13
When the Universe Has Babies
207Even though Hawking has offered us an image of a self-
contained Universe, with no boundaries and no edges,either in space or time, many people still wonder what
might lie “outside” such a Universe. The analogy between theclosed surface of the Universe and the closed surface of the Earthdoes, after all, encourage us to speculate that there might be otheruniverses, just as there are other planets. 
Within the framework of Hawking’s no-boundary Universe, any
such other worlds would have to be embedded in some strange formof space which has more than the three dimensions we are used to:the surface of a sphere, after all, is actually a two-dimensionalsurface wrapped around in the third dimension, but space-time isfour-dimensional; you always need at least one extra dimension towrap up anything into a closed surface. But there is anothermodel—or rather series of models—developed from the inflationaryscenario which offers us another way to imagine many worldscoexisting, without having to try to wrap our brains around thehigher geometries of five or more dimensions (four of space plusCopyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlone of time). Although Hawking himself has expressed reservations
about the idea, which goes by the name of continual inflation, it isin fact based on his dramatic breakthrough discovery from 1974that black holes explode. 
Just after the Planck time, according to the inflationary scenario,
the vacuum itself was in a “false” state, excited and full of energy,like supercooled water. When the false vacuum underwent a transi-tion into its stable, lower-energy state, this energy went into thephenomenal burst of expansion that is known as inflation, creatingthe smooth Big Bang out of which the Universe as we know it hasevolved. But suppose this transition did not happen everywhere atthe same time. 
Almost as soon as Alan Guth came up with the idea of inflation,
researchers such as Alex Starobinsky and Andrei Linde realized thatdifferent regions of the primordial false vacuum might have madethe transition into the low-energy state independently. The effectwould be rather like unscrewing the cap of a bottle of fizzy drink—a myriad of bubbles would appear throughout the fluid, each cor-responding to a stable vacuum expanding in its own way. Unlike thebubbles in your fizzy drink, though, each of these bubbles wouldcarry on expanding, until all the fluid had gone and only bubblesremained. 
This possibility raised serious technical problems for early ver-
sions of the inflationary scenario because, if two or more expand-ing bubbles were to merge, they would create disturbances thatwould spread right through both bubbles. If we lived in a Universethat had formed in this way, it would not be perfectly uniform,because these disturbances would leave their mark—for example,on the microwave background radiation. 
There are ways around this problem. The notion that Hawking
himself favors is that of “chaotic inflation,” in which the worldbeyond our Universe (the infinite “meta-universe”) is in a messySTEPHEN HAWKING 208Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlstate, with some regions expanding, some contracting, some hot
and some cold. In such a chaotic meta-universe, there mustinevitably be some regions just right for inflation to take place. Wejust happen, in this picture, to be in a Universe produced by a ran-dom fluctuation within the chaos. 
But you don’t have to invoke chaos to explain our existence.
Maybe we just happen to live in a bubble that hasn’t (yet!) mergedwith any of its neighbors (if this sounds like an extraordinary coin-cidence, it may not be, as we shall see later in this chapter). Orperhaps some law of physics prevents bubbles from forming veryclose together in the “fluid” of the false vacuum. This is where theproposal that Hawking Radiation might be involved comes in. 
Hawking Radiation, as we saw in Chapter 9, is produced by the
interplay of quantum effects and gravity at the horizon surroundinga black hole. But Hawking and his colleague Gary Gibbons, whoshared an office with him in Cambridge in the late 1970s, realizedthat this kind of radiation must be produced wherever there is ahorizon of this kind and that such horizons do not always surroundblack holes. 
Because of the way the Universe expands, the more widely sepa-
rated two regions are, the faster they recede from each other. Soregions of space that are far enough apart can never “communi-cate” using light beams (or, indeed, anything else) because the spacebetween them expands faster than light can travel. If light cannottravel from one region to another, then in effect there is a horizonwhich light cannot cross, separating the two regions of space aseffectively as the horizon surrounding a black hole separates theinside from the outside. 
Hawking and Gibbons showed that this kind of horizon will also
produce radiation, just like the radiation at the horizon around ablack hole, spreading out from the horizon into both regions ofspace. In the Universe as it is today, spread thin by expansion, theWhen the Universe Has Babies 209Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmleffect of this radiation is tiny, but it could have played a much
bigger role in the early stages of the expanding Universe. Theexpansion of the Universe is steadily slowing down, as the gravityof all the matter in the Universe tries to pull everything backtogether in a Big Crunch. So the expansion rate was much faster,and the effect of Hawking Radiation from horizons therefore morepronounced, when the Universe was younger. Long ago, even rap-idly separating regions had not had time to move far and were muchcloser together. 
The notion that radiation produced by horizons might affect the
expansion of the Universe has been enthusiastically taken up andcombined with the idea of inflation, by Richard Gott of PrincetonUniversity. Andrei Linde has also investigated it, but he has madeless noise about the idea than the ebullient Gott. 
It turns out that under the right conditions the Hawking
Radiation produced in a volume of space filled with horizons of thiskind can provide the energy that drives inflation and makes theUniverse (or rather the meta-universe) expand super fast. The super-fast expansion then creates more horizons, which in turn producemore radiation, driving the super-fast expansion in a self-sustainingcontinuing process of inflation. The bubbles of ordinary low-energystable vacuum that form within this infinite sea of inflationaryexpansion grow at a slower rate, and so even if two bubbles formnext to each other they will be kept apart by the rapid growth of thefalse vacuum of the meta-universe between them. 
The “right” conditions for this process to work are mind-
boggling. The temperature of the Hawking Radiation has to beabout 10
31K, and the density of mass-energy in the false vacuum
has to be an even more staggering 1093grams per cubic centimeter.
And everywhere throughout this extraordinary, rapidly expandingfalse vacuum, bubbles of stable vacuum are forming and becominguniverses in their own right. STEPHEN HAWKING 210Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlIn this scenario, there is not just one Universe but an infinity of
universes, forever separated from one another by the impenetrablewalls of the super-dense false vacuum. In a sense, such a concept ismeaningless. The existence of other universes which we can neverobserve, and which can never have any interaction with ourUniverse, is a matter more suitable for discussion among philoso-phers than astrophysicists. But it turns out that there are more waysthan one to make a universe and that in some scenarios universescan interact with one another, producing consequences of interest toeverybody, not just to astrophysicists and philosophers. 
With all this talk of superdensity and superenergy, and numbers like
10
93grams per cubic centimeter being bandied about, it is natural
to wonder how much mass-energy our entire bubble Universe con-tains (assuming, that is, that any of these scenarios have a grain oftruth in them). The answer is perhaps even more startling—none atall! Let us leave the discussion of continual inflation to the philoso-phers and look again at Hawking’s no-boundary model of theUniverse to see how this can possibly be true. 
We are used to thinking of mass-energy chiefly in terms of lumps
of matter: stars, planets, and so on. Each of them contributes itsown amount of mc
2to the total mass-energy of the Universe; but
there is another, equally important contribution ( exactly equally
important, if Hawking’s ideas are correct). It comes from gravity.And there is a strange thing about gravitational energy—it isnegative. 
To understand what this means, physicists talk in terms of the
gravitational energy of a hypothetical collection of particles. This iszero if the particles are dispersed to infinity, spread apart from oneanother as far as possible. But if the collection of particles fallstogether under the influence of gravity, perhaps eventually to makea star, it loses gravitational energy. Since the particles start with zeroWhen the Universe Has Babies 211Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlenergy, this means that by the time they have collected together to
form a star or a planet they have negative energy. And if all thematter in the entire Universe could be collected together at a singlepoint, its negative gravitational energy (– mc
2) would exactly cancel
out all the positive mass-energy (+ mc2) of all the matter. 
But that is exactly how we think the Universe did start out: with
all its mass-energy concentrated in a point. The closed Universe sce-narios actually describe a situation in which a point of zero energybecomes separated into matter with positive energy and gravitywith negative energy, expands out to a certain size, and then col-lapses back into a point of zero energy again. At first the idea seemsridiculous. However, this is not some crackpot, lunatic-fringetheory, but a respectable cosmological idea, backed up by the equa-tions of relativity. 
The Universe, it seems, is the ultimate free lunch. And if the
Universe contains zero energy, how much energy does it take tomake a universe? Not a lot—certainly not very much comparedwith the amount of mc
2contained in your body or the pages of this
book. For according to Alan Guth and his colleague Edward Fahri,all you need is enough energy to squeeze some matter into forminga black hole. Then the new universe comes free—one universe freewith every black hole. In a tour de force to rank with the great con-
juring tricks, Guth and Fahri have shown that the two great threadsof Hawking’s life’s work are really one and the same: black holes arebig bangs. 
In principle, the seeds of entire universes could be produced out
of nothing at all, in a manner reminiscent of the way pairs of vir-tual particles can be produced out of nothing at all by quantumuncertainty (as we saw in Chapter 9). Such a baby universe wouldbe in the form of a super-dense concentration of mass, smaller thana proton but containing no energy because the mass is balanced bynegative gravitational energy. Of course, according to the ideas ofSTEPHEN HAWKING 212Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlthe 1970s and before, such tiny super-dense seeds would immedi-
ately collapse back into nothing under their own weight. But infla-tion provides a way to blast out such a seed to form an expandinguniverse before gravity can make it collapse. It would then takemany billions of years for gravity first to halt the expansion andfinally to make the universe disappear into a Big Crunch. 
So do we really need the continually inflating false vacuum to
make bubble universes pop up in infinite numbers? At first sight,this raises a worrying possibility. If a bubble universe can pop intoexistence out of the ordinary vacuum, what would happen if oneburst into existence near us? Would we be overwhelmed by theexpanding fireball of a Big Bang going on right next door? Fahriand Guth think that there is nothing to worry about. If such babyuniverses pop into existence spontaneously, or if they were createdartificially, they would have no further interaction with ourUniverse once they had been born. 
Remember that the seed of such a bubble universe must be self-
contained, destined ultimately to collapse back in on itself; in otherwords, it must be a black hole. Fahri and Guth found that you couldtrigger this process of universe creation artificially, by squeezing asmall amount of matter into a black hole at a temperature of about10
24K (quite modest compared with conditions in the false vacuum).
But they gave their scientific paper on the subject the tongue-in-cheek title “An Obstacle to Creating a Universe in theLaboratory,”
1pointing out that although we have the technology
(hydrogen bombs) to do half the job, releasing the energy required,we don’t yet have the ability to confine the energy released byhydrogen bombs within a black hole. 
But it is not beyond the bounds of possibility that a civilization
more advanced than our own might be able to confine the requiredenergy in a small enough volume. What would happen then? To thepeople who created this energetic minihole, very little. The blackWhen the Universe Has Babies 213Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlhole would simply form, spend billions of years evaporating
through Hawking Radiation, and then disappear. But within thehorizon of the hole things would be very different. 
According to the calculations by the American team, conditions
inside such an energetic minihole will sometimes be such as totrigger inflation. But when such a baby universe begins to expand,it does so not by bursting out of the minihole to engulf its sur-roundings in the space-time in which it was created, but by expand-ing in a set of directions which are allat right angles to each of the
dimensions of the parent universe. And exactly the same thing willhappen to baby universes that are produced by natural quantumfluctuations. 
Because all the sets of dimensions are at right angles, the differ-
ent universes never interact with one another once they haveformed. But there is a crucial difference with the continual inflationidea, where the bubbles never interact at all. In the scenariosketched by Fahri and Guth (and studied by others, includingLinde), one universe is created from another. In this picture, our
Universe is the progeny of a previous universe; and it is even possi-ble that our expanding bubble of space-time was created artificiallyin the equivalent of a laboratory in that parent universe. Sciencefiction writer David Brin is already working on the implications ina linked series of stories; we will leave further speculations alongthese lines to Brin and his colleagues while we try to explain theimplications in terms of the spontaneous creation of baby universes. 
It is hard to get a mental grip on the proliferation of dimensions
that this implies. Every baby universe will contain its own vacuum,within which other quantum fluctuations can occur, producing yetmore baby universes each with their own set of dimensions, withevery set of dimensions at right angles to every other set. As usual,we have to fall back on an analogy in two dimensions, bent rounda third, to get a picture of what is going on. STEPHEN HAWKING 214Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlThe helpful image is the old familiar one of the Universe repre-
sented by the skin of an expanding balloon. What we have toimagine now is that a tiny piece of that skin is pinched off, forminga little blister connected to the Universe by a narrow throat—theblack hole. That little blister can now, in turn, expand to enormoussize, while all that any resident of the parent universe sees is the tinyblack hole throat in the fabric of space-time. And the whole processcan repeat indefinitely, producing an infinite foam of bubbles, eachone a universe in its own right. Quantum cosmology actually allowsthe possibility of creating not just one Universe but an infinite num-ber of universes, out of nothing at all. 
And this raises another question. At one level, physics operates by
finding out the rules according to which the Universe operates andusing them to make predictions about how systems will interact. Wefind, for example, that the speed of light has a certain value, andthat this is the ultimate speed limit. That enables us (or at least itenabled Einstein) to work out how our view of the world changeswhen we move at high speed. But at another level some physicistspuzzle over why the rules should have the precise form that we find. 
Why, for example, is the speed of light 300,000 kilometers a
second, rather than, say, 250,000 kilometers a second? Why doesPlanck’s constant have the precise value it has, and not one a littlebigger or a little smaller? What would happen if gravity wereweaker (or stronger)? And so on. We live in a world that seems tobe just right for life-forms like us—which is in a way tautological,since obviously if the world were very different we would not behere to wonder about these things. But as far as anyone is yet ableto tell, the rules of physics that came out of the era of inflationcould have been different from the rules we know, either subtly dif-ferent or dramatically different. Is it, then, just a coincidence thatthese rules have produced a Universe suitable for people like us tolive in? The idea of an infinity of bubble universes, either formedWhen the Universe Has Babies 215Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlout of an eternally expanding false vacuum or pinched off from one
another by the baby process, says that it is not—and explains othercosmic coincidences as well. 
The idea of trying to understand the nature of the Universe in terms
of the relationship between the laws of physics and ourselves isknown as “anthropic cosmology.” It has a long history, but in itsmodern version it stems mainly from a revival of interest triggeredby Martin Rees, of the University of Cambridge, in the 1970s andcontinuing to the present day. 
Rees is an exact contemporary of Hawking. He was born on
June 23, 1942, when Hawking was six months old. They wereworking for their Ph.D.s in Cambridge at the same time, and Reesbecame Plumian Professor of Astronomy and ExperimentalPhilosophy in 1973, at the remarkably early age of thirty-one, justsix years before Hawking became Lucasian Professor. He waselected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1979, five years afterHawking. But where Hawking has made his reputation by investi-gating in great detail one particular set of problems—the singulari-ties and horizons around black holes and at the beginning of time—Rees is known and respected for the breadth of his work, rangingfrom quasars and pulsars to the influence of black holes on theirsurroundings, cosmology, and the nature of the dark matter thatholds the Universe closed. When Rees turned his attention toanthropic cosmology and stirred the revival of serious interest in thesubject by scientists in the 1970s and 1980s, for once Hawking wasprepared to follow somebody else’s lead. 
Rees has developed a particularly nice example of the nature of
anthropic reasoning in cosmology. He has worked out in detail theevolution of a universe in which gravity is stronger than in ourUniverse, but every other rule of physics is the same. Galaxies, stars,and planets can all exist in this model universe, but they are all verySTEPHEN HAWKING 216Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmldifferent from their counterparts in our Universe. In particular,
everything is speeded up to such an extent that it is doubtfulwhether intelligence (which has taken more than four billion yearsto emerge on Earth) could ever evolve. 
For the particular value of the strength of gravity chosen by Rees,
each star has a mass about the same as that of an asteroid in ourSolar System (much less than the mass of the Moon) and a diameterof about two kilometers. The typical lifetime of such a star is justone of our years, and it burns with a brightness one hundred-thou-sandth that of our Sun. The Earth has an average surface tempera-ture of about 15°C, and a planet in this other universe, orbitingaround its parent star at a distance roughly twice as great as the dis-tance from the Earth to the Moon, would have a similar surfacetemperature. It would take about twenty of our days for the planetto orbit the star. So with the star itself having such a short lifetime,it would be burned out in just about 15 of the planet’s “years,”whereas the lifetime of our Sun is likely to be at least 10 billion ofour years. 
Life on the surface of such a planet would be short, in more ways
than one. The biggest mountains on the tiny planet could be nomore than 30 centimeters high, while the maximum mass of anycreatures roaming its surface would be just one-thousandth of agram—any bigger than this and their bodies would break if they fellover in the strong gravity of that world. 
And all of these dramatic changes stem, remember, from making
a change in just oneof the constants of physics, the strength of
gravity! It is possible to imagine very many changes that wouldensure that the universe that emerged from the inflationary phasewould be quite inhospitable for life-forms like us. 
If ours is the only possible Universe, then the existence of the
cosmic coincidences that permit our existence is a real puzzle. But ifthere are many possible universes, then there is a straightforwardWhen the Universe Has Babies 217Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlexplanation. Every different bubble universe may have its own laws
of physics. In some cases, that will mean that the bubbles are heldtogether very tightly by gravity and recollapse before life can evolve.In others, gravity may be so weak that material is never pulledtogether to form stars and planets at all. But there will be a rangeof possibilities—a range of universes—where stars, planets, andintelligences can evolve. The same argument applies to each andevery one of the exact values of the laws and constants of physics. 
If this picture is correct, it means that there may be an infinite
number of universes in the meta-universe, and out of that infinitenumber life-forms like us will exist only in universes where the lawsof physics are just right. The fact that we exist preselects, to somedegree, the exact rules of physics that we will discover the Universeoperates on. This idea is known, rather grandly, as the “anthropicprinciple,” a term coined by Bernard Carr, who worked with Reeson a seminal paper on the topic. 
Of course, because the different universes can never communicate
with one another, this is still largely a matter for the philosophers todebate. Except for one thing. Remember that the crucial ingredientof Hawking’s no-boundary model is the sum-over-histories quan-tum approach. When we mentioned this earlier, we rather glossedover the explanation of what, exactly, the different histories thatwere being “summed” were. Now we can set the record straight. 
Instead of regarding all the different possible universes that could
have emerged out of inflation, each with its own set of physicallaws, as “real,” we can regard them as mathematical possibilities,like the many different paths that an electron can take from A to B.And using the sum-over-histories approach, Hawking shows notonly that our Universe is one of the possible histories, but also that
it is one of the most probable ones: STEPHEN HAWKING 218Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.html. . . [I]f all the histories are possible, then so long as we exist in one of the histories,
we may use the anthropic principle to explain why the universe is found to be theway it is. Exactly what meaning can be attached to the other histories, in whichwe do not exist, is not clear.
2
Nevertheless, using the “no-boundary” condition, Hawking and
his colleagues have found that the Universe must start out with themaximum amount of irregularity allowed by quantum uncertaintyand that inflation and the subsequent more leisurely expansion ofthe Universe then make these irregularities grow to become theclouds of gas that then contract to become galaxies of stars withinthe expanding Universe. 
All of this is very much research at the cutting edge of science
today. The choice of different variations on the theme—bubbles ina continually inflating false vacuum, baby universes, a choice ofquantum histories—reflects not an inability of physicists to make uptheir minds but an attempt to push ahead on many different fronts,not yet knowing which (if any) will turn out to hold the mostpromise in the long term. But it is already clear that in the 1990s thebasic premises underlying cosmological thinking changed dramati-cally from those of what we might call the “pre-Hawking” era.Thirty years ago it was generally accepted that our Universe wasunique. Today, it seems to be generally accepted that, one way oranother, it is just one among many. Is it any wonder that, whenHawking presented these ideas in a book in 1988, the book took theworld by storm? When the Universe Has Babies 219Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.html