6
Marriage and Fellowship
87The mid-sixties turned out to be one of the most important
times in Stephen Hawking’s life. Having become engagedto Jane, he realized that he would need to find a job very
quickly if they were to be married. After obtaining a doctorate, thenext stage in the career of any academic is usually to secure afellowship, accompanied by a grant, in order to continue research.Much like the transition from undergraduate studies to postgradu-ate research, applications for fellowships are usually made whileworking on a Ph.D., rather than leaving things until afterward. Sowhile in the throes of writing his thesis, and with a wedding plannedfor the coming summer, Hawking had to look around for availableposts. Fortunately he did not have to look far. He heard about atheoretical physics fellowship being offered by another college atthe university, Caius,* to begin that autumn. Without hesitating hebegan to organize his application. However, getting such a relativelysimple thing off the ground did not turn out to be as easy as he hadhoped. 
*Pronounced “keys”; its full name is Gonville and Caius College.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlAt this stage of his illness he was unable to write and had planned
to ask Jane to type his application during her next visit toCambridge the coming weekend. But when his fiancée stepped offthe train, she greeted him with her arm in plaster up to the elbow.She had had an accident the previous week and broken her arm.Hawking admits that he was not as sympathetic toward her asperhaps he should have been when he saw the state she was in, buthurt feelings were quickly mended and together they tried to workout how they could get the application written. Jane’s left arm hadbeen broken and she is right-handed, so Hawking dictated theinformation and she was able to write the application by hand.They managed to get a friend in Cambridge to type it up for them. 
However, that was not the end of Hawking’s problems. As a
requirement of the application he had to give two references.Obviously Dennis Sciama was his first referee; he was, naturally,very supportive, and suggested Hermann Bondi as the second.Hawking had met Bondi on several occasions at the King’s Collegeseminars given by Roger Penrose earlier that year, and Bondi hadcommunicated to him a paper he had written to the Royal Societya few months earlier. Encouraged by this, Hawking decided, withnear-catastrophic consequences, to ask Bondi to give him a refer-ence. As Hawking puts it:
I asked him after a lecture he gave in Cambridge. He looked at me in a vague way,
and said, yes he would. Obviously, he didn’t remember me, for when the Collegewrote to him for a reference, he replied that he had not heard of me.
1
If such a serious blow had happened today he would almost cer-
tainly not have had a hope of getting his fellowship. In the sixties,however, competition for academic posts was not quite as fierce asit is now, and the authorities at Caius showed great tolerance inwriting to tell him of the embarrassing situation. Sciama came toSTEPHEN HAWKING 88Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlthe rescue again and contacted Bondi to refresh his memory about
the promising young researcher. Bondi then gave Hawking a glow-ing reference, possibly far kinder than one he might originally havewritten. 
The college council at Caius meets annually during the Lent term
to elect new fellows. There are usually six or seven positions onoffer, covering the full spectrum of subjects, and if elected thesuccessful applicant joins the seventy-odd fellows already in resi-dence at the college. The council consists of around a dozen seniorfellows, headed by the college master. In 1965 the master was thefamous historian of Chinese science, Joseph Needham. Hawkingcame with good recommendations, and a number of the sciencefellows on the council, including Needham, had heard of him viathe early reputation he had already gained in Cambridge academiccircles. As Shakespeare says, “Sweet are the uses of adversity,” andmaybe this has never been truer than in Hawking’s case. Despite theconfusion over references, the council favored him over his com-petitors, and he received his fellowship at Caius. As far asHawking’s career was concerned, he and Jane could now look tothe future with a degree of confidence. 
The duties of fellows are minimal beyond the basic condition that
they continue with their research. They are required to do a littlestudent supervision, but the level to which this is taken varies enor-mously. The role of the fellow, like many other things at CambridgeUniversity, has changed little since Sir Isaac Newton’s time.Fellowship is considered a great honor and a means by which aca-demics may continue with their research and be paid for it. Inreturn, a college gains prestige if one of its fellows turns out to behighly successful. 
Possessing more than his fair share of cheek, Hawking nearly
blew it again after having secured his fellowship at Caius. He man-aged this feat by almost pushing things too far with the Bursar. OnMarriage and Fellowship 89Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmla whim, he decided to ask him what he would be paid for his new
position and was rebuked for his impertinence. Although he couldnot foresee it at the time, soon after they were married this faux pas
would cause him and Jane still further problems. 
The couple was married in July 1965 in the chapel of Hawking’s
postgraduate college, Trinity Hall. It was not a typical “academic”wedding, but neither was it, by any means, a society occasion. Bothsets of parents were ordinary, middle-class people. Jane’s father,George Wilde, was a civil servant, and the Wilde family had knownthe Hawkings for some time before their children had met, so thewedding arrangements were perhaps a little less fraught with argu-ments than they might have been. Around a hundred guestsattended, and the service was followed by a reception with all theusual speeches and champagne toasts to the happy couple. BrandonCarter remembers the wedding as the first occasion on which hemet the Hawking family. He recalls Frank Hawking as a tall, slimman with a quiet and dignified air about him. Hawking’s mother,Isobel, was instantly friendly and chirpy, a lively, gregarious char-acter who delighted in meeting Stephen’s friends and accepting theminto the fold. 
Despite the fact that the groom had to lean on a cane for the wed-
ding photographs, the couple looked much the same as any other ontheir wedding day. In the black-and-white photographs Hawking iswearing a dark suit and a thin, neatly knotted tie, his dark-rimmedglasses and thin face giving him an owlish look. Jane stands besidehim, hands clutching a bouquet of flowers, her veil pushed back toreveal shoulder-length hair curled outward above the neckline ofher short wedding dress in the fashion of the day. Hawking looks atthe camera with a proud expression, a stare of deep-rooted deter-mination and ambition—a stance that says, “This is just the begin-ning.” Jane smiles happily at the lens, equally sure, in her owngentler way, that they will make out and overcome all adversity. STEPHEN HAWKING 90Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlOf course they both knew, as did all the others on that day, that
Stephen might die within a short time. In fact, according to the med-ical predictions he was already living on borrowed time. But suchthoughts were only a distant shadow that summer’s day inCambridge, and Jane and Stephen Hawking were as sure as anyother newly married couple that they would create a successful andhappy life for themselves and that because of their circumstancesthey would make the very most of every moment they had together. 
A fellow’s salary is no princely sum, and in 1965 foreign holidays
were still relatively unusual, so the newlyweds honeymooned inSuffolk for a week. Immediately afterward it was back to work,because the couple had to leave for a summer school in general rel-ativity that Hawking was due to attend at Cornell University, inupstate New York. Hawking recalls that this was a mistake: 
It put quite a strain on our marriage, especially as we stayed in a dormitory that
was full of couples with noisy small children. However, the summer school wasvery useful for me because I met many of the leading people in the field.
2
Brandon Carter attended the same summer school and got to
know Jane much better than he had during her weekend visits toCambridge. He remembers that she was rather inexperienced at thetraditional tasks of a housewife. He recalls how, on one occasion,he came across her in the shared kitchen practically pulling her hairout trying to make tea without a teapot. Carter found a saucepan ina cupboard and showed her how to brew tea camping style. One ofthe fondest memories he has of that summer school is the look ofindignation on Jane’s face. 
The idea of a summer school is to introduce the latest ideas to
research students and fellows from universities around the world.They are usually attended by the most eminent people in a givenfield and help to set scientists thinking about how to apply new dis-Marriage and Fellowship 91Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlcoveries to their own work. Hawking was getting into his stride as
a physicist at this point in his career and, despite domestic difficul-ties, it was perfect timing as far as his cosmological ideas were con-cerned. He returned inspired to Caius and his first job. 
However, upon their return there was a whole new set of domes-
tic problems to face. The first of these was the matter of where theHawkings were to live. Jane was still a student in her third and finalyear at Westfield College in London, so the plan was for her to stayin London during the week, while Stephen looked after himself,and, just as in the days before their marriage, she would return onweekends. The immediate problem was to find suitable accommo-dation in a university city where accommodation was always at apremium. 
Before leaving for America, Hawking had gone to see the Bursar
again to ask for assistance in finding somewhere to live, only to betold that it was against college policy to help fellows with housing.Because Stephen could not use a bicycle and was only able to walkshort distances assisted by a pair of sticks, it was, of course, essen-tial for the Hawkings to live in central Cambridge, close to theDepartment of Applied Mathematics and Theoretical Physics onSilver Street. But as far as the college authorities were concerned,their latest fellow’s disabilities made no difference. Then, just beforethe trip to Cornell, they had heard of a new block of flats beingbuilt a short distance from the DAMTP and had put their namesdown for an apartment there. When they arrived back inCambridge the Hawkings discovered that the flats would not beready for several months. 
In desperation, Hawking went back to the Bursar, who finally
made the concession of arranging for the couple to stay in rooms ina hostel for graduate students. It seems, however, that the Bursarwas still smarting over Hawking’s cheek in asking what he wouldbe paid for his fellowship. The normal price for a room was twelveSTEPHEN HAWKING 92Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlshillings and six pence (63p) per night, but he charged the
Hawkings double because there were two of them, even thoughJane planned to stay there only on weekends. 
In the event, they stayed in the hostel for just three nights because
they discovered that a small house had become available nearby ina tiny street of picturesque old houses named Little St. Mary’s Lane.Less than a hundred yards from the DAMTP, it suited them per-fectly. The house was owned by one of the other Cambridge col-leges, which had let it to one its own fellows. He had now boughtand moved into a larger house in the suburbs and agreed to subletthe property for the remaining three months of his lease. 
During their stay there they heard news of another house that
had become available on the same street. An elderly neighbor whohad befriended the couple discovered their housing problems andcontacted the owner of the empty house just a few doors alongLittle St. Mary’s Lane. Incensed by the idea that a struggling youngcouple should have such problems when a house remained unoccu-pied only a few yards away, the neighbor summoned the owner toCambridge and insisted that the house be rented to the Hawkingsand at a reasonable price. Once again problems had been turned ontheir head. They moved in when the three-month contract for thefirst house had run its course and remained there for many years. 
The actual process of moving house was quite a problem, even if
it was only a few doors along the same street. Their friends allmucked in, carrying furniture along the pavement and arranging itin the new place while Stephen leaned on his sticks, giving instruc-tions and acting the part of foreman, shouting orders in his bestcoxswain’s voice. Brandon Carter and Martin Rees both lent ahand, as did another friend, Bob Donovan, a chemistry post-graduate who had made friends with Stephen and Jane before theirmarriage. Marriage and Fellowship 93Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlThe new house was another tiny, ancient building. The front door
opened directly into a sitting room, and there was a kitchen at therear. A winding narrow staircase led up to the master bedroom onthe first floor; beyond that, on the second floor, were a couple ofsmaller rooms. The Hawkings had very little furniture, and a largedining table took up most of the space in the sitting room. The wallswere painted in soft shades; bright prints were hung around theroom to give a splash of color between sets of shelves lined withrows of books and records. The ceilings were low, and tall visitorshad to crouch under doorways to avoid a bump on the head. 
The Hawkings have always been enthusiastic hosts, and the tiny
house was frequently crowded with friends who would come forsupper or lunch on weekends, all gathered around the dining table,trying to avoid talking shop but not always succeeding. BrandonCarter remembers the house on Little St. Mary’s Lane as a verycheerful place, where friends would all help out with the prepara-tion of meals and the washing up, the strains of Wagner or Mahlerplaying in the background. 
Meanwhile, Hawking’s work on black holes was progressing well.
In December 1965 he was invited to give a talk at a relativity meet-ing in Miami. Jane was on her Christmas vacation from WestfieldCollege, and although she was working toward her finals thatcoming summer she decided to go to America with her husband. 
By the time of the Miami meeting, Hawking’s speech had deteri-
orated to a severe slur, and he was concerned that the audiencewould find it difficult to understand him. Fortunately one of his oldfriends, George Ellis, was spending a year at the University of Texasat Austin and would also be attending the Miami meeting. After adiscussion in their hotel room, it was agreed that Ellis would givethe talk on Hawking’s behalf. It was a resounding success and, withthe ink still wet on his Ph.D. diploma, Hawking’s work onSTEPHEN HAWKING 94Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlsingularity theory was enthusiastically received by some of the most
eminent scientists gathered there from all over the world. 
In Miami they stayed at the Fountainbleau Hotel, which had
recently been used in the filming of the James Bond movieGoldfinger . It was a large hotel with a private beach. On one of
their free days during the conference, George Ellis and his new wifespent the afternoon on the beach with Stephen and Jane. Around sixo’clock in the evening, the spectacular red disc of the sun low in thewest, they decided to return to the hotel for supper, only to find thatthe beach gates had been locked. A quick search for a way off thebeach showed them that the only way they could get back into thehotel was through an open kitchen window at the side of the build-ing. The problem was, how on earth were they to get Stephen, whocould not even walk without the aid of sticks, through the windowand back to their rooms? 
They managed somehow to clamber through the opening and
were halfway to getting Stephen through when they discovered thatthey were being watched by some Hispanic cleaners, who were notexactly pleased to see a weird-looking group of people struggling toget what looked like a lifeless body in through the kitchen window.Never were the Hawkings and the Ellises more thankful that Janewas studying modern languages. As soon as she realized the nation-ality of the cleaners, she began to talk to them in fluent Spanish andrapidly explained their predicament. Once they understood whatwas going on they were entirely hospitable, helped to get Stepheninto the hotel kitchen, and even guided the foursome back to theirrooms. 
George Ellis invited the Hawkings to stay in Texas for a short
holiday. Jane was not due back in London until January, so theydecided to go along. They spent a week in Texas, sightseeing andrelaxing after a tiring term in their respective careers. The four ofthem went on long drives in the Ellises’ car through the dramatic,Marriage and Fellowship 95Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlrugged Texas landscape, drinking cold beers at remote desert bars
and window shopping in the Austin shopping malls. 
Upon their return to Cambridge, the realities of life hit them
hard. Jane had to return almost immediately to London, and the oldsystem of weekend visits began again. 
During the first year of their marriage Jane really came into her
own. She managed to continue with her studies and graduated inthe summer of 1966. During that time she also typed up Stephen’sPh.D. thesis and continued to travel back to Cambridge everyweekend and during holidays. In the summer of 1966, she was atlast able to live with her husband throughout the week in theirhome on Little St. Mary’s Lane. 
Meanwhile, Stephen’s condition had begun to worsen. The
nature of the disease is such that in many cases it progresses in irreg-ular leaps. A period of little change, which may last for years, maybe followed by a rapid decline and then a leveling off. Since hisdiagnosis and early deterioration, Hawking’s symptoms hadremained more or less constant, but in the latter half of the 1960sanother rapid decline occurred. He had to take to using crutchesrather than sticks in order to get around. At this point his fatherbecame disillusioned and impatient with the advice his son wasreceiving from the medical profession and decided to take overStephen’s treatment. He carried out intensive research into ALS andprescribed a course of steroids and vitamins that Stephen continuedto take until his father’s death in 1986. 
He was finding it increasingly difficult to negotiate the winding
staircase to their bedroom on the first floor on Little St. Mary’sLane. Friends who visited the couple for the evening began toappreciate just how much Stephen’s condition had deteriorated asthey saw him struggling across the sitting room and up the stairswhen he decided to retire for the night. One acquaintance hasrecalled that he watched in shock as Hawking took a full fifteenSTEPHEN HAWKING 96Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlminutes to make the journey from the first stair to his bedroom
door. He would never allow himself to be helped on these occasionsand utterly rejected any behavior that singled him out as anythingother than a normal, able-bodied man. Jane and their friendsrespected this attitude, but it could become frustrating at times.Hawking’s determination and single mindedness could often be mis-construed as arrogance and bloody mindedness. The writer JohnBoslough has described Hawking as “the toughest man I have evermet.”
3And Jane has said, “Some would call his attitude determina-
tion, some obstinacy. I’ve called it both at one time or another. Isuppose that’s what keeps him going.”
4
At the DAMTP and in Cambridge academic circles, Hawking
was beginning to cultivate a “difficult genius” image, and his repu-tation as successor to Einstein, although embryonic, was alreadybeginning to follow him around. People who knew him in thosedays remember him as a friendly and cheerful character, but alreadyhis natural brashness, coupled with his physical disabilities, wasbeginning to create communication difficulties with many of thosearound him. 
He was quite outspoken when attending talks given by inter-
nationally famous and highly respected figures in the world ofphysics. Where most young researchers would be happy to acceptthe words of the great quietly, Hawking would ask deep, oftenembarrassingly penetrating questions. Instead of alienating himfrom his seniors, this behavior, quite rightly, gained him a great dealof respect and helped to increase his standing in the eyes of his supe-riors. However, it could be quite intimidating to some of his con-temporaries. On occasion some colleagues felt a little shy about ask-ing him to go for a beer at the pub. 
Hawking’s great personal gift is to be able to make light of his
disabilities and always to have a cheerful and positive outlook onlife. He simply refuses to let his condition get him down. In physicsMarriage and Fellowship 97Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlhe has a perfect displacement activity. By keeping himself totally
preoccupied with the nature and origin of the cosmos and playingwhat he calls the “game of Universe,” he does not allow himself tospend time and energy thinking about his state of health. Once,when asked whether he ever became depressed over his condition,he replied, “Not normally. I have managed to do what I wanted todo despite it, and that gives a feeling of achievement.”
5Despite the
gradual deterioration in his speech and increasing muscular atro-phy, to his close friends he was the same Stephen Hawking they hadknown since his early Cambridge days, and those who really under-stood him felt the warmth of his personality. 
Both Jane and Stephen knew that they should not waste any time
in starting a family once they were married, and their first child, aboy they named Robert, was born in 1967. 
This event was another turning point in Hawking’s life. Only four
years after he was diagnosed as having a terminal illness and a lifeexpectancy of two years, his reputation as a physicist was in theascendant; he had retained, by sheer determination and willpower,a degree of independence and mobility; and now, against all odds,he was a father. As Jane has observed, “It obviously gave Stephen agreat new impetus, being responsible for this tiny creature.”
6
Everything seemed to be going well for him. His career was blos-soming, and with every new paper he published a further barrier inour understanding of the Universe was broken down. His reputa-tion as a promising new name in the world of physics was rein-forced with each fresh breakthrough. And now he had a son to addto the happiness of his married life. 
For Jane these events were not quite so elevating. To her fell the
burden of raising a child, keeping the home together, and caring fora severely disabled husband who could do nothing to help her. Sheis quoted as saying: STEPHEN HAWKING 98Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlWhen I married him I knew there was not going to be the possibility of my hav-
ing a career, that our household could only accommodate one career and that hadto be Stephen’s. Nevertheless, I have to say I found it very difficult and very frus-trating in those early years. I felt myself very much the household drudge, andStephen was getting all the glittering prizes.
7
On another occasion she said: 
I can imagine how frustrating it must be for some physicists’ wives when theyexpect help from able-bodied husbands that is not forthcoming. I have no illu-sions on that score, so it doesn’t trouble me unduly.
8
However, it would be many years before the inevitable tensions that
were brewing would break to the surface. 
The couple decided to buy the house in Little St. Mary’s Lane.
Hawking swallowed his pride and returned to the Bursary at Caius toask the college for a mortgage. They conducted a survey of the prop-erty, decided that it would not be a sound investment, and turned himdown. Once again, his status as a fellow was opening up very few“real life” privileges. Undeterred, they went to a building society forthe loan and were granted a mortgage. Stephen’s parents gave themthe money to do up the house, and the usual gang of friends oncemore helped out, this time with wallpapering and painting. 
Although the house was small, they remained there for a number
of years until, in the mid-seventies, it became too cramped for thegrowing family. But in the meantime it served their purposes as wellas it had ever done. Newly decorated, it was even cozier than it hadbeen as a rented property, and—what was more important—it wasnow their own home, providing a secure environment in which theycould begin to raise a family. 
The sixties were a great time to be alive and young. They were a
time of tremendous, although in some ways misplaced, hope, an eraMarriage and Fellowship 99Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlof reawakening two decades on from the end of the Second World
War and all the privations that followed, a time of fresh beginningsand optimism in all spheres of life. The second half of the decadeheralded the first real counter-cultural revolution in the West, bring-ing with it new music, new art, and new literature. A few years ear-lier, the trial surrounding the censorship of D. H. Lawrence’s Lady
Chatterley’s Lover had seen the dam of elitism and Victorian moral-
ity burst wide open with the immortal question, “Is it a book youwould wish your wife or your servant to read?” The Beatles, theRolling Stones, and, so it seemed, half the youth of Britain andAmerica were experimenting with psychedelic drugs; dresses weregetting shorter and hair longer. 
The Hawkings and their friends in Cambridge showed little inter-
est in fashion and pop music, although Jane was keen on mini-dresses and the latest hairstyles. But in the world of science thingswere also on the move. George Ellis clearly remembers watching themaiden flight of the British Concorde in April 1969 and being filledwith excitement at the new technology taking the world by storm.Then, only a few months later, they sat glued to their TV screens towatch the “one small step” of Neil Armstrong when the lunarmodule, Eagle , landed in the Sea of Tranquility, 240,000 miles away
on the surface of the Moon. “The Eagle has landed,” he said. “The
surface is like a fine powder. It has a soft beauty all its own, likesome desert in the United States.” At that moment, anything seemedpossible. 
The Hawkings and the Ellises went on holiday together in 1969.
Foreign holidays were suddenly in vogue because of drasticallyreduced prices, and it had become very fashionable to take a pack-age trip to such destinations as Spain or its outlying islands, espe-cially Majorca. The two families flew to Palma airport, Majorca,and spent a short break walking through the unspoiled almondgroves, sampling the local wine and sunning themselves on theSTEPHEN HAWKING 100Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlclean, unmolested beaches, almost untouched by visiting Anglo-
Saxons and certainly lager-lout-free. 
Hawking was working harder than he had ever worked before,
and it was paying dividends. In 1966 he won the Adams Prize foran essay entitled “Singularities and the Geometry of Spacetime.”Much of his research during this period was a continuation of thework that had yielded the astonishing last chapter of his Ph.D.thesis. He spent most of this time in collaboration with RogerPenrose, who was by then professor of applied mathematics atBirkbeck College in London. 
One of the major difficulties the two of them faced was that they
had to devise new mathematical techniques in order to carry out thecalculations necessary to verify their theories—to make them empir-ically sound and not just ideas. Einstein had experienced a similarproblem fifty years earlier with the mathematics of general relativ-ity. He, like Hawking, was not a particularly brilliant mathemati-cian. Fortunately for Hawking, however, Penrose was. In fact, hewas fundamentally a mathematician rather than a physicist, but atthe deep level at which the two subjects become almost indistin-guishable. 
It really boils down to a difference in approach. Hawking’s way
of working is largely intuitive—he just knows if an idea is correct ornot. He has an amazing feel for the subject, a bit like a musicianplaying by ear. Penrose thinks and works in a different way, morelike a concert pianist following a musical score. The twoapproaches meshed perfectly and soon began to produce some veryinteresting results on the nature of the early Universe. As DennisSciama once put it, “[The theories] required very highbrow meth-ods, at least by the standards of theoretical physicists.”
9Penrose
liked to work in a highly visual way, using diagrams and pictures,which suited Hawking fine. He always felt more at home withvisual representations than with mathematical formulas. It was alsoMarriage and Fellowship 101Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlso much easier for him to manipulate these pictures rather than try-
ing to work with equations that he could not write out and had toretain in his head. 
Since his undergraduate days Hawking has been a keen follower
of the philosopher Karl Popper. The main thrust of Popper’s philos-ophy of science is that the traditional approach to the subject, “thescientific method” as originally espoused by the likes of Newtonand Galileo, is in fact inadequate. 
The traditional approach to science can be broken down into six
stages. First comes an observation or an experiment. Scientists thentry to devise a general theory to explain by induction what theyhave observed and go on to propose a hypothesis based on this gen-eral theory. Next come attempts to verify this hypothesis by furtherexperimentation. The original theory is thus proved or disproved,and the scientist then assumes the truth or otherwise of the matteruntil proven wrong. 
Popper stands this process on its head and suggests the following
approach. Take a problem. Propose a solution or a theory to explainwhat is happening. Work out what testable propositions you candeduce from your theory. Carry out tests or experiments on thesedeductions in order not to prove them but to refute them. The refu-tations, combined with the original theory, will yield a better one. 
The primary difference between the two approaches is that,
according to the traditional scientific method, after making anobservation the scientist attempts to verify a theory by furtherexperiment. In Popper’s system, the scientist tries to disprove thetheory in an attempt to find a better one. It is this aspect of Popper’sthought that is so appealing to Hawking and many other scientists,and he has often applied it in his own scientific work. The sciencewriter Dennis Overbye once asked him how his mind worked. Inreply, Hawking said: STEPHEN HAWKING 102Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlSometimes I make a conjecture and then try to prove it. Many times, in trying to
prove it, I find a counter-example, then I have to change my conjecture.Sometimes it is something that other people have made attempts on. I find thatmany papers are obscure and I simply don’t understand them. So, I have to try totranslate them into my own way of thinking. Many times I have an idea and startworking on a paper and then I will realize halfway through that there’s a lot moreto it. 
I work very much on intuition, thinking that, well, a certain idea ought to be
right. Then I try to prove it. Sometimes I find I’m wrong. Sometimes I find thatthe original idea was wrong, but that leads to new ideas. I find it a great help todiscuss my ideas with other people. Even if they don’t contribute anything, justhaving to explain it to someone else helps me sort it out for myself.
10
Little did he know, at the end of the 1960s, just how important
his ideas would soon prove to be. Marriage and Fellowship 103Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.html