14
A Brief History of Time
220The dying notes of Tears for Fears’ “Mad World” lead into
Radio One’s 12:30 p.m. news as Simon Mitton walks intothe DAMTP and a car with its window down and radio
turned up parks in front of the building on the other side of thecobbled courtyard. The news report is full of peace protesters atGreenham Common, British troops in the troubled city of Beirut,and the biggest Christmas film ever, E.T., but Mitton has other
astronomical thoughts on his mind. He is visiting Stephen Hawkingto discuss the imminent publication of the professor’s new book forCambridge University Press, The Very Early Universe. Unexpectedly,
however, after talking through the latest details of the book over teaand biscuits, the two of them fall into a discussion about somethingaltogether different—a popular cosmology book, which Stephenhas been mulling over for some time. 
For almost as long as he had known him, Mitton had been inti-
mating to Hawking that he should attempt a cosmology bookaimed at the popular market. Hawking had displayed little interestin the idea, but by late 1982 he had come to recognize that such aCopyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlproject might provide the answer to his looming financial difficul-
ties, and he decided to revive the idea. The two of them had enjoyeda fruitful publishing relationship for many years, and, despite theproblems over Superspace and Supergravity, Hawking’s first
thought was to approach Cambridge University Press with the pro-posal. Mitton’s original intention was for Hawking to attempt abook on the origin and evolution of the Universe. CambridgeUniversity Press had enjoyed a long tradition of publishing popularscience books written by eminent scientists, such as ArthurEddington and Fred Hoyle, whose titles had sold well. A popularbook by Stephen Hawking would, he believed, neatly follow onfrom these. 
According to Mitton, Hawking laid things on the line immedi-
ately. He wanted a lot of money for this book. Mitton had alwaysknown him to be a tough negotiator; that was clear from the fracasover the cover for Superspace and Supergravity . When it came to
financial matters he was prepared for some intransigence, but in theevent even Mitton was surprised by Hawking’s suggestions. At theirfirst organized meeting to discuss the book, Hawking opened theconversation by explaining his financial situation, making it clearthat he wanted to earn enough money to continue financing Lucy’seducation and to offset the costs of nursing. He was obviouslyunable to provide any form of life insurance to protect the family inthe event of his death or complete incapacitation, so if he was goingto spend a considerable amount of his valuable time away fromresearch writing a popular book, he expected an appropriatereward. 
Mitton is philosophical about the whole matter, pointing out that
Hawking was showing remarkable loyalty toward CambridgeUniversity by staying there. There is absolutely no doubt that hecould have commanded a huge salary from any university in theworld. A number of colleges in the USA would have offered him six-A Brief History of Time 221Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlfigure sums simply for the prestige accompanying his international
fame, not to mention the enormous kudos of cashing in on theimportant breakthroughs he would almost certainly make in thenear future. The fact that he remained in Cambridge for a fractionof the salary he could command elsewhere is, Mitton believes, agreat credit to him. The simple fact is that the Hawkings lovedCambridge. They had lived there for nearly two decades, andStephen had spent practically all of his academic life at the univer-sity. The DAMTP is, without doubt, one of the best theoreticalphysics departments in the world, and he would have left it only asa last resort. 
In the early eighties, Simon Mitton’s office was based in the same
courtyard as the DAMTP on Silver Street, so the two of them hadplenty of opportunity to talk about the proposed project. One after-noon Hawking went to see him with the rough draft of a section ofthe proposed book. Mitton knew the commercial market as well asany publisher. In fact he was by that time author of several success-ful popular science books himself. He had a very clear idea of thetype of book the general public would want and which would earnHawking the sort of money he was after. After looking through thesection Hawking had shown him, he came to the conclusion that itwas far too technical and highbrow for the general reader. “It’s likebaked beans,” he told Hawking. “The blander the flavor, thebroader the market. There simply isn’t a commercial niche for spe-cialist books like this, Stephen.” 
Hawking went away and thought about Mitton’s comments;
Mitton went to the Cambridge University Press Syndicate to seewhat they thought of the idea. The two men met up again shortlyafterward. Mitton had the encouraging news that the Syndicate hadaccepted the idea of the book with glee and had handed over to himall negotiations. Hawking, for his part, had done a little editing ofthe section he had written earlier. Mitton sat back and flickedSTEPHEN HAWKING 222Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlthrough the manuscript as Hawking remained motionless in his
wheelchair on the other side of the room, patiently awaiting hisopinion. Finally, Mitton put the typescript down on his desk andlooked across at him. 
“It’s still far too technical, Stephen,” he said at last. Then smil-
ing, he made the now famous statement: “Look at it this way,Steve—every equation will halve your sales.” 
Hawking looked surprised. Then, smiling, he said, “Why do you
say that?” 
“Well,” replied Mitton, “when people look at a book in a shop,
they just flick through it to decide if they want to read it. You’ve gotequations on practically every page. When they look at this, they’llsay, ‘This book’s got sums in it,’ and put it back on the shelf.” 
Hawking took Mitton’s point. Over a cup of tea the two of them
began to talk money. Mitton suggested an advance, to whichHawking smiled and made a faintly disparaging reply. Mitton knewthis was going to be tough. By the end of the afternoon Hawkinghad talked Mitton into a £10,000 advance, by far the biggestCambridge University Press had ever offered anyone. The percent-age royalties on both the hardback and the paperback were alsoexcellent. The next morning Mitton sent a contract over toHawking’s office. He never heard from him on the matter again. 
Early in 1983, as Stephen Hawking and Simon Mitton sat in an
office on Silver Street, Cambridge, discussing over tea the idea ofdoing a popular book, three thousand miles away a tall, beardedman in his early thirties passed by a newsstand on Fifth Avenue.Stopping briefly to scan the titles, he picked up a copy of the New
York Times , paid for it, and walked on. Arriving at his office a few
blocks away, he sat down at his desk; he had a few moments tospare before his lunch appointment with a literary agent at a localrestaurant. Peter Guzzardi opened the paper and the magazine fellA Brief History of Time 223Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlout on to the desk. There, on the front cover, a picture of a man in
a wheelchair was staring back at him. Discarding the rest of thenewspaper, Guzzardi quickly turned to the cover article, “TheUniverse and Dr. Hawking,” and began to read. 
Within minutes he was hooked. The article described the amaz-
ing story of the crippled Cambridge scientist, Stephen Hawking,who had revolutionized cosmology and had, for the past twentyyears, successfully overcome the devastating symptoms of a wastingneurological disease called amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. By thetime he had finished the article, he knew he had stumbled upon agreat story, and being a senior editor at Bantam Books he was in aperfect position to do something about it. With the enormouspossibilities opened up by his discovery already racing around in hismind, he stuffed the magazine into his bag and headed off for lunch. 
Peter Guzzardi’s appointment was with the agent Al Zuckerman,
who was president of a large agency named Writer’s House based inNew York City. Over dessert Guzzardi mentioned what he had justbeen reading about Stephen Hawking. Zuckerman had read thesame article and was already on the case. He had recently heardthrough a mutual friend, a physics professor at the MassachusettsInstitute of Technology named Daniel Freedman, that Hawking wasworking on a book. He had then contacted his own brother-in-law,who just happened to be a physicist himself, about the project. 
By the time of his lunch engagement with Peter Guzzardi,
Zuckerman had already decided to get in touch with Hawking toestablish the state of play. Seeing the human story behind the dis-coveries and believing that such a book could be hugely successful,he wanted to be involved. Before they left the restaurant, PeterGuzzardi made it very clear that, if Zuckerman were to meetHawking and discover that he had not already signed to anotherpublisher, he was sure Bantam would like to know about it. On theSTEPHEN HAWKING 224Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlsidewalk the two men shook hands and went back to their respec-
tive offices.
Six months passed before Peter Guzzardi heard another thing from
Al Zuckerman, but the agent had not been idle in the meantime. Hehad succeeded in contacting Hawking on the point of signing a con-tract with Cambridge University Press (CUP). He had cut it fine—afew days later the deal would have gone through, and Zuckermanwould have had little incentive to get involved. Although CUPwould undoubtedly have made a very good job of producingHawking’s book, they probably would not have been the right pub-lisher for it. Hawking wanted to sell his book in vast numbers, tap-ping the popular market; as a highly prestigious academic publisher,CUP is simply not geared up for that area of the business. 
Dennis Sciama recalled how he met Hawking on a train around
the time of CUP’s offer and discovered that his former student wasworking on a popular book. 
“You’re doing it with CUP?” he asked. “Oh no,” Hawking replied with a mischievous grin. “I want to
make some money with this one.” 
Zuckerman managed to persuade Hawking not to sign the con-
tract before giving him a chance to see what he could do. Theyagreed that if he was unsuccessful in placing the book, thenHawking could always fall back on the offer from CUP, butZuckerman had a very strong feeling that he could get more than£10,000 in advance and hook one of the big trade publishers.Hawking drafted a proposal for the book and produced a samplesection of around a hundred pages, and Zuckerman contacted anumber of publishers, including Bantam, in the States. He haddecided at the beginning that he would go for a deal with anAmerican publishing company first and secure contracts for publi-cation in other countries at a later date. A Brief History of Time 225Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlPeter Guzzardi received the proposal early in 1984 and presented
it to the next scheduled editorial meeting. He took with him theNew York Times article that had attracted his interest in the first
place and showed it to his colleagues. They immediately saw thepotential of the proposal and needed little persuading that the ideawas a good one. By the end of the meeting they had agreed to makea serious bid for the rights. 
Despite Bantam’s obvious interest, Zuckerman decided to hold an
auction for the book. The whole thing was conducted over thephone. He sent out the package Hawking had put together to a col-lection of major publishers and told them that if they were interestedin the book they had to make an offer by a certain prearranged date.Interested parties then contacted him with their offers and were toldif there was a rival offer that bettered their own. They then had thechoice of upping their offer or dropping out of the bidding. Towardthe end of the auction day, two rivaling publishers were left to com-pete over the contract: Norton and Bantam. Norton had recentlypublished Surely You’re Joking, Mr. Feynman! , the autobiographical
reveries of the Nobel Prize-winning Caltech professor RichardFeynman and were very keen on the Hawking proposal. TheFeynman book had done exceptionally well. To them the marketpotential of a popular book by Hawking was obvious. 
As evening approached and the two companies upped their bids
further, Bantam decided to take the plunge and make a final, somemay have thought hugely risky, offer. Hurried telephone callsflashed between offices and hastily arranged meetings were held todecide what should be done. Finally, Guzzardi was given the go-ahead to make his final bid. He offered a $250,000 advance for theUnited States and Canada and a very favorable deal on hardbackand paperback royalties. As the sun set over the ragged skyline,tense minutes turned into a nail-biting half-hour in Guzzardi’s officein Manhattan. He really wanted this book. STEPHEN HAWKING 226Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlFinally the phone rang. Guzzardi grabbed for it. Norton had not
matched the offer. Subject to Hawking’s approval of a submittedletter outlining what they would do in terms of rewrites and pro-motional technique, the book was theirs. 
Author and agent obviously had little doubt of the book’s worth
and the salability of the Hawking name—remarkably cool behavior,on Hawking’s part, for a man who, for all his fame and earningpotential abroad, was in reality in a rather delicate financial state.Peter Guzzardi accepted the conditions and wrote to Hawking withhis ideas. Hawking obviously approved, for the contract was signeda short time later. Guzzardi says that one of the things he believesclinched the deal was his suggestion that the book should be on saleat every airport in America. Hawking loved the idea. The fact thathis book was with one of the world’s biggest publishers gave him areal thrill. 
Guzzardi first met Hawking after a conference at Fermilab, the
high-energy physics research establishment just outside Chicago. Heremembers that Hawking was very tired after delivering his talk butwas still very receptive and enthusiastic about the project. Recallinghis first impressions of Hawking, he said, “The man has a formida-ble presence. He came across as a very powerful personality.” 
By this time Hawking’s lectures were always delivered via an
interpreter, usually a research assistant who would handle the slideprojector and present Hawking’s prescripted lecture. The sameinterpreter acted for Guzzardi when he met Hawking after the talk.“It was a bit like listening to someone speaking in a foreign lan-guage,” Guzzardi recalls. “You pick up a sort of rhythm, withoutactually understanding what he’s saying.” 
Although Hawking was very happy to discuss the book even at
the end of a tiring day, Guzzardi sensed that some of his assistantswere less than enthusiastic about the whole thing. He feels theyresented the idea that their professor’s work was being popularizedA Brief History of Time 227Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmland that attempts to reinterpret his theories in layman’s language
for public consumption would somehow devalue them. Accordingto Guzzardi, this was an attitude Hawking did not share with hisstudents; on the contrary, he was very much in favor of communi-cating his theories to a general audience. Before A Brief History of
Time , Hawking had shown great interest in delivering public lec-
tures about his work and had, Guzzardi feels, a definite sense ofmission about public awareness of cosmology. 
After the first meeting, an exchange of letters between
Cambridge and New York began in which suggestions andcountersuggestions were made about passages in the growing man-uscript. Throughout the long gestation period of the project,Guzzardi sought advice from other scientists and expert communi-cators to help him understand Hawking’s ideas, feeding back hisdigested version of their remarks to steer Hawking further in thedirection in which he had said he wanted to go—toward a best-seller. Considering Hawking’s commitments to the DAMTP, hisbusy schedule of talks and lectures around the world, and hisfamily responsibilities, work on the book progressed well. Butdespite all their efforts it was to take a further eighteen monthsbefore Hawking and Guzzardi succeeded in knocking the manu-script into shape and preparing it for publication. 
There have been suggestions that at one stage Bantam wanted the
book ghostwritten by a successful science writer but that Hawkingtotally rejected the idea. Such notions are completely unfounded. Atno time was such a suggestion made by Guzzardi. In fact, it hadbeen Al Zuckerman who had initially proposed the idea: 
I read the manuscript and thought it was very interesting, and that I could cer-
tainly find a publisher for it, but that it would not be readily comprehensible tothe lay reader. . . . I thought at that time that we should bring in a professionalwriter to help put the ideas across in language which would be more easily under-STEPHEN HAWKING 228Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlstood. Hawking refused; he wanted the book to be all his. And he is a very strong-
minded man.1
In his role as editor, Guzzardi tried to put himself in the position
of the average man in the street buying and attempting to read thebook. He tried to convey this to Hawking during their transatlanticcorrespondence, with remarks like “I’m sorry Professor Hawking, Ijust don’t understand this!” Zuckerman has said of Guzzardi’sefforts: 
I would guess that, for every page of text, Peter wrote two to three pages of edi-
torial letters, all in an attempt to get Hawking to elaborate on ideas that his mindjumps over, but other people wouldn’t understand.
2
“I was persistent,” Guzzardi says, “and kept on until Hawking
made me understand things. He may have thought I was a littlethick, but I risked it and kept on plugging away until I saw what hewas talking about.” According to Guzzardi, Hawking was perfectlyamiable about the whole thing and showed great patience with him.In his typically modest way, he also claims that Hawking gave himtoo much credit in the book’s acknowledgments. “I did,” he pointsout, “what any normal intelligent person would do and persevereduntil I understood what was going on.” 
Kitty Ferguson, in her book Stephen Hawking: A Quest for the
Theory of Everything , has suggested that because of his condition
Hawking’s use of few words in his explanations meant that inlectures and seminars he would often jump from thought tothought, wrongly assuming that others could see the connection.Without careful editing, this could obviously present serious prob-lems in a supposedly popular science book. 
For Peter Guzzardi the responsibility of editing A Brief History of
Time was a very exciting experience. He realized before the contractA Brief History of Time 229Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlwas even signed that Hawking was the man to write the definitive
work on the theory of the origin and evolution of the Universe. Itwas he who had done the seminal work on many of the new ideas atthe heart of the subject. Who could have been more suited to thetask? The manuscript was from the horse’s mouth. Guzzardi is fromthe school of thought that proposes Hawking as the Einstein of thelatter half of the twentieth century. Although he is not himself a sci-entist, through their collaboration on the book he undoubtedly grewto know Hawking and his way of thinking very well. His under-standing of the man is very different to the way his students and pro-fessional associates understand him, but perhaps equal in depth. 
To many Hawking is not the hero the public seems to have made
him. There are those who suggest that he is melodramatic at con-ferences, that he is pretentious and showy, that his constant ques-tioning is affected and deliberately argumentative. 
The physicist and popular writer Paul Davies has pointed out
that there can be few things more intimidating than for Hawking tocome crashing through the doors of a lecture theater five minutesafter an inexperienced speaker has begun to talk. Even worse arethe occasions when he decides to leave before the end of a lectureand goes careering along the aisle, accelerating his motorized wheel-chair straight toward the swing doors at the back of the room. ButDavies admits: 
Often, it is simply that Stephen is hungry or has remembered that he must phone
someone urgently. His lateness is always unintentional and not done to intimi-date, but fortunately it hasn’t happened to me—yet! 
There are those who do not view Hawking’s antics and celebrity
so kindly. One theorist has been quoted as saying, “He’s working onthe same things everybody else is. He just receives a lot of attentionbecause of his condition.”
3STEPHEN HAWKING 230Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlDo Hawking’s critics have a point, or are such statements simply
sour grapes over the hype surrounding him? Hawking’s own opin-ion on people comparing him with Einstein is typically brash: “Youshouldn’t believe everything you read,” he says with an ambiguoussmile.
4
Finishing the first draft took up most of 1984. It was the year abomb planted in the Grand Hotel in Brighton nearly killed theBritish Cabinet, and the prime minister of India, Indira Gandhi, wasassassinated by her own bodyguards in the garden of her New Delhihome. 
As the months passed and Hawking juggled his commitments, the
manuscript grew and the stack of correspondence with his editorexpanded apace. In the world at large, a baboon’s heart was trans-planted into a fifteen-day-old baby, Bishop Tutu received the NobelPeace Prize, and toward the close of the year Ronald Reagan wasreelected as U.S. president. 
The first draft of the manuscript was completed by Christmas,
and work on rewrites began in the New Year. The exchange of let-ters between Hawking in Cambridge and Guzzardi in Manhattanbecame even more frenetic as the deadline approached. 
The trade press got wind of the book soon after Christmas 1984
but appeared to be nonplussed by seemingly misplaced enthusiasmat Bantam: 
Is it the imminence of spring, or is the new enthusiasm we detect genuine?
Everywhere we hear the sound of feet jumping up and down in sheer elation oversome pet project. At Bantam, Peter Guzzardi is jumping for joy over the acquisi-tion of Stephen Hawking’s From the Big Bang to Black Holes . . . . Paying what
Guzzardi calls “significant six figures, definitely above $100,000,” Bantam hasplans to publish the book in hardcover “sometime in 1986.” . . . “It’s a great bookto have,” enthuses Peter. “Hawking is on the cutting edge of what we know aboutthe cosmos. This whole business of the unified field theory, the conjunction ofA Brief History of Time 231Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlrelativity with quantum mechanics, is comparable to the search for the Holy
Grail.”5
The mid-eighties were indeed a time of growing optimism. As the
major nations of the world dragged themselves out of recession,markets began to expand and all sectors of business were on the up.It was the era of the yuppie. The “city slicker” emerged metamor-phosed from the post-hippy hibernation of the seventies, cast off theclinging remnants of introspection and integrity, and jumped into aPorsche 911 convertible. 
Newly elected right-wing governments were in power in the
major industrialized nations and you could almost smell the odor ofgrowing confidence in the spring air. Life was good; no one hadnoticed the swelling bass note of overexpansion and downturn.Share prices in champagne and designer labels rocketed, and bigpublishing deals became part of the norm. 
In July 1985, Hawking decided to spend some time at CERN, the
European organization for nuclear research in Geneva. There hecould continue with his fundamental research and also allow him-self time to devote to what he described to friends as “a popularbook.” He rented an apartment in the city where he was lookedafter by a full-time nurse and his research assistant at the time, aFrench Canadian named Raymond Laflamme. Jane, in the mean-time, had decided to tour Germany to visit friends. The coupleplanned to meet up in Bayreuth to attend the Wagner Festival inAugust, after Stephen had completed the rewrites for the book. 
One evening at the beginning of August, Hawking retired to bed
late after a long day making corrections to the manuscript. Hisnurse helped him into bed and sat down to relax in an adjoiningroom. After finishing a magazine article, she would begin her rou-tine of checking her patient every half-hour throughout the night.Around 3 a. m. the nurse walked into Hawking’s room to find himSTEPHEN HAWKING 232Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlawake and having problems breathing. His face had turned violet,
and he was making a gurgling sound in his throat. She immediatelyalerted Laflamme, and an ambulance was called. 
Hawking was rushed to the Cantonal Hospital in Geneva, where
he was immediately put on a ventilator. Legend has it that it wasthanks to television that the doctor in charge of receiving the crip-pled scientist at the hospital saved Hawking’s life. Shortly beforeHawking had become one of his patients, he just happened to watcha TV program about a Cambridge physicist who suffered from ALS.Knowing Hawking’s condition, he knew which drugs he could andcould not give to his patient. A doctor who had not been fortunateenough to catch the program may well have killed him uninten-tionally. 
Hawking was rushed to intensive care, and the authorities at
CERN were notified. The division leader, Dr. Maurice Jacob,arrived at the hospital before dawn and was informed that thingswere touch and go. It was thought that Hawking had suffered ablockage in his windpipe and was suspected of having contractedpneumonia. ALS sufferers are more susceptible to the disease thanothers; in many cases it proves to be fatal. Maurice Jacob and hisstaff immediately tried to contact Jane, but it proved no easy matter.She was traveling from city to city and had left a series of telephonenumbers with Stephen’s nurse. The problem was that no one wasabsolutely sure of her schedule. Frantic calls were made to variousprivate numbers in Germany, until she was finally tracked down ata friend’s house near Bonn. 
Jane arrived at the Cantonal Hospital to find her husband in a
very bad way. He was on a life support machine but out of imme-diate danger. However, in the opinion of the doctors, he would havelittle hope of survival without a tracheostomy operation. Stephenwas unable to breathe through his mouth or nose and would suffo-cate if he were taken off the ventilator that stood beside his hospi-A Brief History of Time 233Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmltal bed. The operation involved slicing in to the windpipe and
implanting a breathing device in his neck, just above collar level.Jane was told that the operation was essential to save her husband’slife, but there was a major snag. If they went ahead, he would neverbe able to speak or make any vocal sound again. 
What was she to do? The decision could come only from her.
Although Stephen had hardly been capable of speech for manyyears, with only his family and close friends able to understand him,there was now the prospect of total loss of communication. Hisvoice may have been difficult to understand, but it was still speech.There was, she knew, a technique for recovering some speech aftera tracheostomy, but that was a possibility only if the patient wasreasonably fit. The doctors around her were staggered that a manin Hawking’s state could still be traveling the world, but therewould be no chance of his regaining any form of speech in his phys-ical condition. Could she take the decision to go ahead with it andcondemn her husband to silence? 
The future looked very, very bleak. We didn’t know how we were going to be able
to survive—or if he was going to survive. It was my decision for him to have atracheostomy. But I have sometimes thought, what have I done? What sort of lifehave I let him in for?
6
After the operation Hawking remained in the Swiss hospital for
another two weeks. An air ambulance then returned him toCambridge, where he was admitted to Addenbrooke’s Hospital.The plane flew in to Marshall’s Airport, where he was met by doc-tors and escorted to the intensive care unit at the hospital. 
That evening the senior nurse of the medical unit at
Addenbrooke’s was quoted in the Cambridge Evening News as say-
ing, “He is going into intensive care. We are not sure of his condi-tion and he needs to be assessed.”
7In the event, he was to spend aSTEPHEN HAWKING 234Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlfurther few weeks in the hospital in Cambridge before he was
allowed home to West Road. 
In many respects, Hawking had been lucky once again. He had
survived by the skin of his teeth. Many ALS sufferers die from pneu-monia initiated by their condition. When he caught the infection hejust happened to be in one of the most medically advanced countriesin the world; he was received at the hospital by a doctor who hadrecently seen him on TV and knew of his condition; and he had thesupport of an intelligent, caring wife. However, one of the mostserendipitous facts of all is that, if he had contracted pneumoniatwo years earlier, things would have been far worse. 
In August 1985 the writing of what would become the best-
selling A Brief History of Time was almost complete. Peter
Guzzardi had, of course, been notified immediately that Stephenhad fallen ill and had continued editing the manuscript whileHawking was recovering in the hospital. The family had receivedsome money from the advance and could just about cope financiallywith the immediate crisis. The problem for Jane, however, was whatwould happen in the long term. After the tracheostomy, Stephenwould need round-the-clock nursing. The best the National HealthService could offer was seven hours’ nursing help a week in theHawkings’ home, plus two hours’ help with bathing. They wouldhave to pay for private nursing. The advance from the book wouldnot last long, and there was absolutely no certainty about its even-tual success. To Jane there seemed little long-term hope. How werethey to survive if he could never work again? 
There were few possibilities. She would willingly have left her
own career and devoted herself full-time to looking after her hus-band, but she was not a qualified nurse, and in any case, who wouldthen provide for the family? The alternative was the dreadedthought of Stephen in a nursing home, unable to work, slipping intogradual decline and eventual death. “There were days when I feltA Brief History of Time 235Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlsometimes I could not go on because I didn’t know how to cope,”8
Jane has said of that period. 
It was obvious they would have to find financial support from
somewhere. Jane wrote letter after letter to charitable organizationsaround the world and called upon the help of family friends inapproaching institutions that might be interested in assisting them.Help arrived from an American foundation aware of Hawking’swork and international reputation, which agreed to pay £50,000 ayear toward the costs of nursing. Shortly afterward several othercharitable organizations on both sides of the Atlantic followed suitwith smaller donations. Jane feels bitter about the whole affair. Sheresents the fact that, after paying a lifetime of contributions to theNational Health Service, they were offered such meager help whenthe need arose. She is very aware that if her husband had been anunknown physics teacher he would now be living out his final daysin a residential home. “Think of the waste of talent,”
9she has said
of the situation. 
The very month in which the Hawkings received the offer of
financial support, a computer expert living in California, WaltWoltosz, sent Stephen a program he had written called Equalizer. Itwas compatible with the computers he used at home and in theoffice and enabled him to select words on a screen from a menu of3,000. He could move from word to word by squeezing a switchheld in his hand. Tiny movements of his fingers were enough tooperate the device and move a cursor to the desired word. When asentence had been built up, it could be sent to a voice synthesizerthat then spoke for him. Certain key sentences were pre-programmed into the computer to speed up the process, and with alittle practice Hawking found he could manage about ten words aminute. “It was a bit slow,” he has said, “but then I think slowly, soit suited me quite well.”
10STEPHEN HAWKING 236Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlHawking’s new computer-generated voice completely trans-
formed his life. He could now communicate better than he couldbefore the operation, and he no longer needed the help of an inter-preter when lecturing or simply conversing with people. Since thetracheostomy, his only means of communication had been by blink-ing his eyes, spelling out words written on a card held in front ofhim. The voice synthesizer has a definite accent, variously describedas American or Scandinavian. Because there is a degree of intona-tion on certain words, it doesn’t sound too much like a robot—something Hawking would have hated. He really wishes that thesynthesizer could produce a British accent, and he often greetspeople with, “Hello, please excuse my American accent.” However,he can change the program and alter the accent. On special occa-sions he likes to use one with a Scottish burr, which is perhaps theclosest he can get to his natural voice. Timothy Hawking thinks hisfather’s new voice suits him. Of all the family he is the one who canleast remember Stephen’s real voice, as he was only six at the timeof the operation in Switzerland, and there had been very little voiceleft for many years before then. 
With his new voice and a degree of financial security, a few weeks
after leaving the hospital Hawking was able to resume work on themanuscript. In collaboration with Peter Guzzardi and taking onboard suggestions quietly solicited from other readers, they decidedto scrap a number of sections and rewrite some others. Hawkingwanted to add a mathematical appendix, which would list the equa-tions forbidden in the text, but Guzzardi vetoed the idea. “It wouldterrify people!” he said. 
As the two men worked on the manuscript and the publicity
machine at Bantam began to get into gear for publication in thespring of 1988, Al Zuckerman was not idle. Having sold the rightsfor America and Canada, he was keen to find buyers for the rest ofthe world. Publishers in Germany and Italy both offered advancesA Brief History of Time 237Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlof $30,000 without even seeing the manuscript, and there was
growing interest from Japan, Scandinavia, France, and Spain. To hissurprise he even received offers from Korea, China, and Turkey andtwo from Russia—a country to which he had never before managedto sell a book. “I had two offers from publishers in Moscow,” hetold the Bookseller . “They don’t compete—they both made the
same offer.”
11It seemed everyone wanted to get in on the action. 
Global interest in Stephen Hawking’s book was exceeding
Zuckerman’s most optimistic dreams. Only in one major countrydid he encounter a problem: Britain. 
British publishers were the most sceptical I encountered. When I showed the ear-
lier version in the UK, Dent offered £15,000 and there were other offers of £5,000and £10,000. I didn’t think they were serious enough, so I withdrew.
12
For the meantime, there was no U.K. publisher for a book by a
British author that had been taken in almost every other country inthe world. 
No further progress was made until the American Booksellers
Association convention in 1987. Mark Barty-King of Bantam UKhad heard of the book through company connections. Bumping intoZuckerman at the convention, he asked him if he could read themanuscript. After reading it, he arranged to meet Zuckerman todeclare an interest in the book. Zuckerman told him that he wanted£75,000 for the U.K. rights. Barty-King suddenly lost his enthusiasm: 
£75,000 [at that time] seemed an outrageous advance for what was a difficult
book, although a very distinguished one. Whether he tried it out on other peopleI don’t know, but eventually we decided we could come up with £30,000. He saidhe had to try other publishers; we said, “If you do, we want the floor.”
13STEPHEN HAWKING 238Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlPenguin, Collins, Century Hutchinson, and others all failed to meet
the floor of £30,000. Zuckerman returned to Bantam UK andaccepted their offer. 
Even then Mark Barty-King’s final decision was touch and go.
The evening before he presented the idea to the scheduled editorialmeeting, he sat down to do some sums. As usual he began to calcu-late projected sales. Hardback: home 3,000 copies, stock 2,000,export 500; trade paperback: 10,000 copies, stock 10,000, export3,000; Australia and New Zealand: 3,000. The calculations didn’tadd up. Finally he added £5,000 for serial rights within the U.K.and he could just about justify the acquisition. He took it to themeeting and, against all advice from his colleagues, forced itthrough. The company would not make a penny from this book, hewas convinced of that. However, on the plus side, a prestigiousbook such as this could only enhance their profile as publishers of“serious” books and, if they did not actually lose money from thedeal, it would be worth taking the risk. 
It was not until he met Hawking in person at the Frankfurt Book
Fair the autumn before publication that Mark Barty-King began toget an inkling of the man’s enormous presence: 
It’s only when you meet him that you realize how extraordinary he is. What in
particular comes as such a surprise, after all he has been through, is that you getsuch a strong impression of his sense of humour.
14
After signing up the book, he told a journalist: 
It’s a book by one of the greatest minds of our time, discussing the elemental sub-ject of who we are and where we come from. It is a lucid and very personal book,one which I personally found quite difficult to read because of the subject-matter,but one which I considered to have enormous appeal.
15A Brief History of Time 239Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlIn Frankfurt, Hawking delivered a short talk to the gathered pub-
lishers in a library hired for the occasion. He described his life aswell as the philosophy and motivations behind the book. Accordingto Guzzardi, they were enthralled. In the lead-up to publication inthe USA, Guzzardi had a series of meetings with Bantam’s directorof marketing to discuss exactly how they would approach the pro-motion of the book. 
Years earlier, when Simon Mitton learned that Hawking had
signed to a major trade publisher, he had given Hawking a piece offriendly advice. “Do be careful if you’re dealing with those people,Stephen,” he had said. “Do ensure that you are quite certain that,if the aim is to make money and sell lots and lots of books, youdon’t mind the marketing techniques.” 
“What do you mean?” Hawking had asked. “Well, I wouldn’t put it past them to market it as ‘Aren’t cripples
marvelous?’ You’ve got to go into it with your eyes open. If youdon’t mind that approach, OK.” 
In the event, Mitton’s advice was unfounded. Guzzardi had no
intention of promoting the book in the way Mitton had feared: 
We could have gone two ways. We could have Bantamized it—planes over
Manhattan with sky-writing, T-shirts, etc., or we could go classy, tasteful, thequality-rap. The author is prestigious, we thought. Put marketing muscle into it,but do it tastefully. That was the alternative, and that’s what we decided to do. 
Less than a month before publication, Hawking received a sur-
prising phone call from his agent Al Zuckerman. Peter Guzzardi,who had seen the book through from the beginning, had told himthat he had been offered his own imprint at Crown and was leavingBantam. The final stages of carrying the book through promotionand the nervy early sales period would be handed over to a neweditor. One of the last decisions Guzzardi made about the book wasSTEPHEN HAWKING 240Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlthe final choice of title. Hawking thought that A Brief History of
Time might come across as a little too frivolous and had misgivings
about the word “brief.” It was Peter Guzzardi who managed toconvince him that it was a brilliant title, succinct but definitive.According to Guzzardi, what finally convinced Hawking was whenhe remarked that the word “brief” in the title made him smile.“Stephen saw the point immediately,” says Guzzardi, “he likes tomake people smile.” 
When handed the portfolio for this strange, difficult book, A
Brief History of Time , the new editor at Bantam got cold feet. The
new editor’s first decision was to reduce the book’s first print rundrastically—to 40,000. 
A Brief History of Time: From the Big Bang to Black Holes hit
stores all over America in the early spring of 1988. The launch partytook place at the Rockefeller Institute in New York, where a ban-quet was held in the author’s honor and Hawking gave a shortspeech to promote the book. According to the other guests, after along day of celebrations and seemingly endless introductions andmeetings, Hawking was still full of energy and in a party mood. 
The gathering moved to the embankment overlooking the East
River. Stephen was in fine form. The years of work on A Brief
History of Time were finally over, and the book was in the shops
and would, it was hoped, do well. Friends remember how hewheeled around from guest to guest in very high spirits. There wasa definite buzz of excitement in the air. It was a clear night, thestars shone brightly over the river, and the city lights were reflectedin a spectrum of colored points in the water. Glasses were contin-ually refilled, and although Hawking himself can drink very littlealcohol and has no real sense of taste, by all accounts he seemedintoxicated by the atmosphere. There were some anxiousmoments, however. One friend recalled that both Jane andA Brief History of Time 241Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlStephen’s nurse were terrified that in his excitement he would roll
his wheelchair into the river. 
Late in the evening a small group of close friends and family
returned to the hotel. As they passed through the lobby, Stephennoticed a dance going on in a ballroom nearby. Insisting that it wastoo early to go to bed, he wheeled himself off in the direction of themusic, intent on crashing the party. His friends were dragged alongand persuaded to join in, and Hawking ended the celebrations inthe early hours, whirring around the dance floor with the bandplaying on long after the original party had ended. 
Bantam carried through their plan of a low-key launch for the
book. There were no prearranged window displays or huge postersof the author. Prelaunch indicators from sales reps were encourag-ing but confused. Shops were keen to take the book but did notknow quite where to put it or what to do with it. Then, days afterpublication, near-disaster struck. An editor at Bantam, lookingthrough a copy from the first print run, noticed that two of thepictures were in the wrong place. There was instant panic. The40,000-copy print run was already in the shops. Sales staff hur-riedly began to phone the larger bookshops. 
“We’ve made a mistake,” they said. “We’ll have to recall all your
copies.” To their amazement, there were no unsold copies left.Shops all over America had already filled in reorder forms for more.According to executives at Bantam, this was the first sign that theywere on to something really big. Wasting no time, a reprint of the cor-rected version was ordered immediately and rushed to retailers asquickly as possible. Much to Bantam’s delight, Time magazine ran a
large article about Hawking in the month of publication, and favor-able reviews began to appear in quality newspapers and magazinesacross the States. Within weeks of publication, A Brief History of
Time entered the best-seller list and climbed effortlessly to the top. STEPHEN HAWKING 242Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlSuddenly, window displays appeared in bookshops all along Fifth
Avenue, and posters of Stephen Hawking were put up over shelvespacked with his book in shops all over America. 
The cover of the American edition of the book shows Hawking
sitting in his wheelchair against a backdrop of stars. He looksvery stern and is staring at the camera, almost frowning.Hawking has said that he was always unhappy with this picturebut that he had no say in its use. Some of his friends and familythought that the picture did not really express his true characterand lacked humor. 
One book reviewer took exception to Bantam’s putting a
photograph of the author in a wheelchair on the front cover,declaring it to be exploitative, a cynical commercial move on thepart of the publisher to get the most mileage possible from theircrippled author. 
Peter Guzzardi was deeply offended by the suggestion. “It was
obvious the reviewer didn’t know Stephen, to think that he could beexploited,” he said. “No one could exploit Stephen Hawking. He isquite capable of looking after himself.” 
“I think the reasoning behind that guy’s comments was pathetic,”
Guzzardi recalled with disgust on another occasion. “It was atriumph for a man in Hawking’s physical condition to be on thecover of his own book. It’s inspiring.” 
By the summer of 1988, Stephen Hawking’s “difficult” book had
stayed in the best-seller list for four months and had sold over a halfa million copies in America. He was very rapidly becoming a house-hold name. The publishing phenomenon of the year hit the nationalnews—and every airport bookstall in the country. 
In Chicago a Stephen Hawking fan club was hurriedly organized
and started selling Hawking T-shirts. Among the “science set,” hebegan to achieve the status and commercial trappings of a rock starin schools and colleges from L.A. to Pittsburgh. The schoolboy whoA Brief History of Time 243Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlhad been a devoted fan of Bertrand Russell was now, some thirty
years later, himself a schoolboys’ hero. 
June 1988 saw the British publication of A Brief History of Time . It
immediately followed the same pattern of instant success it hadenjoyed in America. Bookshops sold out every copy within days. Afew days after publication, one of us (M.W.) searched every book-shop in Oxford and London and could not find a single copy left onsale. Weeks later he tracked down a copy—the last remaining in thebookshop at the World Trade Center in New York. 
British sales reps were reporting overwhelming interest from
retailers the length of the country. Waterstone’s in Edinburgh wroteto the publisher to say that they wanted to mount a window displayand were planning to order 100 copies of the book. But despite theobvious interest the book was generating, the British publisher wasslow to appreciate the scale of its success. Mark Barty-King atBantam UK had decided to increase the first print run from 5,000to 8,000, but these were sold by the end of their first day in theshops. Once again an immediate reprint was ordered. By the begin-ning of 1991, A Brief History of Time had gone to twenty reprints
in Britain and was still selling an average of 5,000 copies a monthin hardback. The book was leaving the bookshelves faster than theprinters could produce new copies. The buyer for W. H. Smith wasquoted as saying, “Demand for the book had completely outstrippedwhat we were expecting. It has almost become a cult book.”
16
Reviews appeared in publications ranging from Nature to the
Daily Mail, all of them favorable. Interview after interview appeared
in newspapers and magazines. Hawking was becoming such acelebrity that he had to pick which journalists he would talk to. 
“It was interesting to see the interviews he went for,” said Wendy
Tury at Transworld. “He wanted to do the Sunday Mirror, for
instance.”
17STEPHEN HAWKING 244Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlHawking’s attitude was that he wanted to reach the broadest
audience possible. He wanted plumbers and butchers to read hisbook as well as doctors, lawyers, and science students: 
I am pleased a book on science competes with the memoirs of pop stars. Maybe
there is still hope for the human race. I am very pleased for it to reach the generalpublic, not just academics. It is important that we all have some idea of what sci-ence is about because it plays such a big role in modern society.
18
Entering the Sunday Times best-seller list within two weeks of
publication, it rapidly reached number one, where it remainedunchallenged throughout the summer. The book had alreadybroken many records and indeed went on to break them all—stay-ing on the list in Britain for a staggering 234 weeks, and notchingup British sales in excess of 600,000 in hardback before Hawking’spublisher Bantam decided to paperback the book in 1995. 
People began to stop Hawking on the street and proclaim their
deepest admiration. Timothy was said to be embarrassed by suchincidents, but Stephen reveled in it. One reviewer compared A Brief
History of Time to Zen and the Art of Motorcycle Maintenance .*
Family and friends were horrified, but Hawking took it as a com-pliment—a clear sign that he had succeeded in reaching his targetaudience. 
Reviewers and commentators seemed bemused by the book’s suc-
cess. John Maddox, the editor of Nature , wrote toward the end of
1988: 
Those who worry about the supposed public ignorance of science must surely be
comforted to know that in the United States there are now in circulation 600,000copies of Professor Stephen Hawking’s book A Brief History of Time .A Brief History of Time 245
*A cult success of the seventies.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlCuriously, among roughly a score of people I have questioned during a visit to
California (not all of them scientists), I found none who did not know of thebook, three who owned a copy and none who had yet read it. This seems odd fora volume of only 198 pages whose author’s estimate of the reading-time can beinferred from his statement that 1,000 calories of nutriment will be required tocapture its information content, roughly half a day. 
Indeed, there is a strange embarrassment about the book. People say it is a
“cult” book, or describe Professor Hawking as a cult figure. In California, wellused to the coming and going of gurus differing in persuasions and persuasiveness,this explanation may seem natural. But even California cannot have absorbed all600,000 copies.
19
In August 1988, Simon Jenkins of the Sunday Times wrote: 
I am all but mystified. Throughout this summer, a book by a 46-year-old
Cambridge mathematics professor on the problem of equating relativity theorywith quantum mechanics has been on the British non-fiction best-seller list. Forthe past month it has been top. Michael Jackson and Pablo Picasso have been top-pled. Stephen Hawking’s A Brief History of Time has notched up five reprints and
50,000 copies in hardback. This is blockbuster territory. 
20
Everyone, including many of the people who put it on the best-
seller list, seemed startled by the book’s cosmopolitan appeal. It wasobvious that Hawking had indeed managed to achieve the accoladeof having plumbers and butchers buying his book. There were sim-ply not enough science students in the world to account for the salesfigures. One writer recounted a story about a scientist who stoppedat a garage in America and began to chat to the service attendant.When the attendant discovered the driver was a scientist, he asked,“Do you know Professor Hawking? He’s my hero.”
21Suddenly
everyone was a Hawking fan, and everyone had a pet theory as tohow the book had become such a remarkable success. STEPHEN HAWKING 246Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlSo what is the secret of its success? It is a question still being
asked years after A Brief History of Time took up residence on the
best-seller list. 
In April 1991, nearly three years after its British publication, a
tiny article appeared in the gossipy “Weasel” section of theIndependent magazine that questioned how many people had actu-
ally read the book: 
That brilliant man Mr. Bernard Levin has admitted in his Times column that he
is unable to get beyond page 29 of A Brief History of Time by Professor Stephen
Hawking. This raises a question: if the brilliant Mr. Levin can only get as far aspage 29, how is the average punter likely to fare as he embarks on the quest forknowledge about the origins of the universe? 
Yet the fact remains that this slim scientific treatise priced by Bantam at £14.99
has sold 500,000 copies in this country alone, and that come July it will have beenin the best-sellers list for three whole years. Understandably, the publishers haveno plans to issue a paperback edition. 
How does one explain the extraordinary success of a book that so few of its
purchasers are able to understand? Amateur psychiatrists point to the author’scondition. He is a victim of motor neuron disease who was given up by his doc-tors years ago. Yet, against all the odds, he wrote his book. It is a heroic tale, butis it enough to explain the book’s success? 
I do not think so. Nor will it do to say that readers hope to discover the truth
about the origins of the world in which they live. The word will have got roundby now that there is no easy answer. The mystery of the book’s success is by nowalmost as baffling and fascinating as the mystery of the origins of the universe. Iam prepared to offer a small prize (say £14.99) to any reader who can provide anexplanation that is at all convincing.
22
The article provoked a flood of letters, including one from
Hawking’s mother, Isobel, published the following week, in whichshe wrote: 
Sir: I have to declare an interest, as I am the mother of Professor Stephen
Hawking, but I have given some thought to the reasons for the success of A BriefA Brief History of Time 247Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlHistory of Time . . . a success which surprised Stephen himself. I believe the
reasons to be complex, but shall attempt to simplify them—as I see them. 
The book is well written, which makes it pleasurable to read. The ideas are
difficult, not the language. It is totally non-pompous; at no time does he talkdown to his readers. He believes that his ideas are accessible to any interestedperson. It is controversial; plenty of people oppose his conclusions on one level oranother, but it stirs thought. 
Certainly his fight against illness has contributed to the book’s popularity, but
Stephen had come a long way before the book was even thought of. He did notcollect his academic and other distinctions because of motor neuron disease. 
I do not claim to understand the book myself, though I did read it to the end
before coming to this conclusion. I think my age and type of mental training havesomething to do with my non-comprehension. Without wishing to doubt thebrilliance of Mr. Levin’s intellect, I should hesitate to assume from his non-comprehension that most people share it.”
23
Isobel Hawking’s last point seems to have got to the root of the
matter perfectly. While some would consider the classical“Oxbridge arts” education the perfect foundation for later identifi-cation as an “intellectual,” there are other forms of education that,as we rush headlong toward the twenty-first century, may be moreappropriate for the “intellectuals” of the future. Ask any scientistabout the prejudices of the scientifically untrained. Such peoplemake themselves known at any normal dinner party. The sociablescientist has a surfeit of sorry tales of how the uninitiated protecttheir own ignorance with Levinesque belittlement, almost revelingin the fact that they don’t understand scientific matters. It is ofteneasier to make a joke of things you do not wish to admit to than tobe honest and confront them. In Britain, especially, this xenophobiais nurtured by the vestiges of Victorian images of the scientist aslittle more than a workman dirtying his hands in a laboratory, mess-ing around with chemicals and bizarre-looking instruments. 
Among the other replies to the “Weasel” piece was another letter
that neatly exposed such misplaced intellectual snobbery: STEPHEN HAWKING 248Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlSir: You are mistaken in thinking that few of the purchasers of A Brief History of
Time are able to understand the work. It is only those who, like Bernard Levin,
have had a limited education who have this problem. 
My 17-year-old son, a physics A Level student, found the book very easy to
understand and wished that Stephen Hawking had written in greater depth. Thisis a boy who never reads a novel and usually buys only the Sun. He would him-
self claim the £14.99 offered by the Weasel to those who could explain the pop-ularity of Hawking’s book, but he is hardly capable of constructing a letter. 
This bears out the theory . . . that there are different sorts of intelligence. Just
as there are philistine scientists there is an arts intelligentsia that is mathematicallyand scientifically illiterate. Never mind Shakespeare: perhaps schools should beteaching concepts that help one to understand the very basis of the nature of theUniverse.
24
Despite such forthright opinions, a great many people believe
that A Brief History of Time has turned out to be thebook to be
seen with in the eighties and nineties. Soon after publication severalarticles appeared in which the writer commented on the fact thatfriends and colleagues were in competition to see how far they hadmanaged to get through it. Both the writers of this book have com-pared notes on the comments of our nonscientist friends (and some-times scientifically trained ones too) who claim over dinner thatthey are trying it “a page a day” or that they are “three pagesfurther on than my next-door neighbor.” Even Simon Jenkins, whodisplays a continuing high regard for Hawking and his book, wadedin with: 
Hawking is, I am sure, benefiting from “wisdom by association.” Buying a book
is a step more virtuous than merely reading a review of it, but need not involvereading it. On the coffee-table or by the loo, a book is the intellectual equivalentof a spare Gucci label stitched on a handbag or an alligator on a T-shirt.
25A Brief History of Time 249Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlOthers have claimed that A Brief History of Time has sold so well
because it has been latched on to by a lost generation of post-yup-pie Greens who see it as a symbol of new-age wisdom, that it some-how takes on semireligious importance in their minds. Of course,Hawking finds such notions hilarious. 
So what do Hawking’s colleagues think of his book? If the truth
be told, many have not read it, claiming that they hardly see it as abeach read. Among those who have, there are a variety of opinions.A number have drawn the conclusion that Hawking did not go farenough and that the book should have been twice the length, butthat perhaps is the professional in them talking. 
Some like it; others do not. More than one physicist has said that
he felt Hawking was wrong to integrate accepted and establishedscientific conclusions with his own controversial speculations with-out informing the lay reader of any distinction between the two.Others believe that Hawking’s insistence on including potted biog-raphies of Galileo, Newton, and Einstein at the end of the book ispretentious—that it implies that the author thought the name“Hawking” would be the next in line in any future A Brief History
of Time . This last view seems at odds with the man’s own opinion
of the media hype surrounding his status. For he would claim it isthey, not he, who have made such proclamations. Others wouldargue that he has every right to think of himself in the same light asthis illustrious triumvirate. 
Whatever the reason for the book’s amazing success, it has far
outstripped the wildest expectations of the publishers who signed itup, the agent who saw its commercial value, and, most of all, thewriter and editor who created it. 
The final story of its cosmopolitan appeal must be reserved for a
tale from the Russian physicist Andrei Linde. Soon after the book’spublication, he was flying across America for a conference and hap-pened, not unusually, to be seated next to a businessman. Some waySTEPHEN HAWKING 250Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlinto the flight he glanced across and noticed that the man was read-
ing Hawking’s book. Without having been introduced and beforethe usual small talk, they struck up a conversation about it. 
“What do you think of it?” Linde asked. “Fascinating,” said the businessman. “I can’t put it down.” “Oh, that’s interesting,” the scientist replied. “I found it quite
heavy going in places and didn’t fully understand some parts.” 
At which point the businessman closed the book on his lap,
leaned across with a compassionate smile, and said, “Let meexplain. . . .” A Brief History of Time 251Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.html