4
Doctors and Doctorates
56It has been said that Cambridge is the only true university town
in England. Oxford is a much larger city and has, lying beyondthe ring road, heavy industrial areas nestling next to one of
Europe’s largest housing estates. Cambridge is altogether quainterand more thoroughly dominated by academia. Although evidencesuggests that the University of Cambridge was established by defec-tors from Oxford, both seats of learning were created at around thesame time in the twelfth century, using as their model the Universityof Paris. Like Oxford, Cambridge University is a collection of col-leges under the umbrella of a central university authority. LikeOxford, it attracts the very best scholars from around the world andhas a global reputation, paralleled only by its great rival and his-torical twin a mere eighty miles away. And, like Oxford, it is steepedin tradition, drama, and history. 
Having just returned from abroad, Stephen Hawking, B.A. (Hon.),
arrived in Cambridge in October 1962, exchanging the scorched,barren landscape of the Middle East for autumnal wind and drizzleacross the darkening fields of East Anglia. As he traveled past theCopyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlmeadows and gently rolling hills toward his new home that rainy
morning, a darkening shadow hung skulking behind the peace andcalm of the “only true university town in England,” and indeedbehind every other human dwelling elsewhere on the planet, for theworld was in the terrifying grip of the Cuba crisis. 
It really did seem as though the world could end in a blaze of
nuclear fury at any moment. In those relatively calm post-glasnostdays, it is perhaps hard to imagine the atmosphere of the time, theinsecurity, and the uncertainty. Hawking was no different from thenext man in experiencing a sense of hopelessness in the face ofevents over which he had absolutely no control. Old idols, the beau-tiful and the good, were fading and falling; new heroes stood on thesidelines, ready to emerge. Marilyn Monroe had died in August thatyear, John F. Kennedy had little more than twelve months to live,and the Beatles were poised on the brink of huge international fameunparalleled in the history of popular culture. 
Despite the overbearing threat of imminent annihilation, life in
Cambridge went on pretty much as usual. Students began to settleinto their new homes and find their feet in a strange city, the towns-folk continued about their daily business as they had done for thethousand years during which the city had existed. In the days lead-ing up to his move to Cambridge, with the world outside lookingset to tear itself apart, Stephen Hawking was gradually becomingaware of an inner personal crisis. Toward the end of his time atOxford he had begun to find some difficulty in tying his shoelaces,he kept bumping into things, and a number of times he felt his legsgive way from under him. Without a drink passing his lips hewould, on occasion, find his speech slurring as though he wereintoxicated. Not wanting to admit to himself that something waswrong, he said nothing and tried to get on with his life. 
Upon arriving in Cambridge another problem arose. When he
had applied to do a Ph.D. at the university there were two possibleDoctors and Doctorates 57Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlareas of research open to him: elementary particles, the study of the
very small, and cosmology, the study of the very large. As he hassaid himself: 
I thought that elementary particles were less attractive, because, although they
were finding lots of new particles, there was no proper theory of elementary par-ticles. All they could do was arrange the particles in families, like in botany. Incosmology, on the other hand, there was a well-defined theory—Einstein’s gen-eral theory of relativity.
1
However, there was a snag. He had originally chosen to go to
Cambridge University because at the time Oxford could not offercosmological research and, most important, he wanted to studyunder Fred Hoyle, who had a worldwide reputation as the most emi-nent scientist in the field. But instead of getting Hoyle, he was placedunder the charge of one Dennis Sciama, of whom he had neverheard. For a while this turn of events struck him as disastrous, buthe came to realize that Sciama would be a far better supervisorbecause Hoyle was forever traveling abroad and could find little timeto play the role of mentor. He soon discovered too that Dr. Sciamawas himself a very fine scientist and a tremendously helpful andstimulating supervisor, always available for him to talk to. 
Hawking’s first term at Cambridge went rather badly. He found
that he had not studied mathematics to a sufficiently high standardas an undergraduate and was soon struggling with the complex cal-culations involved in general relativity. He was still operating in hissomewhat lazy work mode, and his research material was becom-ing increasingly demanding. For the second time in his life he wasbeginning to flounder. Sciama (who died in 1999) recalled that,although his student seemed exceptionally bright and ready to arguehis point thoroughly and knowledgably, part of Hawking’s problemwas finding a suitable research problem to study. STEPHEN HAWKING 58Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlThe difficulty was that a research assignment had to be suffi-
ciently taxing to meet the requirements of a Ph.D. course, and,because relativity research at that level was fairly new and unusual,the right sort of problem was not easy to find. 
Sciama believed that at that time Hawking came close to losing
his way and flunking the whole thing. This was a situation whichpersisted for at least the first year of his Ph.D. Things would beginto resolve themselves only through a complex series of events initi-ated by changes already unfolding inside Hawking’s own body. 
When Stephen returned to St. Albans for the Christmas vacation at
the end of 1962, the whole of southern England was covered in athick blanket of snow. In his own mind he must have known thatsomething was wrong. The strange clumsiness he had been experi-encing had occurred more frequently but had gone unobserved byanyone in Cambridge. Sciama remembered noticing early in theterm that Hawking had a very slight speech impediment but had putit down to nothing more than that. However, when he arrived at hisparents’ home, because he had been away for a number of months,they instantly noticed that something was wrong. His father’simmediate conclusion was that Stephen had contracted somestrange bug while in the Middle East the previous summer—a logi-cal conclusion for a doctor of tropical medicine. But they wanted tobe sure. They took him to the family doctor who referred him to aspecialist. 
On New Year’s Eve the Hawkings threw a party at 14 Hillside
Road. It was, as might have been expected, a civilized affair withsherry and wine; close friends were invited, including school friendsJohn McClenahan and Michael Church. The word passed aroundthat Stephen was ill, the exact nature of the disease unknown, butsomething picked up in foreign climes was the general impression.Michael Church remembers that Stephen had difficulties pouring aDoctors and Doctorates 59Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlglass of wine and that most of the liquid ended up on the tablecloth
rather than in the glass. Nothing was said, but there was an atmos-phere of foreboding that evening. 
A young woman named Jane Wilde, whom Stephen had previ-
ously known only vaguely, had also been invited to the party. Amutual friend formally introduced him to her during the course ofthe evening. Jane also lived in St. Albans and attended the local highschool. As the dying hours of 1962 trickled away and 1963 began,the two of them began to talk and to get to know each other. Shewas in the upper sixth and had a place at Westfield College inLondon to begin reading modern languages the following autumn.Jane found the twenty-one-year-old Cambridge postgraduate a fas-cinating and slightly eccentric character and was immediatelyattracted to him. She recalls sensing an intellectual arrogance abouthim, but “there was something lost, he knew something was hap-pening to him of which he wasn’t in control.”
2From that night their
friendship blossomed. 
He was due back in Cambridge to begin the Lent term later in
January, but instead of resuming his work there he was taken intothe hospital to undergo a series of investigatory tests. Hawkingrecalls the experience vividly: 
They took a muscle sample from my arm, stuck electrodes into me, and injected
some radio-opaque fluid into my spine, and watched it going up and down withX-rays, as they tilted the bed. After all that, they didn’t tell me what I had, exceptthat it was not multiple sclerosis, and that I was an atypical case. I gathered, how-ever, that they expected it to continue to get worse, and that there was nothingthey could do except give me vitamins. I could see that they didn’t expect them tohave much effect. I didn’t feel like asking for more details, because they were obvi-ously bad.
3
The doctors advised him to return to Cambridge and his cosmo-
logical research, but that, of course, was easier said than done.STEPHEN HAWKING 60Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlWork was not going well and now the ever-present possibility of
imminent death hung over his every thought and action. Hereturned to Cambridge and awaited the results of the tests. A shorttime later he was diagnosed as having a rare and incurable diseasecalled amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, or ALS, known in the UnitedStates as Lou Gehrig’s disease after the Yankee baseball player whodied from the illness. In Britain it is usually called motor neurondisease. 
ALS affects the nerves of the spinal cord and the parts of the
brain that produce voluntary motor functions. The cells graduallydegenerate over a period of time and cause paralysis as musclesatrophy throughout the body. Apart from this the brain isunaffected, and the higher functions such as thought and memoryare left untouched. The body gradually wastes away, but thepatient’s mind remains intact. The usual prognosis is gradual immo-bility, followed by creeping paralysis, leading eventually to death bysuffocation or pneumonia as the respiratory muscles seize up. Thesymptoms are painless, but in the final stages of the disease patientsare often given morphine to alleviate chronic depression. 
One of the amazing ironies of the situation was that Stephen
Hawking just happened to be studying theoretical physics, one ofthe very few jobs for which his mind was the only real tool heneeded. If he had been an experimental physicist, his career wouldhave been over. Quite naturally this was little compensation to thetwenty-one-year-old who, like everyone else, had seen a normal lifestretching ahead of him rather than a death sentence from a neuro-logical disease. The doctors had given him two years. 
Upon hearing the news, Hawking fell into a deep depression.
Fleet Street legend has it that he locked himself away in a darkenedroom, plummeting into heavy drinking and listening to a great dealof high-volume Wagner while wallowing in a drunken haze of self-pity. However, he has gone on record as saying that the stories ofDoctors and Doctorates 61Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlexcessive drinking are exaggerated but that, feeling a somewhat
“tragic character,”4he did shut himself away for a while and lis-
tened to a lot of music, especially Wagner. 
Reports in magazine articles that I drank heavily are an exaggeration. The trouble
is, once one article said it, other articles copied it, because it made a good story.Anything that has appeared in print so many times must be true.
5
The truth may never be known, but Hawking’s recollection of
events rings true. The idea of getting totally smashed and stayingthat way to nullify the mental pain strikes one as an eminentlyreasonable thing to do in the circumstances. Furthermore, there isevidence to support his assertion. Dennis Sciama, for one, once saidthat he has no recollection of Hawking disappearing for a longperiod, as the tabloids have implied. Being used to seeing his stu-dents every day during term time, he would have been the first tohave noticed Hawking’s absence. 
However, there is little doubt that he was deeply shocked by the
news and experienced a time of deep depression. There seemed verylittle point in continuing with his research because he might not livelong enough to finish his Ph.D. For a while he quite naturallybelieved that there was nothing to live for. If he was going to diewithin a few years, then why bother to do anything now? He hadnever been attracted by religion or any thought of an afterlife, sothere was no crumb of comfort to be found there. He would live hisspan and then die. That was his fate. Being no different from thenext person faced with any form of personal tragedy, he kept think-ing, “How could something like that happen to me? Why should Ibe cut off like this?”
6
He tells of an experience while he was undergoing tests that made
a great impression on him and helped him through those nightmaredays back in Cambridge: STEPHEN HAWKING 62Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlWhile I had been in hospital, I had seen a boy I vaguely knew die of leukemia, in
the bed opposite me. It had not been a pretty sight. Clearly there were people whowere worse off than me. At least my condition didn’t make me feel sick. WheneverI feel inclined to be sorry for myself, I remember that boy.
7
He was experiencing some disturbing but poignant dreams at the
time. In hospital he dreamt that he was going to be executed. Hesuddenly realized that there were a lot of worthwhile things hecould do if he were to be reprieved. In another recurring dream hethought that he could sacrifice his life to save others: “After all, if Iwere going to die anyway, it might as well do some good,” hedreamed.
8
After Hawking had dragged himself out of his depression and
back to work, his father decided to pay Dennis Sciama a visit. Heexplained the situation and asked if Stephen could complete hisPh.D. in a shorter time than the three-year minimum because hisson might not live that long. Sciama, knowing perhaps better thananyone what his student was really capable of, told Frank Hawkingthat any idea of finishing in less than three years was impossible.Whether Sciama realized at the time that Hawking would need hiswork to help him through is another matter; but he knew the rules,and despite the fact that his student may have been dying, theycould not be bent to suit him. 
Most people believed that the medical predictions were correct
and that Hawking had a very short time to live. John McClenahanvividly remembers that, on the eve of his departure to work inAmerica for a year, Hawking’s sister Mary had said to him that, ifhe decided not to return within a year, he would probably never seehis friend again. Once it had taken a grip, the disease developedquickly. Jane met Stephen again soon after he was released from thehospital and found him confused and lacking the will to live. Doctors and Doctorates 63Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlHowever, there is little doubt that her appearance on the scene
was a major turning point in Hawking’s life. The two of them beganto see a lot more of one another, and a strong relationship devel-oped. It was finding Jane that enabled him to break out of hisdepression and regenerate some belief in his life and work.Meanwhile, the Ph.D. progressed at a painfully slow rate. 
He was not the only student working with Sciama. A South African,
George Ellis, had been the supervisor’s first student when Sciamahad taken up his post in 1961. A year later Hawking arrived, fol-lowed the year after by two other students who would, along withEllis, become lifelong friends and colleagues—Brandon Carter andMartin Rees. Together with a number of others they formed a smallgroup of relativists and cosmologists, all working on slightly differ-ent areas within the same field. 
They became good friends as well as co-workers, often relaxing
in one of the city’s pubs in the evening or going to concerts, plays,and films together when they had had enough of talking physicsover a pint of beer. There were common interests other than theirwork. Ellis was always very interested in politics and vehementlyantiapartheid. In Hawking he found a sympathetic set of attitudes,and they would often talk politics. Sitting beside pub fires in thewinter and in gardens on summer evenings, the two of them woulddiscuss anything, from the Vietnam War to Black Power. They wereall introduced to Jane, of course, and when she made the trip toCambridge on weekends the whole group would often go outtogether to eat or to picnic by the river, watching the punts glide by. 
During Hawking’s first year he worked with the other students
and supervisors in the Phoenix Wing of the Cavendish Laboratory,which had been set up by James Clerk Maxwell in the 1870s. In theearly 1960s the head of the physics department, George Batchelor,managed to persuade the university to establish a separate mathe-STEPHEN HAWKING 64Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlmatics and theoretical physics department in what used to be
known as the Old University Press Building in Silver Street. Itbecame known as the Department of Applied Mathematics andTheoretical Physics (DAMTP). 
The system at Cambridge is such that both undergraduate and
postgraduate students are enrolled in one of the colleges yet workin university buildings with others in the same field but from dif-ferent colleges. Hawking was a student of Trinity Hall and wouldeat there in the evenings and be assigned accommodation by the col-lege, but he did not work in Trinity Hall buildings or exclusivelywith Trinity Hall students and academic staff. 
The atmosphere in the physics department was very informal,
and Ph.D. students had no rigid timetable or course to follow. Thejob of the supervisor is to suggest a set of problems or targets anddiscuss with the student plans of attack and give guidance wherenecessary. Sciama remembered how, on a number of occasions, hewould dash into Hawking’s office with a new idea for something hischarge was working on, and they would then thrash out the schemetogether. At other times Hawking would go to see Sciama in hisoffice, a fondly remembered place, the walls covered with modernart prints between the shelves of books and papers.
As well as attending lectures at the university, all the Ph.D. stu-
dents at the DAMTP attended regular seminars, where thirty orforty people would listen to talks given by one of the teaching staffor a visiting lecturer. These would be followed by a general discus-sion. But the most important place for conversation and exchang-ing ideas was in the Tea Room. In the twice-daily ritual, well estab-lished at the Cavendish and carried over to Silver Street, everyonewould meet at 11 a.m. for coffee and 4 p.m. for tea to exchangetheir latest thoughts and ideas. Students shared offices, and theirdoors were nearly always open to all—there was never any feelingof working secretly or keeping ideas to oneself. It was in this atmos-Doctors and Doctorates 65Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlphere of free communication that Hawking happened to stumble
upon his first significant project during his early years as a Ph.D.student. 
Fred Hoyle was a very big name in the physics department of
Cambridge University, widely known for his ideas about the originsof the Universe. An inveterate self-publicist, he was very good atmanipulating the media and was of the breed of scientist whowould on occasion publicly express unrefereed and unverified theo-ries. His justification for this was simple. He was not an egomaniacor intellectual cowboy, but to acquire funds for his research heneeded to make a public splash, to be internationally famous.Publicity was of the utmost importance to him. 
Hoyle had not always been in such an elevated position. The son
of a Yorkshire textile merchant, he had entered Cambridge in the1930s on a full scholarship and had been hardened by the experi-ence of feeling socially inadequate because of his background andstrange accent. Although he proved himself intellectually superiorto most of his contemporaries, he was changed by the experienceand emerged as a difficult customer to deal with. For much of histime as a professor at Cambridge he was engaged in fierce argu-ments with the authorities as well as many of his colleagues. Soonafter the move to Silver Street, Hoyle set up his own institute inCambridge but still used the brains and help of many at theDAMTP. 
During the arguments and upheavals at Cambridge, Hoyle was
very much involved with the steady state theory of the Universe. Hehad developed the idea with the mathematician Hermann Bondi atKing’s College, London, and the astronomer Thomas Gold, but atthe time it was simply the more scientifically evolved of two con-tending theories. He detested the alternative theory of a sponta-neous creation of the Universe, which he once described as a partygirl jumping out of a birthday cake—it just wasn’t dignified or ele-STEPHEN HAWKING 66Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlgant. Much to his later amusement, he became the creator of the
term “Big Bang,” a phrase coined deliberately to ridicule the ideaand dropped into a radio program in which he was propounding hisown steady state theory. 
As well as developing his theory of the origin of the Universe,
Hoyle acted as supervisor to a select group of students. One of hischarges was a graduate student named Jayant Narlikar. Narlikarhad been assigned the task of working through some of the mathe-matics for Hoyle’s theory as part of the research material for hisPh.D. He also happened to occupy the office next to Hawking’s.Hawking became very interested in Narlikar’s equations. Withouttoo much persuasion, Narlikar shared the research material he wasworking on and Hawking began to develop the theories further.During the next few months Hawking spent more and more timewalking between his friend’s office and his own, clutching pages fullof mathematical interpretations in one hand and leaning heavily onhis newly acquired walking stick with the other. 
At this point it should be emphasized that Hawking had no mali-
cious intent toward Hoyle or, indeed, Narlikar. He was quite simplycurious about the material and was floundering with his ownprojects. The equations and their meaning were fascinating and per-haps initially more stimulating than his own research. Besideswhich, the whole approach within the department was one ofshared goals and ideals. 
Before too long things came to a head. Hoyle decided to make a
public announcement of his findings at a meeting of the RoyalSociety in London. Although it was certainly not without precedent,some of his colleagues considered that he was being overly keen indoing this because the work had not been refereed. Hoyle gave histalk to around a hundred people; at the end there was warmapplause and the usual post-lecture hubbub of conversation. Thenhe asked if there were any questions. Naturally Hawking hadDoctors and Doctorates 67Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlattended and had followed the arguments closely. He stood up
slowly, clutching his stick. The room fell silent. 
“The quantity you’re talking about diverges,” he said. Subdued murmurs passed around the audience. The gathered sci-
entists saw immediately that, if Hawking’s assertion were correct,Hoyle’s latest offering would be shown to be false. 
“Of course it doesn’t diverge,” Hoyle replied. “It does,” came Hawking’s defiant reply. Hoyle paused and surveyed the room for a moment. The audi-
ence was absolutely silent. “How do you know?” he snapped. 
“Because I worked it out,” Hawking said slowly. An embarrassed laugh passed through the room. This was the last
thing Hoyle wanted to hear. He was furious with the young upstart.But any enmity between the two men was short lived—Hawkinghad demonstrated himself to be too good a physicist for that. ButHoyle considered Hawking’s action to be unethical and told him so.In return, Hawking and others pointed out that Hoyle had beenunethical in announcing results that had not been verified. The onlyinnocent party, who no doubt had to bear the full brunt of Hoyle’sanger, was the middleman, Narlikar. 
Although Hoyle is every bit Hawking’s intellectual equal, on this
occasion the younger man turned out to be absolutely correct: thequantity Hoyle had been talking about did indeed diverge, whichmeant that the latest component of his theory was wrong. Hawkingwrote a paper summarizing the mathematical findings that had ledhim to realize this. It was well received by his peers and establishedhim as a promising young researcher. While still trying to sort outhis own Ph.D. work with Sciama, Hawking was already beginningto make a name for himself within the rarefied atmosphere of cos-mological research. STEPHEN HAWKING 68Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlDuring his first two years at Cambridge, the effects of the ALS dis-
ease rapidly worsened. He was beginning to experience enormousdifficulty in walking and was compelled to use a stick in order tomove just a few feet. His friends helped him as best they could, butmost of the time he shunned any assistance. Using walls and objectsas well as sticks, he would manage, painfully slowly, to traverserooms and open areas. There were many occasions when these sup-ports were not enough. Sciama remembered clearly, as do his  col-leagues, that on some days Hawking would turn up at the officewith a bandage around his head, having fallen heavily and receiveda nasty bump. 
His speech was also becoming seriously affected by the disease.
Instead of being merely slurred, his speaking voice was now rapidlybecoming unintelligible, and even close colleagues were experienc-ing some difficulty in understanding what he was saying. Nothingslowed him down, however; in fact, he was just getting into hisstride. Work was progressing faster and more positively than it hadever done in his entire career, and this serves to illustrate his attitudeto his illness. Crazy as it may seem, ALS is simply not that impor-tant to him. Of course he has had to suffer the humiliations andobstructions facing all those in our society who are not able bodied,and naturally he has had to adapt to his condition and to live underexceptional circumstances. But the disease has not touched theessence of his being, his mind, and so has not affected his work. 
More than anyone else, Hawking himself would wish to under-
play his disability and to concentrate on his scientific achievements,for that is really what is important to him. Those working with him,and the many physicists around the world who hold him in thehighest regard, do not view Hawking as anything other than one ofthem. The fact that he cannot now speak and is immobile withoutthe technology at his fingertips is quite irrelevant. To them he isfriend, colleague, and, above all, great scientist. Doctors and Doctorates 69Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlHaving come to terms with ALS and found someone in Jane
Wilde with whom he could share his life on a purely personal level,he began to blossom. The couple became engaged, and the fre-quency of weekend visits increased. It was obvious to everyone thatthey were sublimely happy and immensely important to each other.Jane recalls, “I wanted to find some purpose to my existence, and Isuppose I found it in the idea of looking after him. But we were inlove.”
9On another occasion she said, “I decided what I was going
to do, so I did. He was very, very determined, very ambitious. Muchthe same as now. He already had the beginnings of the conditionwhen I first knew him, so I’ve never known a fit, able-bodiedStephen.”
10
For Hawking, his engagement to Jane was probably the most
important thing that had ever happened to him: it changed his life,gave him something to live for, and made him determined to live.Without the help that Jane gave him, he almost certainly would nothave been able to carry on or had the will to do so. 
From this point on his work went from strength to strength, and
Sciama began to believe that Hawking might, after all, manage tobring together the disparate strands of his Ph.D. research. It wasstill touch and go, but another chance encounter was just aroundthe corner. 
Sciama’s research group became very interested in the work of a
young applied mathematician, Roger Penrose, who was then basedat Birkbeck College in London. The son of an eminent geneticist,Penrose had studied at University College in London and had goneon to Cambridge in the early fifties. After research in the UnitedStates he had begun in the early sixties to develop ideas of singular-ity theory that interfaced perfectly with the ideas then emergingfrom the DAMTP. STEPHEN HAWKING 70Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlThe group from Cambridge began to attend talks at King’s
College in London where the great mathematician and cocreator ofthe steady state theory, Hermann Bondi, was professor of appliedmathematics. King’s acted as a suitable meeting point for Penrose(who traveled across London), those from Cambridge, and a smallgroup of physicists and mathematicians from the college itself.Sciama took Carter, Ellis, Rees, and Hawking to the meetings withthe idea that the discussions might spark applications to their ownwork. However, there were times when Hawking almost failed tomake it to London. 
Brandon Carter remembers one particular occasion when the
group arrived late at the railway station and the train was alreadydrawing in. They all ran for it, forgetting about Stephen, who wasstruggling along with his sticks. It was only after they had installedthemselves in the carriage that they were aware he was not withthem. Carter recalls looking out of the window, seeing a patheticfigure struggling toward them along the platform and realizing thatStephen might not make it before the train pulled away. Knowinghow Hawking was fiercely against being treated differently fromothers, they did not like to help him too much. However, on thisoccasion Carter and one of the others jumped out to help him alongthe platform and on to the train. 
It would have been an odd twist of fate indeed if Hawking had
not made it to at least one of those London meetings because it wasthrough them that his whole career took another positive turn.Over the course of the talks at King’s, Roger Penrose had intro-duced his colleagues to the idea of a space-time singularity at thecenter of a black hole, and naturally the group from Cambridge wastremendously excited by this. 
One night, on the way back to Cambridge, they were all seated
together in a second-class compartment and had begun to discusswhat had been said at the meeting that evening. Feeling disinclinedDoctors and Doctorates 71Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlto talk for a moment, Hawking peered through the window, watch-
ing the darkened fields stream past and the juxtaposition of hisfriends reflected in the glass. His colleagues were arguing over oneof the finer mathematical points in Penrose’s discussion. Suddenly,an idea struck him, and he looked away from the window. Turningto Sciama sitting across from him, he said, “I wonder what wouldhappen if you applied Roger’s singularity theory to the entireUniverse.” In the event it was that single idea that saved Hawking’sPh.D. and set him on the road to science superstardom. 
Penrose published his ideas in January 1965, by which time
Hawking was already setting to work on the flash of inspirationthat had struck him on the way home from London to Cambridgethat night after the talk. Applying singularity theory to the Universewas by no means an easy problem, and within months Sciama wasbeginning to realize that his young Ph.D. student was doing some-thing truly exceptional. For Hawking this was the first time he hadreally applied himself to anything. As he says: 
I . . . started working hard for the first time in my life. To my surprise, I found I
liked it. Maybe it is not really fair to call it work. Someone once said, “Scientistsand prostitutes get paid for doing what they enjoy.”
11
When he was satisfied with the mathematics behind the ideas, he
began to write up his thesis. In many respects it ended up as a prettymessy effort because he had been in something of a wilderness formuch of the first half of his time at Cambridge. The problems heand Sciama had experienced in finding him suitable researchprojects left a number of holes and unanswered questions in thethesis. However, it had one saving grace—his application of singu-larity theory during his third year. 
The final chapter of Hawking’s thesis was a brilliant piece of
work and made all the difference to the awarding of the Ph.D. TheSTEPHEN HAWKING 72Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlwork was judged by an internal examiner, Dennis Sciama, and an
expert external referee. As well as being passed or failed, a Ph.D.can be deferred, which means that the student has to resubmit thethesis at a later date, usually after another year. Thanks to his finalchapter, Hawking was saved this humiliation and the examinersawarded him the degree. From then on the twenty-three-year-oldphysicist could call himself Dr. Stephen Hawking. Doctors and Doctorates 73Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.html