11
Back to the Beginning
175By the end of 1974, Hawking’s work on black holes had
shown that, using the general theory of relativity alone,the equations said that the surface area of a black hole
could not shrink—but adding in the quantum rules to the equationsrevealed that they could not only shrink but would eventually dis-appear in a puff of gamma radiation. His earlier work with Penrosehad shown that, using the general theory of relativity alone, theequations said that the Universe must have been born out of a sin-gularity, a point of infinite density and zero volume, at a time some15 billion years ago. It was natural that the next scientific questionHawking asked himself was what would happen to this predictionif the quantum rules were added to that set of equations. 
This was no easy question to answer. Physicists had been trying
to combine quantum theory and relativity theory into one complete,unified theory ever since the quantum revolution in the 1920s;Einstein himself spent the last twenty years of his working life onthe problem and failed to come up with a solution. Indeed, a fulltheory of quantum gravity still eludes the mathematicians. But byCopyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlrestricting himself to the specific puzzle of how relativity and quan-
tum mechanics interacted at the beginning of time, Hawking wasable to make progress, to such an extent that by the early 1980s hewas posing the question of whether there ever had been a beginningto time at all. To understand how he arrived at this startling hypoth-esis, we have to look again at the quantum theory, in a variationdeveloped by the great American physicist Richard Feynman. It isknown as the “sum-over-histories” or “path integral” approach. 
The essential features of quantum mechanics are demonstrated
most clearly in what is known as “the experiment with two holes.”In such an experiment, a beam of light, or a stream of electrons, isdirected through two small holes in a wall and on to a screen on theother side. The version using light is known as Young’s experimentand may be familiar from school physics. What happens is that thepattern of light on the screen forms a characteristic arrangement ofdark and light stripes, caused when the electromagnetic waves pass-ing through each of the holes interfere with each other. Where thetwo sets of waves add together, there is a bright stripe; where theycancel each other out, the screen is dark. 
This interference is easy to understand in terms of waves. You can
get exactly the same effect by making waves in a tank of water andletting them pass through two slits in a barrier. But it is much harderto understand how electrons, which we are used to thinking of ashard particles like tiny snooker balls, can behave in the same way.Yet they do. 
What is even stranger is that the same pattern of dark and light
stripes slowly builds up on the screen (which can be almost exactlythe same as a TV screen) when electrons are fired through the holesone at a time. Why should this be strange? Think about what hap-pens when electrons are fired through just one hole. Instead of astriped pattern on the screen, there is just a bright patch behind thehole. This is indeed what we see if we block off either of the twoSTEPHEN HAWKING 176Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlholes and fire the electrons through. “Obviously,” each electron can
go through only one hole. But when both holes are open, even withelectrons fired one at a time through the experiment, we do not seejust two patches of brightness behind the holes, but the characteris-tic stripy pattern of Young’s experiment. 
This is the clearest example of the wave-particle duality (see
Chapter 2) that lies at the heart of the quantum world. When eachelectron arrives at the screen, it makes a pinpoint of light, just asyou would expect from the arrival of a tiny “snooker ball” particle.But when thousands of those points of light are added together, theyproduce the striped pattern corresponding to a wave passingthrough both holes at once. It is as if each individual electron is awave that passes through both holes simultaneously, interferes withitself, decides which bit of the striped pattern it belongs in, andheads off there to arrive as a particle that makes a pinpoint of light. 
Don’t worry if you find this incomprehensible. Niels Bohr, one of
the physicists who pioneered the quantum revolution, used to saythat “anyone who is not shocked by quantum theory has not under-stood it,” while Feynman, probably the greatest theoretical physi-cist since the Second World War, went even further and was fond ofsaying that nobody understands quantum mechanics. The impor-
tant thing is not to understand how such a strange behavior aswave-particle duality can occur, but to find a set of equations thatdescribe what is going on and make it possible for physicists to pre-dict how electrons, light waves, and the rest will behave. The sum-over-histories approach was Feynman’s contribution to this morepragmatic form of “understanding” at the quantum level, and in thelate 1970s Hawking applied it to the study of the Big Bang. 
Feynman said that, instead of thinking of an object such as an
electron as a simple particle that follows a single route from A to B(for example, through one of the two holes in Young’s experiment),we have to regard it as following every possible path from A to BBack to the Beginning 177Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlthrough space-time. It would be easier for a “classical” particle to
follow some paths (some “histories”) than others, and this isallowed for in Feynman’s equations by assigning each path a prob-ability, which can be calculated from the quantum rules. 
These probabilities can interfere with the probabilities from
neighboring “world lines,” as they are called, rather like the wayripples on the surface of a pond interfere with one another. Theactual path followed by the particle is then calculated by addingtogether all the probabilities for individual paths (which is why thisis also known as the path integral approach). 
In the vast majority of cases, the various probabilities cancel each
other out almost entirely, leaving just a few paths, or trajectories,that are reinforced. This is what happens for the trajectories corre-sponding to an electron moving near the nucleus of an atom. Theelectron is not allowed to go just anywhere because of the way theprobabilities cancel. It is only allowed to move in one of the feworbits around the nucleus where the probabilities reinforce oneanother. 
The experiment with two holes is unusual because it offers the
electrons a choice of two equally probable sets of trajectories, onethrough each hole, and this is why the basic strangeness of thequantum world shows up so clearly in this example. OnlyHawking, though, had the chutzpah to apply the path integralapproach to calculating the history, not of an individual electronbut of the entire Universe; but even he started out in a smaller way,with black hole singularities. 
When a black hole evaporates, what happens to the singularity
inside it? One simple guess might be that in the final stages of theevaporation the horizon around the hole vanishes, leaving behindthe naked singularity that nature is supposed to abhor. In fact,though, the equations developed by Hawking in the early 1970s toSTEPHEN HAWKING 178Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmldescribe exploding black holes could not be pushed to such
extremes. Strictly speaking, they could only be applied if the massof the black hole were still a reasonable fraction of a gram—almostbig enough to be weighed on your kitchen scales. The best guessthat Hawking, or anyone else, could make in 1974 was that whena black hole has evaporated to this point it would completely dis-appear, taking the singularity with it. But this was only a guess,based on some general quantum principles. 
These principles are aspects of the basic uncertainty principle.
Just as there is a fundamental uncertainty about the energy contentof the vacuum, so there is a fundamental uncertainty about basicmeasures such as length and time. The size of these uncertainties isdetermined by Planck’s constant, which gives us basic “quanta”known as the Planck length and the Planck time. 
Both are very small. The Planck length, for example, is 10
–35of a
meter, far smaller than the nucleus of an atom. According to thequantum rules, not only is it impossible in principle ever to measureany length more accurately than this (we should be so lucky!), butalso there is no meaning to the concept of a length shorter than thePlanck length. So if an evaporating black hole were to shrink to thepoint where it was just one Planck length in diameter, it could notshrink any more. If it lost more energy, it could only disappearentirely. The quantum of time is, similarly, the smallest interval oftime that has any meaning. This Planck time is a mere 10
–43of a
second, and there is no such thing as a shorter interval of time.(Don’t worry about the exact size of these numbers; what matters isthat, although they are exceedingly small, they are notzero.)
Quantum theory tells us that we can neither shrink away a blackhole to a mathematical point nor look back in time literally to themoment when time “began.” Even if we pushed the Big Bang modelto its most extreme limit, we would have to envisage the Universebeing created with an “age” equal to the Planck time. Back to the Beginning 179Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlIn both cases, quantum mechanics seems to remove the trouble-
some singularities. If there is no meaning to the concept of a volumewith a diameter less than the Planck length, then there is no mean-ing to the concept of a point of zero volume and infinite density.Quantum theory is telling us that, although the densities reachedinside black holes, and at the birth of the Universe, may be stagger-ingly high by any human measure, they are not infinite. And if theinfinities and singularities can be removed, there is at least a hopeof finding a set of equations to describe the origin (and, it turns out,the fate) of the Universe. Having started out in 1975 from thepuzzle of what happens in the last stages of the evaporation of ablack hole, by 1981 Hawking was ready to unveil his new ideas,incorporating Feynman’s sum-over-histories version of quantummechanics, to explain how the Universe had come into being. Theplace he chose for the unveiling was—the Vatican. 
In fact, the choice of venue was not entirely Hawking’s whim.
It happened that the Catholic Church had invited several eminentcosmologists to attend a conference in Rome in 1981, to discussthe evolution of the Universe from the Big Bang onward. By the1980s, the Church was much more receptive to scientific teachingthan it had been in the days of Galileo, and the official view wasthat it was quite OK for science to investigate events since the BigBang, leaving the mystery of the moment of creation in the handsof God. 
Fortunately, perhaps, Hawking’s investigation of the moment of
creation was still couched in rather abstruse mathematical languagewhen he presented it to that conference. Since then, however, he hasdeveloped the ideas in a more accessible way (most notably with thehelp of James Hartle of the University of California). It doesn’t takemuch intuition to guess that the Pope would probably not approveof the fully developed version of Hawking’s ideas, which seems todo away entirely with a role for God. STEPHEN HAWKING 180Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlWhat Hawking has tried to do is to develop a sum over histories
describing the entire evolution of the Universe. Now this is, ofcourse, impossible. Just one history of this kind would involveworking out the trajectory of every single particle through space-time from the beginning of the Universe to the end, and there wouldbe a huge number of such histories involved in the “integration.”But Hawking found that there is a way to simplify the calculations,provided the Universe has a particularly simple form. 
Quantum theory comes into the calculations in the form of the
sum over histories. General relativity enters in the form of curvedspace-time. In Hawking’s models, a complete curved space-timethat describes the entire history of a model universe is equivalent toa trajectory of a single particle in Feynman’s sum over histories.General relativity allows for the possibility of many different kindsof curvature, and some sorts of curvature turn out to be more prob-able than others. 
If the Universe is like the interior of a black hole, with space-time
closed around it, we can imagine, in the standard picture of the BigBang, that everything (including space) expands outward from theinitial singularity, reaches a certain size, and then collapses backinto a mirror image of the Big Bang, the so-called “Big Crunch.” Inthis picture, there is a beginning of time in the initial singularity andan end of time in the final singularity. Hawking calls the beginningand end of time “edges” to this model of the Universe—such amodel has no edge in space because space is folded round into asmooth surface like the surface of a balloon, or the surface of theEarth; but there is an edge in time in the beginning, when theUniverse appears as a point of zero size. 
Hawking wanted to remove the edge in time, as well as the edge
in space, to produce a model of the Universe that has no boundariesat all. He found that, without having to go into the detail of calcu-lating every trajectory of every particle through space-time, the gen-Back to the Beginning 181Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmleral rules of the sum-over-histories approach as applied to families
of curved space-times said that a certain kind of curvature is muchmore likely than any other if the no-boundary condition applies. 
Hawking stresses that this no-boundary condition is, as yet, just
a guess about the nature of the Universe, but it is a guess that leadsto a powerful image of reality. This is the cosmological equivalentof saying that the path integral approach tells us that an electroncan follow only certain orbits around a nucleus; the Universe hasonly a limited number of life cycles to choose from, and they alllook much the same. 
The best way to picture these models is by an extension of the
idea of the Universe being represented by the surface of a balloon.In the old picture, this surface represents space, and the evolution ofthe Universe from bang to crunch is represented by imagining theballoon being first inflated and then deflated. In the new picture,however, the spherical surface represents both space and time, andit stays the same size—much more like the surface of the Earth thanthe surface of an expanding balloon. So where does the observedexpansion of the Universe come into this model? 
Now, says Hawking, we have to imagine the Big Bang as corre-
sponding to a point on the surface of the sphere, at the North Pole.A tiny circle drawn around that point (a line of latitude) corre-sponds to the size of the space occupied by the Universe. As timepasses, we have to imagine lines of latitude being drawn further andfurther away from the North Pole, getting bigger (showing that theUniverse expands) all the way to the equator. From the equatordown to the South Pole, the lines of latitude get smaller once again,corresponding to the Universe shrinking back to nothing at all astime passes. 
We still have an image of the Universe being born in a super-
dense state, evolving, and shrinking back into a super-dense state,but there is no longer a discontinuity in time, just as there is no edgeSTEPHEN HAWKING 182Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlof the world at the North Pole. At the North Pole, there is no direc-
tion north, and every direction points south. But this is simply dueto the geometry of the curved surface of the Earth. In the same way,at the Big Bang there was no past, and all times lay in the future.And this is simply due to the geometry of curved space-time. Thewhole package of space and time, matter and energy, is completelyself-contained. 
A rather nice way to understand what is going on is to imagine
you are standing a little way from the North Pole and start to walkdue north. Even though you keep walking in a straight line, you willsoon find that you are walking due south. In the same way, if youhad a working time machine and started traveling backward in timefrom some moment just after the Big Bang, you would soon findthat you were traveling forward in time, even though you had notaltered the controls of the time machine. You just cannot get backto a time before the Big Bang (strictly speaking, before the Plancktime) because there simply is no “before.” 
In A Brief History of Time , Hawking spelled out the implications
for religion. He leaves his colleagues in no doubt that he is, at thevery least, an agnostic and finds strong support for this belief in hiscosmological studies: 
So long as the universe had a beginning, we could suppose it had a creator. But if
the universe is really completely self-contained, having no boundary or edge, itwould have neither beginning nor end: it would simply be. What place, then, fora creator?
1
But even without a creator there were still problems to be solved.
Already, in 1981, the attention of Hawking and other theorists wasfocusing on the next question—how did a tiny seed of a Universeget blown up to the enormous size that we see today? Back to the Beginning 183Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlThe puzzle of how the Universe has got to be as big as it is today
had itself loomed larger and larger during the 1970s. When every-body thought that the Big Bang theory was just a model to playwith, they didn’t worry too much about the details of how it mightwork. But as evidence built up that this model provides a very gooddescription of the real Universe, it became increasingly important toexplain exactly what makes the model, and the Universe, tick. 
There were two problems that cosmologists were simply unable
to answer in the 1970s. First, why is the Universe so uniform—whydoes it look the same (on average) in all directions of space, andwhy, in particular, is the temperature of the microwave backgroundexactly the same in all directions? Secondly, the Universe seems tobe delicately balanced on the dividing line between being closed,like a black hole, and open, so that it will expand forever. In termsof the curvature of space, the Universe is remarkably flat. Why isthis? 
On the basis of general relativity alone, there seems to be no
reason why it could not have been, for example, much more tightlycurved, in which case the Universe would have expanded only alittle way out of the Big Bang before recollapsing, and there wouldhave been insufficient time for stars, planets, and people to evolve.Cosmologists suspected that the smoothness and flatness of theUniverse were telling us something fundamental about the nature ofthe Big Bang, but nobody could see just what that might be until ayoung researcher at Cornell University, Alan Guth, came up with anew idea. 
Guth’s proposal goes by the name “inflation” and stems from
quantum physics. He suggested that in the first split second after thebeginning, the vacuum of the Universe existed in a highly energeticstate, as allowed by the quantum rules, but unstable. The high-energy state is analogous to a container of water cooled, very slowlyand carefully, to below 0°C. Such supercooling is possible if theSTEPHEN HAWKING 184Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlwater is cooled very carefully, but the result is unstable. At a slight
disturbance, the water will freeze into ice, and as it does so it givesup energy (exactly the same amount of energy that is needed to meltan ice cube, at 0°C, is released when the same amount of waterfreezes). 
This is where the ice analogy breaks down slightly, for when the
Universe cooled from the excited vacuum state to the stable vacuumthat we know today, so much energy was released that it becamesuper-hot, not icy, and for a time it expanded super-fast. In a tinyfraction of a second, a region of space far smaller than a proton (butpacked full of energy) must have been inflated, according to thistheory, into a volume about the size of a grapefruit. At that pointthe inflation was exhausted, and the grapefruit-sized fireball beganthe steady expansion associated with the standard model of the BigBang, growing over the next 15 billion years to become the entirevisible Universe. 
According to inflation theory, the Universe is so uniform because
it has grown out of a seed so small that there was literally no roominside it for irregularities. And the equations also tell us that theinflation process flattened space. The best analogy for how thisworks is with the wrinkly surface of a prune, which is very far fromflat. When you soak the prune in water, it swells up, expanding sothat the surface stretches and the wrinkles are smoothed out.Imagine starting out with a prune smaller than a proton andexpanding it to the size of a grapefruit, and you can see why spaceis so very flat today. 
The inflationary model has been extensively developed since
Guth made the original proposal in 1980. Hawking has beeninvolved in filling in details of this work throughout the 1980s, butthe main developments have come from a Soviet researcher, AndreiLinde. Some of Linde’s early contributions were duplicated inde-pendently by Paul Steinhardt and Andreas Albrecht, from theBack to the Beginning 185Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlUniversity of Pennsylvania. As we shall see in Chapter 15, the early
versions of inflation were overtaken in the 1980s by new insightsthat provide a spectacular new image of the origin and evolution ofnot just the Universe but a multiplicity of universes. Hawkingplayed a part in this work, too. From now on, honors and awardswould be heaped upon the man to whom the modest recognitionoffered by the Gravity Research Foundation had been “very wel-come” just a short time before. STEPHEN HAWKING 186Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.html