3
Going Up
40The year 1959 started with a bang: January 2 saw the
thirty-two-year-old Fidel Castro sweeping to power inCuba; a month later Buddy Holly died in a plane crash
and Indira Gandhi became the leader of India’s ruling CongressParty. By the spring, the world’s first hovercraft was under con-struction on the Isle of Wight, two rhesus monkeys had become thefirst primates in space, and the writer Raymond Chandler had diedat age seventy. Meanwhile, in a small city in Hertfordshire a seven-teen-year-old schoolboy named Stephen Hawking was getting readyfor the Oxford entrance examination in a large, cluttered bedroomin his parents’ rambling Edwardian house. 
Obtaining a place at Oxford University was no easy task. A
potential candidate had two alternatives—an entrance examinationtaken in the upper sixth, before A Levels, or the same examinationtaken in the seventh term, provided very high A Level grades hadbeen obtained. The former route meant that a successful candidatecould go straight to Oxford after the summer vacation; the latternecessitated waiting until the following October. Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlStephen and his father settled on the first alternative, and he was
entered for the examination toward the end of his final year at St. Albans School. The intention from the start was that he wasgoing for a scholarship, the highest award offered by the university.The award provided a number of titular privileges and, moreimportant, a percentage of the cost of putting a student throughOxford was paid by the university. A student failing to obtain ascholarship could be awarded an exhibition, which was less presti-gious and brought with it a smaller contribution to the costs of edu-cation. Last, a candidate could be offered a place at the universitybut with no financial assistance at all and the student was thenknown as a “commoner.” 
Over the previous year, father and son had engaged in endless
arguments over the choice of university course. Stephen insisted thathe wanted to read mathematics and physics, a course then knownas natural science. His father was unconvinced; he believed therewere no jobs in mathematics apart from teaching. Stephen knewwhat he wanted to do and won the argument; medicine had littleappeal for him. As he says himself: 
My father would have liked me to do medicine. However, I felt that biology was
too descriptive, and not sufficiently fundamental. Maybe I would have felt differ-ently if I had been aware of molecular biology, but that was not generally knownabout at the time.
1
Frank Hawking lost the argument over Stephen’s choice of degree
course, but he was determined to see his son obtain a place at hisold college, University College, Oxford. However, it is clear that Dr. Hawking was not, even at this stage, fully convinced ofStephen’s ability and believed that he had to pull strings to get himin. He evidently decided to take the initiative. Just before the sched-uled entrance examination during the Easter vacation, he arrangedGoing Up 41Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlto take Stephen to meet his prospective tutor at University College, 
Dr. Robert Berman. As Berman himself recalls, the sort of pressureHawking senior was applying would usually have put him off thecandidate immediately. However, Stephen sat for the exam and didso extraordinarily well that Berman and University College soonwarmed to him. 
The entrance examination was pretty tough. It was spread over
two days and consisted of five papers in all, each of which was twoand a half hours long. These included two physics and two mathe-matics papers, followed by a paper that tested candidates on theirgeneral knowledge and awareness of current affairs and worldissues. A typical question would have been something like “Discussthe possible short-term global consequences of Fidel Castro’stakeover of Cuba.” It was doubted at the time whether a seventeen-year-old should be expected to have very strong opinions on suchmatters at all, and some at the university even doubted the desir-ability of such opinions. Dr. Berman, for one, would have beenmore impressed, he has said, by Hawking’s knowledge of theEngland cricket team than his views on contemporary politics. 
After twelve and a half hours of theory examinations and a
physics practical paper came the interviews. First there was a gen-eral interview at which the candidates were grilled by the master,dean, senior tutor, and fellows of the subject. These took place inthe Senior Common Room. The prospective students were led inindividually to face stern appraisal by the panel and were expectedto give intelligent answers to a series of obtuse questions. The pur-pose of this, like that of a job interview, was to find out a little moreabout the character of the candidate. Following the general inter-view a specialist interview was held in Dr. Berman’s office, duringwhich Hawking was questioned on his knowledge of physics. 
The interviews and examinations over, the candidates returned to
their various schools around the country to await the results and getSTEPHEN HAWKING 42Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlon with their A Levels. Meanwhile, the tutors marked the papers
and conferred on the matter. If University College wanted Hawking,they had first choice of offering him a scholarship because he hadplaced them at the top of his list in his application. If they decidedthey did not want to award him a scholarship or an exhibition, thenother Oxford colleges on his list could take up the option. If no onewanted to give him an award, the choice went back to UniversityCollege to take him as a commoner if they wished. 
Ten days passed before he heard anything from them. Then came
the invitation to return for another interview. This was a promisingstep forward. It meant that they were taking his application seri-ously and that he had a very good chance of obtaining a place. Littledid he know that he had scored around ninety-five percent in bothhis physics papers, with only slightly lower percentages in the oth-ers. A few days after the second interview the all-important letterfell on to the Hawkings’ doormat. University College was offeringhim a scholarship. He was invited to enroll at Oxford University thefollowing October, the only condition being that he obtain two A Level passes in the summer. 
It has often been said that there is a certain light in Oxford, a
wonderful interplay between sunlight and sandstone, which, likethe comparably beautiful cities of Italy and Germany, has inspiredthe work of poets and painters down the centuries. The city centeris totally dominated by the presence of the university—a ubiquitousthing, without nerve center or organized structure. The colleges areto be found in a random scattering with the rest of the town weav-ing around it. The architecture displays as little organization as thegeography, dating from medieval times to the late twentieth century.On summer days, with the sunlight strong against the stoneworkand the river dotted with punts, their navigators sweeping a poleinto the sparkling water, and those on the grassy banks lifting aGoing Up 43Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlglass of champagne to their lips, it can, if you let it, seem like an
earthly paradise in freeze frame. 
In the late fifties and early sixties, Oxford, as a microcosm of
British society, was on the brink of great change. When Hawkingarrived at the High on his first October Thursday as an undergrad-uate, the university had in many respects changed little since hisfather’s time or, indeed, for the past few hundred years. Universitydiscipline had relaxed somewhat since the end of the war. Beforethen, students had been forbidden to enter the city’s pubs and could,if caught, be expelled from them by the university police, known asthe Bulldogs. Women were not allowed in male students’ roomswithout written permission from the dean, who would specify stricttime limitations and conditions in a letter sent to the head porter,who would then rigorously uphold the dean’s instructions. All thischanged when servicemen returning from the war entered the uni-versity either as freshmen or to restart courses interrupted by thefighting. Naturally, they were unwilling to accept such draconianrestrictions and gradually the rules were relaxed. 
Students vied for rooms in college, but Hawking was lucky in
that, being a scholar, he took priority and managed to keep in resi-dence in college rooms throughout his three years at Oxford. 
Most Oxford colleges are built in the form of a number of quads,
each with a lawn at the center and paths around and across thegrass. From the quads, staircases lead off into the buildings, and thestudents’ rooms are on a number of levels up to the top of eachstaircase. Students in college had their rooms cleaned for them andtheir general domestic duties handled by college servants, or“scouts.” Scouts were also responsible for making sure that hung-over young men and the occasional young woman made it to break-fast between the regulation times of 8:00 and 8:15, so as to avoidfacing a locked dining hall door. Scouts addressed the students as“Sir” or as “Mister Such-and-Such” if attempting to inject a note ofSTEPHEN HAWKING 44Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmldisdain into their voices. They in turn were addressed by their sur-
names, in true master-servant fashion. 
The intake at Oxford was still largely male and from the coun-
try’s private schools, and the majority of those were from the topten, including Eton, Harrow, Rugby, and Westminster. 
The number of students from middle-class and working-class
backgrounds was beginning to increase, but in many respects theclass system took on a greater refinement and a sharper profile atOxford University. There were definite lines of demarcation. Thefriendships and relationships capable of crossing those invisibleboundaries were still amazingly few. The twain very rarely met. 
In one camp were the elite, the children of the aristocracy and
heirs to “old money,” the Sebastian Flytes of this world; they madeup a substantial proportion of students at Christchurch and, to alesser extent, Balliol. The privileged spent their often considerableallowances largely on entertaining their chums from school whohad gone up with them or friends who had chosen to go to the“other place,” Cambridge. They looked upon those from minor pri-vate schools such as St. Albans as a lesser breed, lumping them inwith the lowest of the low—ex-grammar school boys. Despite liter-ature’s tendency toward exaggeration, it was still all veryBrideshead Revisited . On the other side of the divide, the
“Northern chemists” and the “grammar school oiks” made do ontheir scholarships and grants, forfeiting quails’ eggs and champagnefor pork pies and beer. 
The two groups looked surprisingly similar in many respects. In
the late fifties, baggy trousers and tweed jackets were in fashion foracademic young men whatever their background. The differencewas that for a privileged few the jackets came from Savile Row andthe baggy turn-ups from Harrods. At the college balls held eachsummer, the female companion of an Old Harrovian or Etonianwould, in all probability, be the daughter of a baron or a duke,Going Up 45Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlwrapped in the best silk. Meanwhile, at the same functions, the
middle classes gathered together with others of their own kind, sip-ping at rarely sampled champagne. 
A simple point of reference illustrates the changes about to hit
Oxford soon after Hawking went up, encapsulated by one of hiscontemporaries. “When we arrived in Oxford,” he said, “anybodywho was anybody rowed and never wore jeans. When we left, any-body who was anybody never rowed and did wear jeans.” 
Changes were afoot everywhere. Beat poetry from San Francisco
was beginning to have an influence. The Labour Party was growingin popularity. The old values, the class system in particular, werebeginning to look anachronistic, at least among the intelligentsia.There was no desire to “storm the citadel” (that would come a decadelater and in a different city), but the Zeitgeist was definitely on the
move. When it came down to it, Hawking’s type of person found thewhole infrastructure of Oxford as a microcosm faintly amusing, anethos which would, in peculiarly British fashion, lead to Beyond the
Fringe and Monty Python rather than blood in Parisian gutters. 
Despite its many charms, Hawking’s first year at Oxford was, by all
accounts, a pretty miserable time for him. Very few of his schoolcontemporaries and none of his close friends from St. Albans hadgone up the same year. In 1960 Michael Church arrived, and JohnMcClenahan went to Cambridge. Many students in Hawking’s yearhad completed national service before going up and were conse-quently a couple of years older than he. (He had avoided the call-up himself by only a few months when it was scrapped by HaroldMacmillan’s government.) 
Work was a bore. He had very little difficulty solving any of the
physics or mathematics questions his tutors gave him, and he wentinto a downward spiral of bothering very little and finding meagersatisfaction in easy victories. The system at Oxford made it easy forSTEPHEN HAWKING 46Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlsomeone like Hawking to slide into apathy. Students were expected
to attend a number of lectures each week and a weekly tutorial inwhich problems given during the previous tutorial were gonethrough. Apart from these commitments, students were left largelyto their own devices. 
On top of this freedom, the examination structure was loose and
eminently open to exploitation if you were of Hawking’s caliber.The only crucial examinations were set by the university, asopposed to the college, and took place at the end of the first yearand again in the final year. The degree was awarded solely based onthe student’s performance in finals. There were also college examsat the beginning of each new term to test the students on both theprevious term’s work and their personal studies during the vacation.These were called collections and were marked by the students’ owntutors. As Hawking relates: 
The prevailing attitude at Oxford at that time was very anti-work. You were sup-
posed either to be brilliant without effort or to accept your limitations and get afourth-class degree. To work hard to get a better class of degree was regarded asthe mark of a gray man, the worst epithet in the Oxford vocabulary.
2
Hawking knew that he was in the former category and deter-
mined to live up to the image. During his first year he attended onlymathematics lectures and tutorials and completed college examssolely in mathematics. As his tutor now freely admits, the physicscourse at the time was little more than a repetition of A Level workand of limited use to the Hawkings of this world. 
There has arisen a veritable folk tradition of anecdotes about his
intuitive understanding of the subject at university, stories reminis-cent of the early prowess of the boy-Mozart. One of his contempo-raries who shared tutorials with Hawking recalls an incident thatleft a lasting impression on him. They had been given some prob-Going Up 47Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmllems by the tutor to bring to the next tutorial. No one in the group
could do them except Stephen. The tutor asked to see his work andwas immensely impressed with his proof of a particularly difficulttheorem and, complimenting him on the achievement, handed backthe paper. Without the slightest hint of arrogance Hawking tookback his work, screwed it into a ball and lobbed it into the waste-paper bin in the far corner of the room. Another member of thetutorial group said later, “If I had been able to prove that in a year,I would have kept it!” 
Another story tells of the time the four members of his tutorial
group were set a collection of problems for the following week. Onthe morning the questions were due in, the other three came acrossHawking in the common room slouched in an armchair reading ascience fiction novel. 
“How have you got on with the problems, Steve?” one of them
asked. 
“Oh, I haven’t tried them,” Hawking replied. “Well, you’d better get on with it,” said his friend. “The three of
us have been working on them together for the past week and we’veonly managed to get one of them done.” 
Later that day the three of them encountered Hawking walking
to the tutorial and inquired how he had done with the problems.“Oh,” he said, “I only had time to do nine of them.” 
Hawking kept very few notes and possessed only a handful of
textbooks. In fact, he was so far ahead of the field that he hadbecome distrustful of many standard textbooks. A further anecdotedescribes the time one of his tutors, a junior research fellow namedPatrick Sandars, gave the class some problems from a book.Hawking turned up to the following tutorial having failed to com-plete any of the questions. When asked why, he spent the nexttwenty minutes pointing out all the errors in the textbook. STEPHEN HAWKING 48Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlDespite his lackadaisical attitude to things academic, he still man-
aged to maintain a healthy relationship with his tutor, Dr. Berman.He would occasionally go for tea at the Bermans’ home on BanburyRoad. In the summer they would hold parties on the back lawn, atwhich they would eat  strawberries and play croquet. Dr. Berman’swife, Maureen, took a particular liking to the rather eccentricyoung student whom her husband rated so highly as a physicist.Hawking would often arrive early for tea to ask her advice on whatgood books he should buy, and she guided him through a highbrowliterary diet to supplement the physics texts he would occasionallyread. 
His lack of effort hardly seemed to hold back his progress in
physics. As an award student, he had to enter for the universityphysics prize at the end of the second year, for which all the otherphysicists in his year entered. With the minimum of effort he wonthe top award and received a Blackwell’s book token for £50. 
Maintaining his academic position in college and staying on the
right side of Dr. Berman were one thing, but coping with theincreasing boredom of it all was quite another, and at this time hemay have nosedived into depression. Fortunately, in the second yearhe discovered an interest that would help him find some sort of sta-bility. He took up rowing. Rowing has a long tradition at bothOxford and Cambridge, dating back centuries. Each year the boatrace between the two universities highlights the skills of the bestoarsmen, who spend the rest of the year in intercollegiate races andtraining. 
Rowing is a very physical activity and is taken terribly seriously
by those involved. Rowers go out on the water whatever theweather, rain or snow, breaking the ice on freezing winter morningsand sweating in the early summer heat. Rowing requires dedicationand commitment, and that is the real reason for its popularity atuniversity. It acts, at least for some students, as a perfect counter-Going Up 49Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlpoint to the stresses and demands of study. In Hawking’s case it was
the perfect remedy for a calcifying boredom with everything elseOxford had to offer. 
Rowing is one of the most physically demanding sports around,
and an oarsman simply has to be powerfully built to help move aboat through the water, but there is one other essential ingredient inevery rowing team—the coxswain, or “cox.” 
Hawking was perfectly suited to coxing. He was light, so he did
not burden the boat, and he had a loud voice with which he enjoyedbarking instructions the length of the boat and enough discipline toattend all the training sessions. His rowing trainer was NormanDix, who had been with the university college rowing club fordecades. He recalls that Hawking was a competent enough cox, butnever interested in going beyond the second eight. He suspects thatthe first crew held little appeal because it meant taking it all too seri-ously, and at that level the fun would have gone out of the wholething. 
Dix remembers Hawking as a boisterous young fellow who from
the beginning cultivated a daredevil image when it came to navigat-ing his crew on the river. Many was the time he would return theeight to shore with bits of the boat knocked off and oar blades dam-aged because he had tried to guide his crew through an impossiblynarrow gap and had come to grief. Dix never did believe Hawking’sclaims that “something had got in the way.” 
“Half the time,” says Dix, “I got the distinct impression that he
was sitting in the stern of the boat with his head in the stars, work-ing out his mathematical formulae.” 
The crews worked hard on the river. They would be out in the
boats nearly every day during term time, preparing for the big races,the Torpids, which take place in February, and the Summer Eightsin the summer term. The term Torpids originally came from theadjective “torpid” because this would be the first competitive raceSTEPHEN HAWKING 50Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlin which freshmen could compete, and therefore the standard of
many crews was pretty low. Having joined the Rowing Club inOctober, the novice rowers would have trained hard all winter inpreparation for showing off their newfound skills by the fifth weekof the winter term. 
Torpids are all college “bumping” races, taking place over several
days. The thirteen boats competing start off one hundred and fortyfeet apart. Each is tied to the bank by a forty-foot line, the other endof which is held by the cox. When the starting gun goes off, the coxreleases the line and the boats chase each other along a stretch ofthe river with the aim of bumping the boat in front without gettingbumped themselves. The main task of the cox is to guide the crewso that they avoid being bumped by the boat behind but manage tobump the boat in front. The object of the exercise is to move upthrough the positions of the thirteen boats by managing to bumpwithout being bumped; after each heat the “bumpers” and the“bumped” change places. If a crew does very well and moves upseveral places during the series of races, each crewmember is entitledto purchase an oar on which can be written the triumphant tally ofbumps, the names of the crew, and the date. Such oars adorn the wallsof victors’ studies. Hawking’s crews were pretty average, notching uponly a modest number of bumps during their Torpids races, but thewhole idea was to have fun and to relieve academic pressures. 
After the races came the celebrations and commiserations, both
of which would be accompanied by a surfeit of ale, followed by arowing club dinner in the college accompanied by speeches andtoasts. And here was the real reason Hawking was involved at all.He was something of a misfit during his first year, lonely and need-ing to alleviate the boredom of work that presented no challenge tohim. The rowing club brought the nineteen-year-old out of himselfand gave him an opportunity to become part of the university “incrowd.” Going Up 51Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlWhen old school friends encountered Hawking during his second
year they could hardly believe the change in him. Variouslydescribed as “one of the lads” and “definitely raffish,” the slender,tousle-haired youth in his pink rowing club scarf seemed a far cryfrom the gawky schoolboy who had left St. Albans School less thantwo years earlier. He was no longer a social also-ran but a fullypaid-up member of the “right” social set. It was very much an all-male domain; women rarely entered this world. It was, in a way, acontinuation of the gang at St. Albans School, without the intellec-tual intensity but with a lot more alcohol. The idea was to drinkcopious amounts of ale, recount vaguely lurid stories, and have asmuch harmless fun as possible. However, his newfound taste foradventure almost got him into trouble. 
One night he decided to create a splash. After a few beers with a
friend the two of them headed off to one of the footbridges span-ning the river. After leaving the pub, they picked up a can of paintand some brushes they had left in college and hid them inside a bag.When they arrived at the bridge they set up a couple of woodenplanks parallel to the span and suspended them over the water by acarefully arranged rope a few feet below the parapet. Clamberingover the side, they positioned themselves on the planks with the canof paint and brushes and began to write. A few minutes later, justvisible in the dark, were the words “
VOTE LIBERAL ” in foot-high
letters along the side of the bridge and clear to anyone on the riverwhen daylight broke. 
Then disaster struck. Just as Hawking was finishing off the last
letter, the beam of a torch shone down on them from the bridge andan angry voice called out, “And what do you think you’re up tothen?” It was a local policeman. The two panicked, and Hawking’sfriend scurried off the planks and on to the riverbank, hightailing itback to town and leaving Hawking with paintbrush in hand to facethe music. The story goes that he simply got a ticking off from theSTEPHEN HAWKING 52Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmllocal constabulary, and the incident was eventually forgotten. But it
must have had the desired effect of scaring the life out of himbecause he never clashed with the law again. 
Less than three years after arriving at Oxford University, Hawking
again had to face the music when finals approached, and he sud-denly found that he could have been better prepared. Dr. Bermanknew that Hawking, for all his innate ability, would find the exam-inations harder than he anticipated. Berman realized that there weretwo types of student who did well at Oxford: those who were brightand worked very hard, and those who had great natural talent andworked very little. It was always the former who achieved greaterthings in written papers. That was the way of exams; winning end-of-year prizes was one thing, but finals were in a different league.They were all or nothing, the focal point of the whole three years ofstudy. Hawking once calculated that during the entire three years ofhis course at Oxford he had done something like 1,000 hours’work, an average of one hour per day—hardly a foundation for thearduous finals. One friend remembers with amusement, “Towardsthe end he was working as much as three hours a day!” 
However, Hawking had devised a plan. Because candidates had a
wide choice of questions from each paper, he would, he decided,attempt only theoretical physics problems and ignore those requir-ing detailed factual knowledge. He knew that he could do anytheoretical question by using his proven natural talent and intuitiveunderstanding of the subject. But there was an additional problemto complicate things. He had applied to Cambridge to begin Ph.D.studies in cosmology under the most distinguished Britishastronomer of the day, Fred Hoyle. The catch was that to beaccepted for Cambridge he had to achieve a first-class honorsdegree, the highest possible qualification at Oxford. Going Up 53Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlThe night before finals Hawking panicked. He tossed and turned
all night and got very little sleep. When morning came he dressedup in subfusk (the regulation black gown, white shirt, and bow-tieworn by all examinees), left his rooms bleary-eyed and anxious, andheaded for the examination halls a few yards along the High. Outon the street hundreds of other identically dressed studentsstreamed along the pavements, some clutching books under theirarms, others puffing manically on their last cigarette before enter-ing the examination hall—a feast for the tourist’s camera but abjectmisery for those having to sit through days of examinations. 
The examination halls themselves do their best to intimidate:
high ceilings, great chandeliers hanging down from the void, rowupon row of stark wooden desks and hard chairs. Invigilators paceup and down the rows keeping an eagle eye on the candidates intheir multitude of poses—staring at the ceiling or the middle dis-tance, pen protruding between clenched teeth, or terminallyabsorbed, hunched over a manuscript in a free-flow trance.Hawking woke up a little as the paper was placed on the deskbefore him and duly followed through his plan of attempting onlythe theoretical problems. 
Exams over, he went off to celebrate the end of finals with the
others of his year, guzzling champagne from the bottle and joiningthe throng of students ritualistically stopping the traffic on the Highand spraying bubbly into the summer sky. After a short pause anda period of nail-biting anticipation, the results were announced.Hawking was on the borderline between a first and a second. Todecide his fate, he would have to face a viva, a personal interviewwith the examiners. 
He was fully aware of his image at the university. He had the
impression, rightly or wrongly, that he was considered a difficultstudent in that he was scruffy and seemingly lazy, more interested indrinking and having fun than working seriously. However, heSTEPHEN HAWKING 54Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlunderestimated how highly thought of were his abilities. Not only
that, but as Berman is fond of saying, Hawking was in his elementat a viva, because if the examiners had any intelligence they wouldsoon see that he was cleverer than they were. At the interview hemade a pronouncement that perfectly encapsulates the man’smatter-of-fact attitude and at the same time may have just saved hiscareer. The chief examiner asked him to tell the board of his plansfor the future. 
“If you award me a first,” he said, “I will go to Cambridge. If I
receive a second, I shall stay in Oxford, so I expect you will give mea first.” 
They did. Going Up 55Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.html