7
Singular Solutions
104During the 1960s, four new developments, two concern-
ing black holes and two cosmological, led to a revival ofinterest in the singular solutions to Einstein’s equations.
As a result of the work stimulated by these developments, especiallythe collaboration between Hawking and Roger Penrose, physicistsrealized at the beginning of the 1970s that they might have to cometo terms with the unthinkable: the prediction from the general theoryof relativity that points of infinite density—singularities— could
exist in the Universe did not, after all, indicate a flaw in those equa-tions, and singularities might really exist. Even worse, for those still
trying to cling to an older picture of reality, because the Universeitself seems to be a black hole viewed from within the Schwarzschildhorizon, there might indeed be a singularity at the beginning of timethat could notbe obscured from our view—a “naked” singularity. 
It all began with the discovery of quasars in 1963. The quasar
story actually began on the last day of 1960. During the 1950s,astronomers using telescopes sensitive to radio waves rather thanvisible light had identified many objects in the Universe that pro-Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlduce a lot of radio noise. Some of these objects were also visible as
bright galaxies and were known as radio galaxies, but others hadnot yet been identified with any known visible object. Then, at theend of 1960, the American astronomer Allan Sandage reported thatone of the radio sources discovered during a survey carried out byradio astronomers in Cambridge, England (and known as 3C 48)could be identified not with a distant galaxy but with what seemedto be a bright star. More of these radio “stars” were identified overthe next few years, but nobody could explain how they producedthe radio noise. Then, in 1963, Maarten Schmidt, working at theMount Palomar Observatory in California, explained why anotherof these objects, known as 3C 273, had a very unusual spectrum. 
All stars (and other hot objects) reveal their composition by the
nature of the light they emit. Each kind of atom, such as hydrogen,helium, or oxygen, absorbs or emits energy only at very precisewavelengths, because of the quantum effects mentioned in Chapter 2.So when light from a star or galaxy is spread out, using a prism,into a spectrum, we see that the spectrum is crossed by a series ofdark and bright lines at different wavelengths, corresponding to thepresence of atoms of different elements in the atmosphere of the star(or in the stars that make up the galaxy). These spectral lines are ascharacteristic as fingerprints, and for a particular type of atom theyare always produced at the same distinctive wavelengths. 
Astronomers already knew, though, that these spectral lines are
shifted a little bit toward the red end of the spectrum in the lightfrom galaxies outside the Milky Way. This famous “redshift” iscaused by the expansion of the Universe, which stretches space, andtherefore stretches the wavelength of light en route to us from a dis-
tant galaxy. Indeed, it was the discovery of the redshift that toldastronomers the Universe must be expanding, just as Einstein’sequations had predicted, but Einstein himself had at first refused tobelieve it. Singular Solutions 105Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlThe fact that light from 3C 273 was redshifted—the discovery
Maarten Schmidt made—was not a surprise; but the size of theshift, nearly 16 percent toward the red end of the spectrum, aston-ished astronomers in 1963. Typical redshifts for galaxies are muchless than this, about 1 percent, or 0.01. With the realization thatsuch large redshifts were possible, other radio “stars” were re-examined, and it turned out that they all showed similar or evenlarger shifts. 3C 48, for example, has a redshift of 0.368 (nearly 37percent), more than twice that of 3C 273, and the record redshiftnow stands above 4 (in other words, the light from the most distantquasars known is stretched to more than four times its originalwavelength). 
In the expanding Universe, redshift is a measure of distance (the
farther light has to travel on its way to us, the more it will bestretched by Universal expansion). So these objects were not stars atall, but something previously unknown—objects that looked likestars but were far away, in most cases farther away than the knowngalaxies. They soon became known as quasi-stellar objects, or“quasars.” 
In order to be visible at all at the huge distances implied by their
redshifts, quasars must produce prodigious amounts of energy. Atypical quasar shines with the brightness of three hundred billionstars like the Sun, three times as bright as our whole Milky WayGalaxy. Having sought in vain to find any alternative means toexplain the power of quasars, astronomers were reluctantly forcedto consider the possibility that they might be black holes. We nowknow that each quasar is a black hole containing at least a hundredmillion times as much mass as our Sun, contained within a volumeof space with about the same diameter as our Solar System. (This isjust the kind of large, low-density black hole described in Chapter 5.)Each one actually lies at the heart of an ordinary galaxy and feedsoff the stellar material of the galaxy itself. Ever-improving telescopeSTEPHEN HAWKING 106Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmltechnology has enabled us, in many cases, to photograph the sur-
rounding galaxy itself, faint alongside the quasar. 
Although a hundred million solar masses is large by everyday
standards, this still represents only one-tenth of 1 percent of themass of the parent galaxy in which a quasar lurks. When such anobject swallows matter, as much as half the mass of the matter canbe converted into energy, in line with Einstein’s famous equation E = mc
2. As we saw in Chapter 5, the factor c2is so huge that this
corresponds to a vast amount of energy. This process of energy pro-duction is so efficient that, even if only about 10 percent of theinfalling mass is actually converted into energy, a quasar can shineas brightly as three hundred billion Suns, bright enough to be seenacross the vast reaches of intergalactic space, if it is swallowing justone or two solar masses of material every year. The material formsa great, hot, swirling disc around the black hole itself. This disc iswhere the energy that produces the radio noise, and the visible light,comes from, even though the hole itself, as the name implies, isblack. And with a hundred billion stars to eat, even if a quasar onlydines off 1 percent of the mass of the parent galaxy, it can shine thatbrightly for a billion years. 
The existence of quasars shows that large, low-density black holes
really do exist. In 1967, just four years after the redshift of 3C 273was measured, the Cambridge radio astronomers achieved anotherbreakthrough with the discovery of the rapidly varying radio sourcesthat became known as “pulsars.” And although pulsars are notthemselves black holes, they opened the eyes of most astronomers tothe possibility that super-dense, compact black holes might alsoreally exist, just as the general theory of relativity predicted. 
The first pulsars were discovered by a research student, Jocelyn
Bell, while testing a new radio telescope. The astonishing thingabout these radio sources is that they flick on and off several times aSingular Solutions 107Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlsecond (some of them several hundred times a second) with exquisite
precision. This is so much like an artificial signal, a kind of cosmicmetronome, that, only half-jokingly, the first pulsars discoveredwere labeled “LGM 1” and “LGM 2”—the initials “LGM” stoodfor “Little Green Man.” As more of them were discovered, though,it became clear that there were far too many to be explained asinterstellar traffic beacons set up by some super-civilization, and theaccepted name became pulsar, from a contraction of “pulsatingradio source” and because the name chimed with quasar. 
But what natural phenomenon could produce such regular, rapid
pulses of radio noise? There were only two possibilities. The pulseshad to signal either the rotation or the vibration of a very compactstar. Anything bigger than a white dwarf would certainly rotate orvibrate too slowly to explain the speed of the known pulsars, androtating white dwarfs were soon ruled out—a simple calculationshowed that a white dwarf rotating that fast would break apart. 
For a short time early in 1968, it seemed that vibrations of a white
dwarf, literally pulsing in and out, might explain the variations in theradio noise from pulsars. But it was fairly straightforward to calcu-late the maximum rate at which a white dwarf could pulsate with-out breaking apart. Indeed, one of us (J.G.) did exactly that as partof the work for his Ph.D. The answer was disappointing (for him)but conclusive: white dwarfs simply cannot pulsate at the requiredspeed, which meant that the stars involved in the pulsar phenome-non must be even more compact, and denser, than white dwarfs. 
They must, in short, be neutron stars, predicted by theory but
never previously discovered. Within months of the announcementof the discovery of pulsars, it was established that these objects areactually rotating neutron stars, definitely within our Galaxy, pro-ducing beams of radio noise that sweep past us like the flashingbeams of a lighthouse. They are created by supernovas, explosionsof giant stars. And, as theorists were well aware from the outset, theSTEPHEN HAWKING 108Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlsame theory that predicted the existence of neutron stars, a predic-
tion which had been largely ignored for thirty-odd years, also pre-dicted that by adding just a little more mass to a neutron star (or byhaving a little more debris left over from a supernova explosion)you would create a collapsar. 
It is no coincidence that John Wheeler coined the term “black
hole” in this connection the year following the discovery of pulsars,for the realization that pulsars must be neutron stars triggered anexplosion of interest in the even more exotic predictions of the gen-eral theory of relativity. That explosion had already been primed,however, by yet another discovery made using radio telescopes,which had confirmed the reality of the Big Bang itself. 
When the Universe was more compressed, it was hotter, just as the
air in a bicycle pump gets hot when it is compressed. The Big Bangwas a fireball of radiation in which matter initially played aninsignificant role. But as the Universe expanded and cooled, theradiation faded away, and matter, in the form of stars and galaxies,came to dominate the scene. 
All this was known to astronomers in the 1940s and 1950s.
George Gamow and his colleagues even carried out a rough calcu-lation of what temperature this leftover radiation would havecooled to by now. In 1948 they came up with a figure of about 5 K(minus 268°C). By 1952 Gamow was inclined to think that it might
be rather higher, and in his book, The Creation of the Universe, he
said that the temperature ought to be somewhere below 50 K. But5 K or 50 K, it was still a very low temperature, and in the 1950snobody seriously contemplated the possibility of trying to detectthis echo of creation, a cold background sea of radiation filling theentire Universe, and left over from the Big Bang. 
In the early 1960s, though, the possibility of actually measuring
the strength of this background radiation, and thereby testing theSingular Solutions 109Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlBig Bang model, occurred to a few astronomers. One way of under-
standing how and why the radiation has cooled is in terms of red-shift. Radiation that filled the Universe in the Big Bang still fills theUniverse, but because space has stretched since then the wavesmaking up that radiation have had to stretch accordingly in orderto fill the space available. This means that energy that started out inthe form of X-rays and gamma rays would now be in the form ofmicrowaves, with wavelengths of around 1 millimeter or so. Theseare just the kind of radio waves used in some communications linksand in radar. With the technology developed for radar and radiocommunications, and the associated rapid development of radioastronomy, researchers in both the Soviet Union and the UnitedStates saw that the background radiation predicted by the Big Bangmodel might be detectable and set about designing and buildingradio telescopes to do the job. 
But they started just too late. The American team, based at
Princeton University, was headed by Robert Dicke, who had workedin radar during the Second World War. In the early 1960s he gave ateam of young researchers the task of building a microwave back-ground detector using an updated version of equipment he hadhelped to design during the war. By 1965 things were progressingnicely, when Dicke received a phone call from a young researcher atBell Laboratories, just 30 miles away from Princeton. The caller,Arno Penzias, wanted Dicke’s advice about some puzzling radiointerference that Penzias and his colleague Robert Wilson had beengetting on their radio telescope at Bell Labs since the middle of 1964. 
Penzias and Wilson had, in fact, been using an antenna designed
for use with the early communications satellites, modified to oper-ate as a radio telescope. They found that, wherever they pointed thetelescope in the sky, they seemed to be getting a signal correspon-ding to microwave radiation with a temperature of just under 3 K.After trying everything they could to sort out what was wrong withSTEPHEN HAWKING 110Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlthe telescope (including cleaning pigeon droppings off the antenna,
in case that was what was causing the interference), they gave upand called Dicke, an expert on microwaves, to ask if he had anyidea what was going on. 
Dicke soon realized that Penzias and Wilson had, in fact, detected
the background radiation left over from the Big Bang. The Princetondetector, completed hurriedly a little later, confirmed the discovery,and soon radio astronomers around the world were getting in on theact. We now know that the Universe is indeed filled with a weakhiss of microwave background radiation, with wavelengths ofaround 1 millimeter, corresponding to a temperature of 2.73 K. 
It was this discovery that opened the eyes of cosmologists to the
reality of the Big Bang model: not just a model, after all, but also anaccurate description of the real Universe we live in. First, the exis-tence of the background radiation showed that there really hadbeen a Big Bang; then, by using the precise measurement of the tem-perature of that radiation today, it was possible to work backwardto the Big Bang to calculate the exact temperature of the fireballitself. We got slightly ahead of our story in Chapter 5, when wedescribed the first few minutes of the life of the Universe—the accu-racy of that description, dating from the mid-1970s, depends in parton our present-day knowledge of the precise temperature of thebackground radiation. But there is something else significant aboutthat description of the early stages of the Universe. The First Three
Minutes was not written by a specialist in cosmology, or even an
astronomer, but by a mainstream physicist, Nobel Prize winnerSteven Weinberg. 
Before 1965, cosmology was a quiet backwater of science, almost
a little ghetto where a few mathematicians could play with theirmodels without annoying anybody else. Today, a quarter of a cen-tury later, the study of the Big Bang is at the center of mainstreamphysics, and Big Bang cosmology is seen as offering the key toSingular Solutions 111Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlunderstanding the fundamental laws and forces by which the phys-
ical world operates. It is because of the measurements of the back-ground radiation that we can be so confident about how nucleiwere synthesized in the Big Bang. And it was the first calculationsof this kind made after the discovery of the background radiationthat convinced many physicists (not just cosmologists) that hot BigBang cosmology had to be taken seriously as a description of theUniverse. 
These calculations were not something hurriedly cooked up in the
light of the discovery of the background radiation but representedthe culmination of more than ten years’ work. In the 1950s,inspired by Fred Hoyle’s lead, a team of British and Americanresearchers had worked out how all the elements more complexthan helium are synthesized inside stars. This was an astonishingtour de force . In essence, the process consists of sticking helium-4
nuclei together to build up more complex nuclei. Some of the com-plex nuclei then either spit out or absorb the odd proton, makingnuclei of other elements. 
As we mentioned in Chapter 5, though, there is a bottleneck for
this process at its earliest stage. There is no stable nucleus that canbe made by sticking two helium-4 nuclei together, and that is whynucleosynthesis stopped with helium in the Big Bang. Hoyle founda way round this bottleneck, via extremely rare collisions of threehelium-4 nuclei almost simultaneously. This makes it possible tocreate a nucleus of carbon-12, but only if the energies (speeds) ofthe helium-4 nuclei are just right. The energies are just right insidestars, thanks to an unusual quantum effect known as a resonance.Nobody realized this until Hoyle explained how the crucial step inthe chain must take place. He predicted the existence of the crucialresonance, which was then found during experiments here on Earth.Together with his colleagues, Hoyle went on to explain how every-STEPHEN HAWKING 112Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlthing is built up from hydrogen and helium inside stars—including
the atoms in your body and in this book. 
In one of the strangest decisions ever made by a Nobel commit-
tee, one of Hoyle’s colleagues, Willy Fowler, later received a shareof the 1983 Nobel Prize for Physics for this work. Fowler is a finephysicist in his own right and was a key member of the team. Buthe is the first to acknowledge that Hoyle made the key break-through on carbon-12 production and was the inspiration for theteam’s efforts. Unfortunately, later in his career Hoyle espousedsome decidedly unconventional ideas about the possibility that out-breaks of disease on Earth might be caused by viruses from comets.It seems that the Nobel committee, in its wisdom (?), decided not togive him a share of the physics prize with Fowler for fear of seem-ing to lend credence to what they regarded as his more crankywork. At least the British establishment, for once belying its stuffyimage, acknowledged Hoyle’s true worth with a knighthood. Allthat, however, lay far in the future in 1967, when Fowler, Hoyle,and their colleague Robert Wagoner put the icing on the nucleo-synthesis cake. 
The one problem with the story of stellar nucleosynthesis as
developed in the 1950s was that it could not explain where heliumcame from. Starting out with stars in which 75 percent of the mate-rial was hydrogen and 25 percent helium, the theory could explainbeautifully the presence of every other element and could evenexplain why some elements are more common than others and howmuch more common. But it all starts with the triple-helium/carbon-12 resonance, and without that initial 25 percent of helium starswould not be able to cook up the rest of the elements. It wasWagoner, Fowler, and Hoyle who together showed that the kind ofBig Bang that would leave a background radiation with a tempera-ture of 2.73 K today would also produce a mixture of 25 percenthelium and 75 percent hydrogen at the end of the first four minutes. Singular Solutions 113Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlTheir findings were unveiled at a meeting in Cambridge in 1967.
One of us (J.G.) was present, as a very junior research student,somewhat in awe of the occasion. He clearly recalls the deep ques-tions being asked at the meeting by another member of the audi-ence, a slightly older but still junior researcher, who seemed to havea slight speech impediment but whose words were listened toclosely by the more eminent researchers on the platform. StephenHawking was already known to be someone worth listening to,even at this early stage of his career. And the reason for his keeninterest in Big Bang cosmology soon became clear, when the resultsof the investigation he was carrying out with Roger Penrose werepublished. 
Hawking had begun puzzling over the singularity at the beginning
of time in the early 1960s but had soon been deflected, as we haveseen, by the diagnosis of his illness, temporarily giving up his work.But by 1965 things were looking up. He had decided that he wasn’tgoing to die quite so quickly as the doctors had predicted, after all;he had met and married Jane; and he was back at work with avengeance. He was one of the few people, at that time, to take seri-ously the more extreme predictions of the general theory of relativity.Two years after the identification of the first quasar (but before itsenergy source was explained), and two years before the discovery ofpulsars, only a handful of people believed in the possibility thatblack holes might exist or that the Universe really had been bornout of a singularity. 
One of the few other people who did take the notion of black
holes seriously was a young mathematician, Roger Penrose, work-ing at Birkbeck College in London. It was Penrose who showed thatevery black hole must contain a singularity and that there is no wayfor material particles to slide past each other in the middle of thehole. Not just matter, but space-time itself simply disappears at theSTEPHEN HAWKING 114Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlsingularity. At such a point the laws of physics break down, and it
is impossible to predict what will happen next. 
But as we have seen, this need not be too worrying, provided such
bizarre objects are always safely hidden behind the horizon of ablack hole. In this spirit, Penrose proposed a “cosmic censorship”hypothesis, suggesting that all singularities must be hidden in thisway and that “nature abhors a naked singularity.” In other words,observers outside the horizon of the black hole are always protectedfrom any consequences of the breakdown of the laws of physics atthe singularity. 
Hawking was intrigued by Penrose’s work on singularities but
saw that there was no way nature’s abhorrence of a singularitycould shield us from the singularity at the beginning of time— ifit
existed. In 1965 the two of them joined forces to investigate thispuzzle. 
Previously, researchers had expected that if you tried to wind
back the equations describing the expanding Universe, things wouldget more and more complicated as you approached the Big Bang.Particles would collide and bounce off one another, producing achaotic and confusing fireball. To many people this looked like theideal way to make a model universe bounce at high densities, with-out encountering a singularity. But over the next few years Hawkingand Penrose developed a new mathematical technique for analyzingthe way that points in space-time are related to one another. Thisdid away with the confusion of the messy interactions betweenmaterial particles and highlighted the underlying significance of theexpansion (or collapse) of space itself. 
The end result of this study was their proof that there must have
been a singularity at the beginning of time, if the general theory ofrelativity is the correct description of the Universe. There is no wayfor particles in a contracting universe to slide past one another andavoid meeting in a singularity in the fireball, any more than it is pos-Singular Solutions 115Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlsible to avoid the singularity inside a black hole. After all, when
space shrinks to zero volume, there is literally no room left for par-ticles to slip past one another. In other words, the expansion of theUniverse away from the singularity in the beginning really is theexact opposite of the collapse of matter (and space-time) into a sin-gularity inside a black hole. The cosmic censor has slipped up, andthere is at least one naked singularity in the Universe that we areexposed to, even if it is separated from us by 15 billion years oftime. 
While Hawking and Penrose were working all this out, the dis-
covery of the background radiation was announced; pulsars werediscovered; and Wagoner, Fowler, and Hoyle were explaining howhelium had been made in the Big Bang. By the time the Hawking-Penrose theorems were published, John Wheeler had givenastronomers the term “black hole,” and newspaper stories werebeing written about the phenomenon. What had started out as anesoteric (but erudite) piece of mathematical research had evolved bythe end of the 1960s into a major contribution to one of the hottesttopics in science at the time. 
And yet this was Hawking’s firstreal piece of research, stemming
from his Ph.D. work—the journeyman piece for his scientificapprenticeship. What on earth would he come up with next? Andwhat did it mean to say that there had been a definite beginning totime in the Big Bang? There seemed very little prospect, however,that the young researcher would come up with anything of compa-rable importance. The deterioration in his physical conditionseemed to rule out a long career. STEPHEN HAWKING 116Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.html