12
Science Celebrity
187In 1978 Hawking was awarded one the most prestigious prizes
in physics, the Albert Einstein Award given by the Lewis andRose Strauss Memorial Fund, which announced the winner at a
gala event in Washington. The citation claimed that Hawking’swork could lead to a unified field theory, “much sought after byscientists,”
1as one Cambridge newspaper put it. The Albert
Einstein Award is considered to be the prestigious equivalent of aNobel Prize and was undoubtedly the most important awardHawking had received up until that time. Journalists began to talkabout the possibility of the thirty-six-year-old physicist being nextin line for the greatest academic honor of all—an invitation to theRoyal Academy of Sciences in Stockholm. 
However, there are two reasons why Hawking is unlikely ever to
receive a Nobel Prize. First, a cursory glance at the list of winnerssince the first prizes in 1901 shows very few astronomers. The rea-son for this, according to one story, is that the chemist AlfredNobel, who created the awards, decreed that astronomers should beineligible. Rumor has it that their exclusion was because his wifeCopyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlhad an affair with an astronomer, and he subsequently felt only
hatred for the whole profession. Despite this, Martin Ryle andAntony Hewish shared the 1974 Nobel Prize for Physics for theirwork in radio astrophysics and Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar wonit in 1983 for his theoretical studies on the origin and evolution ofstars. These were awarded a good seventy years after the founder’sdeath, so perhaps the academy now views astronomers with greatersympathy. 
There is, however, a more important reason for Hawking’s
absence from the list of winners. One of the academy’s rules statesthat a candidate may be considered for a prize only if her discoverycan be supported by verifiable experimental or observational evi-dence. Hawking’s work is, of course, unproved. Although the math-ematics of his theories is considered beautiful and elegant, science isstill unable even to prove the existence of black holes, let aloneverify Hawking Radiation or any of his other theoretical proposals. 
A year after receiving the Albert Einstein Award, Hawking’s
second book was published by Cambridge University Press: a col-lection of sixteen articles to commemorate the centenary of AlbertEinstein’s birth on March 14, 1879. Hawking coedited the book,entitled General Relativity: An Einstein Centenary Survey, with his
colleague Werner Israel. When Simon Mitton presented it to a salesconference in January 1979, the sales team, whose job it was to takebooks out on the road and convince retailers of their merit, wasunusually enthusiastic. One of the sales staff said to Mitton, “Thatman Hawking—he’s amazing, you know. We’ll have no trouble sell-ing this. All the quality bookshops will take it, no problem.” Hewas right. It was snapped up and sold exceptionally well in hard-back and even better when later issued as a paperback. Hawking’sfame was spreading. 
This was also the year that Stephen Hawking finally got his own
office at the DAMTP—it came with his appointment as LucasianSTEPHEN HAWKING 188Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlprofessor. Hawking is well aware of his place in the history of
science. He is fascinated by the fact that he was born on the three-hundredth anniversary of Galileo’s death on January 8, 1642. Thatyear Isaac Newton was born in Woolsthorpe, a little village inLincolnshire, and it was Isaac Newton who was appointed Lucasianprofessor at Cambridge in 1669, three hundred and ten years beforeHawking. 
Albert Einstein considered Galileo the greatest of all scientists,
and Hawking has claimed that he was, in his approach, the firsttwentieth-century scientist: 
He was the first scientist to actually start using his eyes, both figuratively and phys-
ically. And, in a sense, he was responsible for the age of science we now enjoy.2
Galileo’s work led directly to Newton’s work and the establish-
ment of classical physics. The work of Einstein, who was born onehundred years before Hawking received the Lucasian chair, turned“large-scale” physics on its head. Subsequently, many have seenHawking as the physicist most likely to succeed in the enormoustask of unifying the two supporting pillars of physics, quantummechanics and relativity. Small wonder Hawking has a strong senseof science history. 
At his inauguration as Lucasian Professor, Hawking delivered a
memorable lecture entitled “Is the End in Sight for TheoreticalPhysics?,” in which he suggested that a Grand Unified Theorydescribing the fundamental laws of the Universe could be achievedby the end of the century. 
It was a stirring and inspiring idea. The audience knew as they
streamed out of the hall that, if anyone could make that dreamcome true, it would be the waif-like figure who had earlier sat onthe stage before them, crumpled in his motorized wheelchair, deliv-ering powerful statements with his typical confidence. Science Celebrity 189Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlThe appointment as Lucasian Professor of Mathematics at
Cambridge University was one of the highlights of Hawking’s career.To be professor at one of the oldest and most respected universitiesin the world is a huge achievement in itself, but to have accomplishedsuch a feat by the age of thirty-seven is remarkable. Newton wasHawking’s junior by ten years when he gained the chair, but in theseventeenth century there were far fewer academics and very littlecompetition for such positions. Newton did also happen to be theyoungest ever to be appointed Lucasian Professor at Cambridge. 
Easter 1979 saw the birth of Stephen and Jane’s third child, a boy
they christened Timothy. It was a happy time for the Hawkingfamily. Against all odds, they had overcome tremendous hurdles toachieve great success. Jane had completed her Ph.D. and was find-ing a degree of intellectual satisfaction in her teaching job; ProfessorHawking was receiving the esteem of his colleagues and growingpopular acclaim as the “new Einstein.” Now there was anotherHawking at West Road. 
In the larger world outside the cloistered environs of Cambridge
academia, the ever-shifting kaleidoscope of life was shaken yetagain. Shortly before Timothy Hawking’s birth, scientists at the JetPropulsion Laboratory in Pasadena were surprised to discover, viathe deep space probe Voyager 1 , that Jupiter had rings like its celes-
tial neighbor, Saturn. Before the year was out, Margaret Thatcherhad begun her eleven-year run as Britain’s first woman primeminister; the Queen’s cousin, Lord Mountbatten of Burma, wasmurdered by the IRA; and American embassy staff and marineswere taken hostage in Tehran. Also that year, the Queen’s artadviser, Cambridge man Anthony Blunt, was exposed as the “fourthman.” Russia invaded Afghanistan, Mother Teresa of Calcutta wasawarded the Nobel Peace Prize, and John Cleese continued todelight TV audiences by “not mentioning the war.” One of theyear’s biggest films was Apocalypse Now.STEPHEN HAWKING 190Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlAt the turn of the decade, Hawking could look back satisfied
with his achievements over the past ten years. The symptoms ofALS had leveled off. His speech was practically unintelligible to allbut his close colleagues and family, and he was confined to hismotorized wheelchair, but he continued to work and to travel asintensively as he had ever done. His freedom from mundane choresand responsibilities was paying dividends scientifically. 
From 1980 the system of taking in graduate students to help around
the house was replaced by community and private nursing. Jane hadhelp looking after Stephen for a couple of hours in the morning andevening. They could just afford to flesh out the meager assistanceprovided by the National Health Service by dipping into moniesHawking had received from the growing number of awards andprizes coming his way and the increased salary from his newappointment. 
Stephen and Jane began to cultivate a reputation as socialites and
popular hosts on the Cambridge academic scene. Don Page hasdescribed Jane as “a great professional asset to her husband as ahostess.”
3Dr. Berman, Hawking’s tutor at Oxford, has said of her,
“[Jane is] a remarkable woman. She sees that he does everything thata healthy person would do. They go everywhere and do everything.”
4
The Hawkings were soon at the center of the social in-crowd atCambridge. Being Lucasian Professor gave Stephen a huge measure ofprestige, both in academic circles and in the broader view of the inter-national intelligentsia. Dinner parties and social gatherings on WestRoad and at the DAMTP were frequent events, and guests oftenincluded visiting academics as well as members of the universityhierarchy. Their interest in classical music was well catered for inCambridge, and the couple was often to be seen at concerts in the city.They enjoyed going to the theater and the cinema and dining out,both at home in Cambridge and on visits abroad. Science Celebrity 191Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlStephen’s obvious handicaps would sometimes cause embarrass-
ment to those who did not know him in restaurants and at variousfunctions to which the couple were frequently invited. Casualonlookers, unaware of the fact that they were in the presence of oneof the world’s greatest scientists, could be forgiven for thinking thatthe withered figure slumped in his wheelchair—trying to speak butsucceeding only in producing an incomprehensible noise, having tobe fed, his head, insufficiently supported by atrophied neck muscles,rolling forward, chin on chest—was a hopelessly crippled andpathetically disabled man, perhaps mentally as well as physicallyhandicapped. Nothing could be further from the truth. On the sub-ject of his disability, Hawking told an interviewer at the time: 
I think I’m happier now than I was before I started. Before the illness set in I was
very bored with life. I drank a fair amount, I guess, didn’t do any work. It wasreally a rather pointless existence. When one’s expectations are reduced to zero,one really appreciates everything that one does have.
5
On another occasion he said, “If you are disabled physically, you
cannot afford to be disabled psychologically.”6Jane echoed this
view, with a typically forthright and optimistic approach to life.“We try to make the most of every moment,”
7she told one inter-
viewer. 
A Sunday Times journalist once asked him whether he ever got
depressed because of his disability. “Not normally,” he replied. “Ihave managed to do what I wanted to do despite it, and that givesme a feeling of achievement.”
8
Another asked what was his biggest regret about contracting his
illness. “Not being able to play physically with my children,” hesaid.
9
Some years earlier, Hawking had entered into a protracted fight
with the university authorities over improved access for him in theSTEPHEN HAWKING 192Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlDAMTP building. The row was about who was to pay for a ramp
to be installed. Hawking eventually won and also managed to per-suade the authorities to lower the curbs in the vicinity of SilverStreet to ease his journey from West Road. Such clashes putHawking in a fighting mood about the needs of the disabled, and hehas been crusading for various causes ever since. 
He took on Cambridge City Council over access to public build-
ings and won. After a long drawn-out argument and an exchange ofincreasingly abrasive letters, curbs were lowered in a number ofvital places and ramps installed in various buildings. One particulardispute concerned a public building named Cockcroft Hall, used asa polling station during local elections. After polling day, Hawkingcomplained to the council that it was practically impossible for theseverely disabled to enter the building in order to vote. The councilauthorities tried to argue that Cockcroft Hall was not actually apublic building and did not therefore come under the DisabledPersons Act of 1970. Because of Professor Hawking’s involvement,the local press became interested in the issue and subsequently rana series of articles highlighting the problems faced by the disabledin Cambridge. The city council backed down. 
Toward the end of 1979, the Royal Association for Disability and
Rehabilitation nominated Hawking for “Man of the Year,” and hisefforts in fighting for the rights of handicapped people were againnoted by the local press, which held him up as a champion of theircause. Hawking himself has ambivalent feelings on this issue. Onthe one hand, he wants to do what he can for other handicappedpeople, for, being disabled himself, he knows and fully understandsthe problems faced by the handicapped. He has a stubborn streakand definite strains of a rebellious nature, partly cultivated by hiscircumstances, which give him an appetite for dispute. He lovesnothing more than a good argument, whether it is about cosmology,socialism, or the rights of the disabled. On the other hand, HawkingScience Celebrity 193Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlhas always made a conscious effort to detach himself from his con-
dition. He has absolutely no interest in learning more about his ill-ness or overemphasizing his disability. 
One interviewer asked him if he regretted not using his intellec-
tual powers to help find a cure for his illness. He replied that hewould have found that too upsetting. He is a physicist, not a med-ical man, and knowing the gruesome details would, he feels, betotally unproductive. Hawking is, of course, very happy that othersare working on a cure for ALS, but he does not wish to know howthe research is going. He just wants to be told when they have madea breakthrough. 
All this led to what was perceived at the time to be a strangely
ambivalent attitude to the problems faced by the disabled. Criticsbegan to complain that he was not doing enough, that his growingcelebrity was a perfect platform for him to be heard above thecrowd. As time has gone on, Hawking has indeed become moreactive, but the simple fact is that he hardly needs do anythingbecause, just by staying alive and continuing to work at the intenserate he and the world have grown used to, he is an inspiration tohandicapped people everywhere. 
In a recent speech at an occupational science conference at the
University of Southern California, he certainly made every effort toraise his voice above the crowd: 
It is very important that disabled children should be helped to blend with others
of the same age. It determines their self-image. How can one feel a member of thehuman race if one is set apart from an early age? It is a form of apartheid. Aidslike wheelchairs and computers can play an important role in overcoming physi-cal deficiencies; the right attitude is even more important. It is no use complain-ing about the public’s attitude about the disabled. It is up to disabled people tochange people’s awareness in the same way that blacks and women have changedpublic perceptions.
10STEPHEN HAWKING 194Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlHaving got a taste for it, Hawking did not restrict his campaign-
ing to the problems of the disabled. He was beginning to show agrowing interest in saying his piece about a number of wide-rangingsocio-political issues. He led a campaign to change the ruling pro-hibiting the admission of women students into Caius College, a rowthat lasted the best part of a decade. He and Jane continued to bepaid-up members of the Labour Party, and he was becomingincreasingly vocal on social issues such as the plight of the poor andthe state of the environment. He has joked that he is a “right-wingsocialist,” but his attitudes toward concerns ranging from theFalklands War to nuclear disarmament show definite leaningstoward a brand of liberalism prevalent in the Hawking householdof his early years. 
When accepting an award sponsored by a U.S. defense con-
tractor, he lectured the executives of the company gathered at theceremony on the senselessness of nuclear weapons: 
We have the equivalent of four tons of high explosives for every person on earth.
It takes half a pound of explosive to kill one person, so we have 16,000 times asmuch as we need. We must understand that we are not in conflict with the Soviets,that both sides have a strong interest in the stability of the other side. We oughtto recognize that fact and cooperate, rather than arm ourselves against eachother.
11
Apart from getting his own office, life at the DAMTP had changed
little upon his appointment as Lucasian Professor. Silver Street is anarrow winding lane off King’s Parade in the center of Cambridge.The sign for the Department of Mathematics and Theoretical Physicsis unobtrusive to the point of near uselessness—visitors frequentlyfind themselves unable to find the entrance unassisted. When finallydiscovered, the sign indicates an archway leading on to a cobbledcourtyard. A number of cars are parked around the perimeter andthere are stacks of bicycles, three deep, propped up against theScience Celebrity 195Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlstonework. At the far end of the courtyard is a red door with a glass
window and, on a wall to one side, is a brass plate announcing thedepartment in a clearer and more elegant fashion. 
Inside, a linoleum-floored hallway leads to a large, scruffy
common room. Tables and low, soft chairs are randomly distributedaround the room, left where positioned by their most recent occu-pants. The walls are painted gray, and the whole atmosphere is oneof academic drabness, slightly neglected, workaday. From thecommon room, doors lead off to a number of offices. The oneHawking shared with a former student, Gary Gibbons, sports asticker that says “Black Holes Are Out of Sight.” The door to hisnew office has a typically self-mocking addition pasted at headheight: “
QUIET PLEASE , THE BOSS IS ASLEEP .” 
Hawking’s office has changed little since he took it over in 1979.
It is relatively small and dominated by a desk set two-thirds of theway back from the door. The walls are lined with bookshelves andto one side of the desk sits a set of gadgets. The first is a telephonespecially adapted with a microphone and loudspeaker so that hecan use it without having to hold the handset. Next to that isanother device—a page turner that automatically leafs through anybook placed on a raised platform, operated at the touch of a but-ton. Once an assistant has positioned a book for him and set the fas-teners, Hawking can find any place in the text he wishes to read.Complications arise if he wants to consult a paper or read a maga-zine because the machine cannot handle them. On these occasions,the article has to be xeroxed and laid out on the desk for him. Onthe desk, next to framed pictures of the family, is a computer, aug-mented by the addition of two levers that operate a cursor on thescreen. This replaces the normal keyboard and doubles as a “black-board” and word processor. 
There is a relaxed atmosphere in the department. Perpetuating
the tradition of several decades, everyone meets twice daily forSTEPHEN HAWKING 196Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlmorning coffee and afternoon tea. At these gatherings the talk cen-
ters on the day’s work. Spending five minutes in the DAMTP’scommon room reveals an obvious fact: physicists love to talk shop.The students treat Hawking with playful irreverence; there is nostanding on ceremony or elitism here. When the writer DennisOverbye visited Hawking at the DAMTP he came across a group ofstudents huddled around a Formica-topped table in the commonroom. “In age, dress, pallor and evidence of nutritional deficiency,they resembled the road-crew of a rock-and-roll band”
12is how he
described them. Hawking mucks in with them, cracking cornyundergraduate jokes. Following an old tradition, if they hit on abright idea during the course of their discussions they write outmathematical descriptions on the tabletops. “When we want to savesomething we just xerox the table,”
13Hawking told Overbye. 
Hawking’s administrative duties extended to running the small
relativity group, which consisted of a dozen or so research assistantsof wide-ranging nationality and the supervision of a handful ofPh.D. students. Apart from these responsibilities, the professorshipallowed him to carry on with what he had previously devoted somuch time to—thinking. 
At home Hawking’s schedule was a hectic one. Hardly a week
would go by without a visit from a foreign colleague. It was now hisresponsibility to organize symposia and lectures given by physicistsinterested in visiting Cambridge. Hawking’s relativity group at theDAMTP was seen as being at the cutting edge of research, and therewas no shortage of scientists interested in sharing their latest workwith the Cambridge team. 
Hawking had, by this time, established an exhausting work rou-
tine at the DAMTP, one that has changed little to this day. He roseearly, but it could take up to two hours for him to get ready to leavethe house, arriving at his office by 10 a.m. The journey from WestScience Celebrity 197Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlRoad took no more than ten minutes and was usually spent in con-
versation with one of his Ph.D. students or research assistants. Afterchecking the mail with his secretary, he usually spent the morningworking at his computer or reading articles or papers written byothers in the field. At 11 a.m. sharp he would wheel himself off tothe common room where an assistant helped him with drinking hiscoffee, lifting the cup to Hawking’s mouth. He then often spentsome time conversing, as best he could, with the students andresearch assistants, before returning to his office until lunchtime tomake and receive telephone calls and answer correspondence. 
At 1 p.m. precisely he would set off for lunch at Caius College.
Usually accompanied by an assistant, he would set the controltoggle of the wheelchair to full throttle and head off toward King’sParade, passing by King’s College Chapel and the Senate House, hisassistant having to break into a trot to keep up. Hawking loves thiscity in which he has spent most of his life. The grandeur of its archi-tecture and the atmosphere of intense intellectual activity pervadingthe place are very important to him. Accompanied on this journeyby one writer, he gave the interviewer a history lesson, tinged withhis characteristic brand of irony: 
When Dr. Caius reopened Gonville College in the sixteenth century, he built three
gates. You entered through the Gate of Humility, you passed through the Gate ofWisdom and Virtue, and you left through the Gate of Honour. The Gate ofHumility has been torn down. It’s not needed any more.
14
After lunch each weekday, Hawking headed off back to the
DAMTP to work until teatime. At 4 p.m. the usually silent commonroom would erupt with the noise of those who work there. Tea wasdrunk as a number of animated conversations took place in smallgroups. Then, as now, Hawking usually sat in one corner of theroom. He rarely says more than a few sentences during the courseSTEPHEN HAWKING 198Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlof tea, but when he does speak, people listen. One student has
remarked that more can be gained from a few of Hawking’s crisp,precise statements than from a whole lecture by anyone else. 
His students usually came to see him in the late afternoon. They
would sit beside him at his desk or perch alongside the desktopcomputer screen. With the sheets of equations they had been work-ing on spread before them, Hawking would survey their efforts andmake a few clipped suggestions. His close associates, his researchassistants, then fleshed out his comments and helped the Ph.D. stu-dents unravel problems and expand on the professor’s suggestions. 
After tea Hawking usually worked until 7 p.m. He would then
wheel his chair out of the building and rerun the morning’s journeyin reverse. Some evenings he chose to dine with the other dons andprofessors at high table in college. On such occasions he would beobliged to dress in his professorial gown. At other times he stayedat home with Jane and the children, or the couple would go out toeat at a Cambridge restaurant while one of Hawking’s helpersbabysat. 
As his celebrity grew, the amount of time Hawking spent traveling
abroad increased further. During the early 1980s he made severaltrips to America each year and attended numerous conferences andlectures in Europe and other parts of the globe. Roger Penrose hasrecalled that nothing would stop Stephen making trips to far-flungdestinations and that he would try to attend every important con-ference, no matter where it was held. At one conference held inBelgium, he almost missed the plane home from Brussels because thecab driver taking him and Penrose to the airport got lost. Arriving atthe airport, with the plane on the tarmac ready to leave, Penrose hadto race along ramps and through airport buildings with Hawking’swheelchair whirring along at full throttle beside him. They just madeit in time, boarding the aircraft minutes before takeoff. Science Celebrity 199Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlJane began to travel abroad less frequently so that she could look
after the growing family in Cambridge. The responsibility of nurs-ing Hawking on foreign visits increasingly fell to his research assis-tants and close colleagues. Friends like Penrose would help out asbest they could and travel with him when they were attending thesame conference, but by this time one of his students would alwayshave to go with him everywhere he went. Whenever possibleHawking tried to stretch the budget in order to finance a nurse toaccompany him and his academic assistant. In this respect thingswere easier after he became Lucasian Professor, but even so aca-demic institutions do not like to splash money around. By this time,however, Hawking had become sufficiently important, and his caseexceptional enough, for rules to be bent somewhat. 
If they did not travel with him to destinations all over the world,
the family was certainly never forgotten. Penrose remembers one inci-dent when their return flight was delayed and they had to spendseveral hours in an airport lounge. Hawking had spotted a cuddly toyin the display window of one of the shops. He told his friend that hewanted that particular toy to take home for Lucy. CommandeeringPenrose to buy it for him, Hawking spent the rest of their wait witha large, pink fluffy animal perched on his lap, practically swampinghis wasted body. Lucy was of course delighted with the gift. 
When Hawking attended the groundbreaking cosmology confer-
ence organized by the Pontifical Academy of Sciences in the Vaticanin 1981 (see Chapter 11), Jane went with him. The conference del-egates and their partners spent a week in Rome. On a number ofevenings Stephen and Jane went out to restaurants, often sharingtheir table with Dennis Sciama and his wife Lydia, as well as otherfriends who were also attending the conference. Jane remembers thetrip as a happy time for the two of them. Between meetings and dis-cussions, Stephen tried to make time for sightseeing, one of hisfavorite pastimes. STEPHEN HAWKING 200Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlIn his address to the conference, the Pope warned the physicists
against delving too deeply into the question of how or why theUniverse began, reminding them that this was solely a matter fortheologians. He went on: 
Any scientific hypothesis on the origin of the world, such as that of the
primeval atom from which the whole of the physical world derived, leaves openthe problem concerning the beginning of the Universe. Science cannot by itselfresolve such a question; what is needed is that human knowledge that rises abovephysics and astrophysics which is called metaphysics; it needs above all theknowledge that comes from the revelation of God.
15
Hawking sat impassively in his wheelchair listening as Pope John
Paul II told them that he saw nothing wrong with modern cosmol-ogy and even believed that there may be some substance to the ideaof the Big Bang. But that, he said, was where the line of demarca-tion should be drawn, and cosmologists should not try to lookbeyond it. Some of the older scientists in attendance were remindedof another conference held at the Vatican in 1962, when the thenPope, John XXIII, declared that he hoped they would all follow theexample of Galileo! It was at the 1981 Vatican Conference thatHawking announced his controversial “no-boundary” theorem andthe religious connotations accompanying it. It was received enthu-siastically by the audience, but what the Pope thought of the ideahas not been reported. If nothing else, Hawking certainly has ahighly developed sense of occasion. 
After the conference, the visiting physicists and their spouses
were invited to an audience with the Pope at his summer residence,Castel Gandolfo. The building itself is unimposing but possesses asimple beauty. Visitors pass through the little village surroundingthe grounds and up to the house via a long driveway. The scientistsfrom the Vatican were not the only guests of the Pope that after-noon, and security at Castel Gandolfo (and indeed in Vatican City)Science Celebrity 201Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlwas as tight as could be expected. That year, 1981, will surely be
remembered as the year of assassination attempts. 
Six months earlier, ex-Beatle John Lennon had arrived at his
apartment in the Dakota Building in New York with his wife, YokoOno. Moments later he was senselessly gunned down by a psy-chopath, Mark Chapman, and millions of fans the world over wereshaken at what they saw as the end of an era. In March 1981 therecently inaugurated President Reagan had been hit in the chest bya .22 bullet, and less than two months later Pope John Paul II him-self had nearly died when he was struck by four bullets from a 9mm Browning, one of which lodged in his lower intestine. The audi-ence at Castel Gandolfo was the Pope’s first public appearance sincethe incident in St. Peter’s Square that had almost taken his life. 
Following a private meeting with the physicists the Pope gave a
speech in the main reception room, after which his guests wereintroduced to him in person as he sat on a raised chair upon a daisguarded by Papal security. The visitors entered from one side of theplatform, knelt before the Pontiff, exchanged a few muttered words,and then left on the far side of the stage. When it was Hawking’sturn, he wheeled on to the stage and up to the Pope. The otherguests watched as the man who, only days earlier, had talked of the“no-boundary” concept and the fact that there could be no need fora Creator came face to face with the leader of the Catholic Churchand, for millions, God’s representative on Earth. Everyone, believerand cynic alike, was curious to know what would be said. However,no one in the room could have been more surprised by what hap-pened next. As Hawking’s wheelchair came to a halt in front of thePope, John Paul left his seat and knelt down to bring his face toHawking’s level. 
The two men talked for longer than any of the other guests.
Finally the Pope stood up, dusted down his cassock and gaveHawking a parting smile, and the wheelchair whirred off to the farSTEPHEN HAWKING 202Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlside of the stage. There were a number of offended Catholics in the
hall that afternoon, misinterpreting the Pope’s gesture as unduerespect. Many of the nonscientists present were unfamiliar withHawking’s latest proposals, but his reputation as a scientist withirreligious views was well known. They simply could not under-stand why the Pope should kneel before him; to them Hawking’sopinions were at the opposite end of the spectrum from orthodoxCatholic doctrine. Why had John Paul not taken more interest inthem, the faithful? 
Back at the DAMTP, work continued as usual. Hawking’s third book
for Cambridge University Press was published soon after his return.However, this time things did not run so smoothly, and there was awhole series of arguments between Hawking and Simon Mittonbefore the book saw the light of day. It was to be called Superspace
and Supergravity , aimed at about the same level as The Large Scale
Structure of Spacetime, and was expected to sell in similar numbers
to its predecessor—between five thousand and ten thousand copiesover a period of years. The source of the dispute between Hawkingand the publishers was the choice of cover for the book. 
Hawking wanted a drawing from the blackboard in his office to
be photographed and used on the dust jacket of the hardbackedition, as well as on the cover when the book was issued in paper-back. The trouble began when Simon Mitton realized that thepicture, a bizarre cartoon covered with in-jokes and witticisms doneby a group of colleagues after a recent conference at the DAMTP,had been drawn in color and required full-color printing. Hawkingwould not consider a black-and-white photograph of the illustrationand was absolutely adamant about using a full-color representation. 
Cambridge University Press insisted that they had never done a
four-color cover for a book such as Hawking’s, which, even accept-ing his international fame as a scientist, would not sell enoughScience Celebrity 203Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlcopies to warrant the expense. The cover, they stated, would make
absolutely no difference to the number of copies the book sold. Atthis point Hawking saw red and declared that unless they agreed touse his cover he would withdraw the book completely. After ahastily convened editorial meeting, Mitton capitulated, but he wasright— Superspace and Supergravity sold marginally less than The
Large Scale Structure of Spacetime.
While the dispute with Cambridge University Press was in full
flow and Hawking miraculously found time to work, travel, see hisfamily, and engage in bureaucratic wrangles with the city authori-ties and university, the world at large was going through its usualturmoil. Riots hit British cities; there was intensified fighting inBeirut; and President Anwar Sadat of Egypt was brutally assassi-nated on October 6 during a military parade in Cairo. In December,doctors in the USA were alerted to a deadly new illness thatappeared to attack the body’s immune system. But the news in 1981was not all bad. In July an estimated 700 million TV viewers tunedin to see Prince Charles marry Lady Diana Spencer in St. Paul’sCathedral; England claimed a remarkable cricketing victory againstAustralia; and the New Year Honours List announced at the end ofDecember included a wheelchair-bound Cambridge physicist whohad pioneered important work on black holes—Stephen Hawkingwas made a commander of the British Empire by Queen Elizabeth II. 
As the 1980s progressed, awards and honors continued to be
bestowed on Hawking. In 1982 alone he was made honorarydoctor of science by no fewer than four universities: the Universityof Leicester in Britain, and New York, Princeton, and Notre Dameuniversities in the USA. 
The interest of the media intensified as Hawking’s recognition
grew. In 1983 a BBC Horizon program profiled him at work at the
DAMTP. For the first time the British public was given a chance tosee Professor Hawking whirring around Cambridge in this wheel-STEPHEN HAWKING 204Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlchair, talking in his strangely contorted way with his students and
co-workers, at home on West Road with Jane and the children, andattending official functions. The public was captivated. One maga-zine article after another appeared in rapid succession. The LondonTimes and Telegraph newspapers ran pieces about him, and in-
depth interviews turned up in the New York Times , Newsweek, and
Vanity Fair . A few short years into the decade and “black hole” and
“Stephen Hawking” had become synonymous in the eyes of themedia and the general public. 
Hawking has never been a man to shy away from publicity and
he thoroughly enjoyed his growing fame. However, fame alone doesnot pay the bills, and in the early eighties there were intensifyingfinancial pressures on the Hawking household. A professor’s salaryis not large compared with equivalent positions in industry or com-merce, and occasional monies from prizes and awards were erraticand usually too small to make any real difference. With the strainof running a home and maintaining her own career, Jane was find-ing that the little nursing help they could afford was growingincreasingly inadequate. She desperately needed more privatenursing assistance, and that would be expensive. 
That was not all. They had managed to finance their eldest son
Robert’s education at the fee-paying Perse School in Cambridgesince the age of seven. He had been highly successful academicallyand was scheduled in a few short years to go to university. Grantswere available, but they would not cover all the expenses of a three-year degree course. Coinciding with these problems was the factthat, in 1982, Lucy was in her final year at a junior state school,Newnham Croft. Stephen and Jane both wanted her to attend thePerse School, as her brother had done. With Timothy growing andeveryday family expenditures increasing, there seemed to be no wayfor them to afford school fees for two children. Science Celebrity 205Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlAnd what of the future? Stephen’s illness had been stable for a
number of years, but things could begin to slide again at any time—that was the nature of the disease. If he could no longer work, theprizes would soon dry up and his pension from the university couldnot sustain them comfortably. There was another great fear: if Janecould no longer look after Stephen and earn a salary, what wouldbecome of him? They did not like to discuss the awful possibilities,but they were there and had to be faced. They needed money,quickly. The last thing any of them wanted was for Stephen to endup in a nursing home, if his condition should degenerate further,simply because they could not afford to look after him at home. 
Something had to be done and fast. Hawking had the germ of an
idea in the back of his mind. He had mentioned it to no one but hadallowed it to grow and develop. Now, he realized, he would have toput his idea into action. It would be a number of years beforeHawking’s secret plan would come to fruition and, with one stroke,solve the family’s financial problems. When it did, it was to changeeverything. But first there were intriguing developments to followup in the field of inflationary cosmology. STEPHEN HAWKING 206Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.html