In an upscale restaurant near Cambridge city center, twelve
young men and women sit around a large, linen-covered tableset with plates and dishes, glasses, and cutlery. To one side is a
man in a wheelchair. He is older than the others. He looks terriblyfrail, almost withered away to nothing, slumped motionless andseemingly lifeless against the black cloth cushion of his wheelchair.His hands, thin and pale, the fingers slender, lie in his lap. Set intothe center of his sinewy throat, just below the collar of his open-necked shirt, is a plastic breathing device about two inches in diam-eter. But despite his disabilities, his face is alive and boyish, neatlybrushed brown hair falling across his brow, only the lines beneathhis eyes belying the fact that he is a contemporary of Keith Richardsand Donald Trump. His head lolls forward, but from behind steel-rimmed spectacles his clear blue eyes are alert, raised slightly to sur-vey the other faces around him. Beside him sits a nurse, her chairangled toward his as she positions a spoon to his lips and feeds him.Occasionally she wipes his mouth. 1
The Day Galileo Died
1Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlThere is an air of excitement in the restaurant. Around this man
the young people laugh and joke, and occasionally address him ormake a flippant remark in his direction. A moment later the babbleof human voices is cut through by a rasping sound, a metallic voice,like something from the set of Star Wars —the man in the wheel-
chair makes a response which brings peals of laughter from thewhole table. His eyes light up, and what has been described by someas “the greatest smile in the world” envelops his whole face.Suddenly you know that this man is very much alive. 
As the diners begin their main course there is a commotion at the
restaurant’s entrance. A few moments later, the headwaiter walkstoward the table escorting a smiling redhead in a fake-fur coat.Everyone at the table turns her way as she approaches, and there isan air of hushed expectation as she smiles across at them and says“Hello” to the gathering. She appears far younger than her yearsand looks terribly glamorous, a fact exaggerated by the generalscruffiness of the young people at the table. Only the older man inthe wheelchair is neatly dressed, in a plain jacket and neatly pressedshirt, his immaculately smart nurse beside him. 
“I’m so sorry I’m late,” she says to the party. “My car was wheel-
clamped in London.” Then she adds, laughing, “There must besome cosmic significance in that!” 
Faces look toward her and smile, and the man in the wheelchair
beams. She walks around the table toward him, as his nurse standsat his side. The woman stops two steps in front of the wheelchair,crouches a little and says, “Professor Hawking, I’m delighted tomeet you. I’m Shirley MacLaine.” He smiles up at her and themetallic voice simply says, “Hello.” 
For the rest of the meal Shirley MacLaine sits next to her host,
plying him with question after question in an attempt to discoverhis views on subjects that concern her deeply. She is interested inmetaphysics and spiritual matters. Having spoken to holy men andSTEPHEN HAWKING 2Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlteachers around the world, she has formulated her own personal
theories concerning the meaning of existence. She has strong beliefsabout the meaning of life and the reason for our being here, the cre-ation of the Universe, and the existence of God. But they are onlybeliefs. The man beside her is perhaps the greatest physicist of ourtime, the subjects of his scientific theories the origin of the Universe,the laws which govern its existence and the eventual fate of all thathas been created—including you, me, and Ms. Shirley MacLaine.His fame has spread far and wide; his name is known by millionsaround the world. She asks the professor if he believes that there isa God who created the Universe and guides His creation. He smilesmomentarily, and the machine voice says, “No.” 
The professor is neither rude nor condescending; brevity is sim-
ply his way. Each word he says has to be painstakingly spelt out ona computer attached to his wheelchair and operated by tiny move-ments of two of the fingers of one hand, almost the last vestige ofbodily freedom he has. His guest accepts his words and nods. Whathe is saying is not what she wants to hear, and she does not agree—but she can only listen and take note, for, if nothing else, his viewshave to be respected. 
Later, when the meal is over, the party leaves the restaurant and
returns to the Department of Applied Mathematics and TheoreticalPhysics at the university, and the two celebrities are left alone withthe ever-present nurse in Professor Hawking’s office. For the nexttwo hours, until tea is served in the common room, the Hollywoodactress asks the Cambridge professor question after question. 
By the time of their encounter in December 1988, Shirley
MacLaine had met many people, the great and the infamous.Several times nominated for an Oscar and winner of one for her rolein Terms of Endearment, she was probably a more famous name
than her host that day. Doubtless, though, her meeting with StephenHawking will remain one of the most memorable of her life. ForThe Day Galileo Died 3Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlthis man, weighing no more than ninety pounds and completely
paralyzed, speechless, and unable to lift his head should it fall for-ward, has been proclaimed “Einstein’s heir,” “the greatest genius ofthe late twentieth century,” “the finest mind alive,” and even, byone journalist, “Master of the Universe.” He has made fundamen-tal breakthroughs in cosmology and, perhaps more than anyone elsealive, he has pushed forward our understanding of the Universe welive in. If that were not enough, he has won dozens of scientificprizes. He has been made a CBE—commander of the Britishempire—and then companion of honour by Queen Elizabeth II andhas written a popular science book, A Brief History of Time, which
stayed on the best-seller list for five years from 1988 to 1993 andhas to date sold over ten million copies worldwide. 
How did all this happen? How has a man with a progressive
wasting disease fought off the ravages of his disability to overcomeevery obstacle in his path and win through? How has he managedto achieve far more than the vast majority of able-bodied peoplewould ever have dreamed of accomplishing? 
To casual visitors the city of Oxford in January 1942 would have
appeared little changed since the outbreak of the Second World Wartwo and a half years earlier. Only upon closer inspection would theyperhaps have noticed the gun emplacements dotted around the city,the fresh camouflage paint in subdued khaki and gray, the high tow-ers protruding from the car plants at Cowley, east of the dreamingspires, and the military trucks and personnel carriers periodicallytrundling over Magdalen Bridge and along the High, where frostlingered on the stone gargoyles. 
Out in the wider world, the war was reaching a crucial stage. A
month earlier, on December 7, the Japanese had attacked PearlHarbor and the USA had joined the war. To the east the Soviet armywas fighting back Hitler’s troops in the Crimea, bringing about theSTEPHEN HAWKING 4Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlfirst moves that would eventually precipitate the total defeat of both
Germany and Japan. 
In Britain every radio was tuned to J. B. Priestley presenting Post-
Scripts to the News; there were Dr. Joad and Julian Huxley arguing
over trivia and homely science on the “Brains Trust”; and the“Forces’ sweetheart,” Vera Lynn, was wowing the troops at homeand abroad with “We’ll Meet Again.” Winston Churchill had justreturned from his Christmas visit to America where he hadaddressed both houses of Congress, rousing them with quotes fromLincoln and Washington and waving the V sign. Television waslittle more than a laboratory curiosity. 
It is perhaps one of those oddities of serendipity that January 8,
1942 was both the three-hundredth anniversary of the death of oneof history’s greatest intellectual figures, the Italian scientist GalileoGalilei, and the day Stephen William Hawking was born into aworld torn apart by war and global strife. But as Hawking himselfpoints out, around two hundred thousand other babies were bornthat day, so maybe it is after all not such an amazing coincidence. 
Stephen’s mother, Isobel, had arrived in Oxford only a short time
before the baby was due. She lived with her husband Frank inHighgate, a northern suburb of London, but they had decided thatshe should move to Oxford to give birth. The reason was simple.Highgate, along with the rest of London and much of southernEngland, was being pounded by the German Luftwaffe night after
night. However, the warring governments, in a rare display of equa-nimity, had agreed that if Germany refrained from bombing Oxfordor Cambridge, the Royal Air Force would guarantee peaceful skiesover Heidelberg and Göttingen. In fact, it has been said that Hitlerhad earmarked Oxford as the prospective capital of world govern-ment when his imagined global conquest had been accomplishedand that he wanted to preserve its architectural splendor. The Day Galileo Died 5Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlBoth Frank and Isobel Hawking had been to Oxford before—as
students. They both came from middle-class families. FrankHawking’s grandfather had been quite a successful Yorkshirefarmer but had seen his prosperity disappear in the great agricul-tural depression that immediately followed the First World War.Isobel, the second eldest of seven, was the daughter of a doctor inGlasgow. Neither family could afford university fees without mak-ing sacrifices, and in an age where far fewer women went on tohigher education than we are now accustomed to, it demonstratedconsiderable liberalism on Isobel’s parents’ part that a universityeducation was considered at all. 
Their paths never crossed at Oxford, as Frank Hawking went up
before his future wife. He studied medicine and became a specialistin tropical diseases. The outbreak of hostilities in 1939 found himin East Africa studying endemic medical problems. When he heardabout the war he decided to set off back to Europe, traveling over-land across the African continent and then by ship to England, withthe intention of volunteering for military service. However, uponarriving home he was informed that his skills would be far moreusefully employed in medical research. 
After leaving Oxford, Isobel had stumbled into a succession of
loathed jobs, including a spell as an inspector of taxes. Leaving afteronly a few months, she decided to take a job for which she wasridiculously overqualified—as a secretary at a medical researchinstitute. It was there that the vivacious and friendly Isobel, mildlyamused at the position she had found herself in but with sights seton a more meaningful future, first met the tall, shy young researcherfresh back from exciting adventures in exotic climes. 
When he was two weeks old, Isobel Hawking took Stephen back
to London and the raids. They almost lost their lives when he wastwo, when a V2 rocket hit a neighbor’s house. Although their homewas damaged, the Hawkings were out at the time. STEPHEN HAWKING 6Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlAfter the war, Frank Hawking was appointed head of the
Division of Parasitology at the National Institute of MedicalResearch. The family stayed on in the house in Highgate until 1950,when they moved twenty miles north to a large rambling house at14 Hillside Road in the city of St. Albans in Hertfordshire. 
St. Albans is a small city dominated by its cathedral, which can
trace its foundation back to the year A.D. 303, when St. Alban wasmartyred and a church was built on the site. However, long beforethat the Romans had realized the strategically useful position of thearea. There they built the city of Verulamium, and the firstChristian church was probably constructed from the Roman ruinsleft behind when the empire began to crumble and the soldiersreturned home. In the 1950s, St. Albans was an archetypal, pros-perous, middle-class English town. In the words of one ofHawking’s school friends, “It was a terribly smug place, upwardlymobile, but so awfully suffocating.” 
Hawking was eight when the family arrived there. Frank
Hawking had a strong desire to send Stephen to a private school.He had always believed that a private school education was an essen-tial ingredient for a successful career. There was plenty of evidence tosupport this view: in the 1950s, the vast majority of members ofParliament had enjoyed a privileged education, and most seniorfigures in institutions such as the BBC, the armed forces, and thecountry’s universities had been to private schools. Dr. Hawkinghimself had attended a minor private school, and he felt that evenwith this semi-elite background he had still experienced the prejudiceof the establishment. He was convinced that, coupled with his ownparents’ lack of money, this had held him back from achievinggreater things in his own career and that others with less ability butmore refined social mores had been promoted ahead of him. He didnot want this to happen to his eldest son. Stephen, he decided, wouldbe sent to Westminster, one of the best schools in the country. The Day Galileo Died 7Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlWhen he was ten, the boy was entered for the Westminster School
scholarship examination. Although his father was doing well inmedical research, a scientist’s salary could never hope to cover theschool fees at Westminster—such things were reserved for the likesof admirals, politicians, and captains of industry. Stephen had to beaccepted into the school on his own academic merit; he would thenhave his fees paid, at least in part, by the scholarship. The day ofthe examination arrived and Stephen fell ill. He never sat for theentrance paper and consequently never obtained a place at one ofEngland’s best schools. 
Disappointed, Dr. Hawking enrolled his son at the local private
school, St. Albans School, a well-known and academically excellentabbey school which had close ties with the cathedral extending.back, according to some accounts, to the year A.D. 948. Situatedin the heart of the city and close to the cathedral, St. Albans Schoolhad 600 boys when Stephen arrived there in September 1952. Eachyear was streamed as A, B, or C according to academic ability. Eachboy spent five years in senior school, progressing from the first formto the fifth, at the end of which period he would sit for Ordinary(O) Level exams in a broad spectrum of subjects, the brighter boystaking eight or nine examinations. Those who were successful at OLevel would usually stay on to sit for Advanced (A) Levels in prepa-ration for university two years later. 
In 1952 there were on average three applicants for every place at
St. Albans School and, as with Westminster, each prospective can-didate had to take an entrance examination. Stephen was well pre-pared. He passed easily and, along with exactly ninety other boys,was accepted into the school on September 23, 1952. The fees werefifty-one guineas (£53.55) a term. 
The image of Stephen at this time is that of the schoolboy nerd in
his gray school uniform and cap as caricatured in the “Billy Bunter”STEPHEN HAWKING 8Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlstories and Tom Brown’s Schooldays. He was eccentric and awk-
ward, skinny and puny. His school uniform always looked a messand, according to friends, he jabbered rather than talked clearly,having inherited a slight lisp from his father. His friends dubbed hisspeech “Hawkingese.” All this had nothing to do with any earlysigns of illness; he was just that sort of kid—a figure of classroomfun, teased and occasionally bullied, secretly respected by some,avoided by most. It appears that at school his talents were open tosome debate: when he was twelve, one of his friends bet another abag of sweets that Stephen would never come to anything. AsHawking himself now says modestly, “I don’t know if this bet wasever settled and, if so, which way it was decided.”
1
By the third year Stephen had come to be regarded by his teach-
ers as a bright student, but only a little above average in the topclass in his year. He was part of a small group that hung aroundtogether and shared the same intense interest in their work and pur-suits. There was the tall, handsome figure of Basil King, who seemsto have been the cleverest of the group, reading Guy de Maupassantat the age of ten and enjoying opera while still in short trousers.Then there was John McClenahan, short, with dark brown hair anda round face, who was perhaps Stephen’s best friend at the time.Fair-haired Bill Cleghorn was another of the group, completed bythe energetic and artistic Roger Ferneyhaugh, and a newcomer inthe third form, Michael Church. Together they formed the nucleusof the brightest of the bright students in class 3A. 
The little group was definitely the smart kids of their year. They
all listened to the BBC’s Third Programme on the radio, now knownas Radio 3, which played only classical music. Instead of listeningunder the sheets to early rock ’n’ roll or the latest cool jazz from theStates, Mozart, Mahler, and Beethoven would trickle from theirradios to accompany last-minute physics revision for a test the nextday or the geography homework due the next morning. They readThe Day Galileo Died 9Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlKingsley Amis and Aldous Huxley, John Wyndham, C. S. Lewis,
and William Golding—the “smart” books. Pop music was on theother side of the “great divide,” infra dig, slightly vulgar. They allwent to concerts at the Albert Hall. A few of them played instru-ments, but Stephen was not very dexterous with his hands andnever mastered a musical instrument. The interest was there, but hecould never progress beyond the rudiments, a source of great regretthroughout his life. Their shared hero was Bertrand Russell, at onceintellectual giant and liberal activist. 
St. Albans School proudly boasted a very high intellectual stan-
dard, a fact recognized and appreciated by the Hawkings very soonafter Stephen started there. Before long, any nagging regrets that hehad been unable to enter Westminster were forgotten. St. AlbansSchool was the perfect environment for cultivating natural talent. 
Much remembered and highly thought of was a master fresh out
of university named Finlay who, way ahead of his time, taped radioprograms and used them as launch points for discussion classeswith 3A. The subject matter ranged from nuclear disarmament tobirth control and everything in between. By all accounts, he had aprofound effect on the intellectual development of the thirteen-year-olds in his charge, and his lessons are still fondly remembered by thejournalists, writers, doctors, and scientists they have become today. 
They were forever bogged down with masses of homework, usu-
ally three hours each night, and plenty more on weekends, afterSaturday morning lessons and compulsory games on Saturdayafternoons. Despite the pressures, they still managed to find a littletime to see each other out of school. Theirs was pretty much amonastic lifestyle. English schoolboys attending the private schoolsof the 1950s had little time for girls in their busy program, andparties were single-sex affairs until the age of fifteen or sixteen. Itwas only then that they would have the inclination and parentalpermission to hold sherry parties at their houses and practice theSTEPHEN HAWKING 10Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmldance steps they had learned after school games on Saturdays at a
dance studio in St. Albans city center. 
Until they had graduated to such pleasures, the boys often went
on long bicycle rides in the Hertfordshire countryside around St.Albans, sometimes going as far afield as Whipsnade, some fifteenmiles away. Another favorite hobby was inventing and playingboard games. The key characters in all this were Stephen and RogerFerneyhaugh. Hawking, the embryonic scientist and logicianalready emerging, would devise the rules and laws of the games,while Ferneyhaugh designed the boards and pieces. The groupwould gather at parents’ houses during school holidays and onweekends, and set up the latest game on the bedroom floor or withglasses of orange squash on the sitting room carpet. 
First there was the War Game, based on the Second World War.
Then came the Feudal Game, devised around the social, military,and political intricacies of medieval England, with the whole infra-structure meticulously developed. However, it soon became appar-ent that there was a major flaw in their games—Stephen’s rules wereof such labyrinthine complexity that the enactment and conse-quences of a single move turned out to be so convoluted that some-times a whole afternoon would be spent sorting them out. Often thegames moved to 14 Hillside Road, and the boys would traipse upthe stairs to Stephen’s cluttered bedroom near the top of the house. 
By all accounts the Hawkings’ home was an eccentric place, clean
but cluttered with books, paintings, old furniture, and strangeobjects gathered from various parts of the world. Neither Isobel norFrank Hawking seemed to care too much about the state of thehouse. Carpets and furniture remained in use until they began to fallapart; wallpaper was allowed to dangle where it had peeled throughold age; and there were many places along the hallway and behinddoors where plaster had fallen away, leaving gaping holes in thewall. The Day Galileo Died 11Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlStephen’s room was apparently little different. It was the magi-
cian’s lair, the mad professor’s laboratory, and the messy teenager’sstudy all rolled into one. Among the general detritus and debris,half-finished homework, mugs of undrunk tea, schoolbooks, andbits of model aircraft and bizarre gadgets lay in untended heaps. Onthe sideboard stood electrical devices, the uses of which could onlybe guessed at, and next to those a rack of test tubes, their contentsneglected and discolored among the general confusion of odd piecesof wire, paper, glue, and metal from half-finished and forgottenprojects. 
The Hawking family was definitely an eccentric lot. In many
ways they were a typically bookish family, but with a streak of orig-inality and social awareness that made them ahead of their time.One contemporary of Hawking’s has described them as “bluestock-ing.” There were a lot of them; one photograph from the familyalbum includes eighty-eight Hawkings. Stephen’s parents did somepretty oddball things. For many years the family car was a Londontaxi which Frank and Isobel had purchased for £50, but this waslater replaced with a brand-new green Ford Consul—the archetypallate-fifties car. There was a good reason for buying it: they haddecided to embark on a yearlong overland expedition to India, andtheir old London taxi would never have made it. With the exceptionof Stephen, who could not interrupt his education, the whole fam-ily made the trip to India and back in the green Ford Consul, anastonishingly unusual thing to do in the late 1950s. Needless to say,the vehicle was not in its original pristine condition upon its return. 
The Hawkings’ journeys outside St. Albans were not always so
adventurous. Like many families, they kept a caravan on the southcoast of England; theirs was near Eastbourne in Sussex. Unlikeother families, however, they owned not a modern version but abrightly colored gypsy caravan. Most summers the family spent twoor three weeks walking the cliff tops and swimming in the bay.STEPHEN HAWKING 12Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlOften Stephen’s closest friend, John McClenahan, would join them,
and the two boys would spend their time flying kites, eating icecream, and thinking up new ways to tease Stephen’s two youngersisters, Mary and Philippa, while generally ignoring his adoptedbrother, Edward, who was only a toddler at the time. 
Frank Hawking was significant in Stephen’s childhood and adoles-
cence by his absence. He seems to have been a somewhat remotefigure who would regularly disappear for several months each yearto further his medical research in Africa, sometimes missing thefamily holidays in Ringstead Bay and leaving the children withIsobel. This routine was so well embedded in the structure of theirlives that it was not until her late teens that Stephen’s eldest sister,Mary, realized that their family life was at all unusual—she hadthought all fathers were like birds that migrated to sunnier climeseach year. Whether at home or abroad, Frank Hawking kept metic-ulous accounts of everything he did in a collection of diaries main-tained until the day he died. He also wrote fiction, completingseveral unpublished novels. One of his literary efforts was writtenfrom a woman’s viewpoint. Although Isobel respected his effortswhen she read it, she believed that it was unsuccessful. 
Isobel had an indisputable influence on her eldest son’s political
ideas. She, like many other English intellectuals of the period, hadpolitically left-of-center ideas that in her case led to active member-ship in the St. Albans Liberal Association in the 1950s. By then theLiberal Party was only a minor parliamentary force with just ahandful of MPs, but at the grassroots level it remained a livelyforum for political discussion, often taking the lead, during the1950s and 1960s, on many issues of the time, including nuclear dis-armament and opposition to apartheid. Stephen has never beenextreme in his political views, but his interest in politics and left-wing sympathies have never left him. The Day Galileo Died 13Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlStephen and his friends quickly tired of board games and moved
on to other hobbies. They built model aircraft and electronic gadg-ets. The planes rarely flew properly, and Hawking was never asgood with his hands as he was with his brain. His model aircraftwere usually scruffy constructions of paper and balsa wood and farfrom aerodynamically efficient. With electronics he had similar set-backs, once receiving a 500-volt shock from an old television set hewas trying to convert into an amplifier. 
In the third and fourth forms, the motley gang of friends began
to turn its attention toward the mystical and the religious. Towardthe end of 1954, a boy on the periphery of the group, Graham Dow,got religion in a very big way. The evangelist Billy Graham hadtoured Britain that year, and the young Dow had been greatly influ-enced by the man. Dow went on to convert Roger Ferneyhaugh,and the enthusiasm spread. Hawking’s attitude to this craze is opento debate. Most likely, he stood back from this particular game witha certain amused detachment; this at least is the opinion of his con-temporaries. They speak of experiencing a towering intellect, look-ing on at the reaction of the participants more with fascination thanwith any feelings of conviction or budding faith. 
Michael Church describes how he felt an indefinable intellectual
presence when it came to discussing matters vaguely mystical ormetaphysical with Stephen. Remembering one encounter, he says: 
I wasn’t a scientist and didn’t take him remotely seriously until one day when we
were messing around in his cluttered, joke-inventor’s den. Our talk turned to themeaning of life—a topic I felt pretty hot on at the time—when suddenly I wasarrested by an awful realization: he was encouraging me to make a fool of myself,and watching me as though from a great height. It was a profoundly unnervingmoment.
2
Their interest in Christianity lasted for most of the year. The
group of friends met at each other’s houses as they had done to playSTEPHEN HAWKING 14Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlboard games. They still drank orange squash and even played
games occasionally, but for most of the time they would holdintense discussions on matters of faith, God, and their own feelings.It was a time of inner growth, a struggle to find meaning in thetumble of events and stimuli surrounding them, but it was also animportant group activity. One member of the group has sinceintimated that there was an undoubted tinge of schoolboy homo-sexuality about the whole thing. 
This was a difficult time for Stephen. He wanted to be involved,
to be part of the group, but the rationalist in him would not, eventhen, allow his emotions to compromise his intellect. Yet he man-aged to keep his friends, remain detached, and learn a number ofsocial skills that would hold him in good stead for the future. Theirony is that at the end of the third year, at the height of the craze,Stephen won the school divinity prize. 
After Christianity came the occult. The group began to turn its
attention to extrasensory perception (ESP), which at the time wasbeginning to capture the public imagination. Together and in theprivacy of their own dens, they started to conduct experiments dur-ing which they would attempt to influence the throw of a die by thepower of their minds. Stephen was far more interested in this—itwas quantifiable, real experimental work, and there was a chancethat the idea could be proved or disproved. It was not simply amatter of faith and hope. 
The craze did not last long. With the others, Stephen attended a
lecture by a scientist who had made a study of a set of ESP experi-ments conducted at Duke University in North Carolina in the latefifties. The lecturer demonstrated that when the experimentersobtained good results the experiments could be shown to be faulty,and whenever the experimental technique was followed correctly,no results were obtained. Hawking’s interest turned to contempt.He came to the conclusion that it is only people who have notThe Day Galileo Died 15Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmldeveloped their analytical faculties beyond those of a teenager who
believe in such things as ESP. 
Meanwhile, at school things carried on pretty much as before.
Stephen was poor at all sports with the possible exception of cross-country running, for which his wraith-like physique was perfectlysuited. He endured cricket and rugby, but special loathing wasreserved for the Combined Cadet Force, the CCF. Like most privateboys’ schools in Britain, St. Albans School maintains a schoolboyarmy, the original aim of which was to prepare young men fornational service. Each Friday the entire school, with six exceptions,wore military uniform. The exceptions were those whose parentswere conscientious objectors. Despite Isobel Hawking’s politicalleanings, Stephen’s parents did not object and he took part in thesame war games, drills, and parades as the others. 
For those with little interest in things military, the memories of
the CCF are sour—cold winter Fridays in driving rain, clothesdrenched through, biting January sleet numbing face and fingers,and the enthusiastic boy-officers yelling orders. Stephen had therank of lance corporal in the Signals, the section into which thosewith a scientific bent were traditionally placed. By all accounts hehated every minute of it, but it was endured. In some respects thealternative was worse. Those who did not wish to play their part indefending Queen and Country had to run the gauntlet of persuasivetactics. First, the objector was taken to Colonel Pryke, commanderof the CCF. If he did not manage to persuade the dissenter to join,the next line of attack was the sub-dean, Canon Feaver, a formida-ble gentleman who would subject the boy to a lecture on his moralduty to serve God and the Queen, to play his role in the greaterscheme of things. If that were endured, the final test would be toface the headmaster, William Thomas Marsh. 
Marsh was one of St. Albans’ most severe but successful head-
masters. He has been described by more than one of Hawking’sSTEPHEN HAWKING 16Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlcontemporaries as “absolutely terrifying”; to cross him was an act
of extreme foolishness. If the headmaster failed to convert a consci-entious objector, then he must possess tremendous conviction anddetermination. However, that was only the beginning of the ordeal.Those who did not take part in the CCF were made to dress infatigues along with everyone else and, instead of playing at soldiers,were forced to dig a Greek theater in the school grounds. Marshwas a dedicated Classicist, and he viewed this treatment as fittingritualistic humiliation. The construction of the Greek theater con-tinued, rain or shine, for as long as it took. As the work progressed,Marsh stalked its perimeter in fair weather or surveyed the site fromthe comfort of a warm room when it was raining or snowing. 
Life at school was not always bleak. The whole class often went on
school trips to places of academic interest. It was usually the CCFcommander, Colonel Pryke, who was given the responsibility of tak-ing what he referred to as “a scruffy band of young men” to suchplaces as chemical plants, power stations, and museums. He remem-bers with fondness the occasion when he took Hawking’s class tothe ICI chemical plant at Billingham in the north of England.Everything seemed to be going well until just after lunch, when oneof the scientists who had been showing them around cornered Prykeand said angrily, “Who the hell have you got here? They’re askingme all sorts of bloody awkward questions I can’t answer!” 
By the time he was fourteen, Stephen knew that he wanted to
make a career out of studying mathematics, and it was around thistime that his scientific aptitude began to show. He would spend verylittle time on mathematics homework and still obtain full marks. Asa contemporary recalled, “He had incredible, instinctive insight.While I would be worrying away at a complicated mathematicalsolution to a problem, he just knew the answer —he didn’t have toThe Day Galileo Died 17Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlthink about it.”4The “average” bright kid was beginning to reveal
a prodigious talent. 
One particular example of Stephen’s highly developed insight left
a lasting impression on John McClenahan. During a sixth-formphysics lesson, the teacher posed the question, “If you have a cup oftea, and you want it with milk and it’s far too hot, does it get to adrinkable temperature quicker if you put the milk in as you pour thetea, or should you allow the tea to cool down before adding themilk?” While his contemporaries were struggling with a muddle ofconcepts to argue the point, Stephen went straight to the heart ofthe matter and almost instantly announced the correct answer: “Ah!Milk in first, of course,” and then went on to give a thorough expla-nation of his reasoning: because a hot liquid cools more quicklythan a cool one, it pays to put the milk in first, so that the liquidcools more slowly.
He sailed through his Ordinary Level exams, obtaining nine in
July 1957 and his tenth, in Latin, a year later, midway through hisAdvanced Levels. When he sat down to decide on his A Level sub-jects, parental pressure began to play a part in his plans. He wantedto do mathematics, physics, and further mathematics in preparationfor a university course in physics or mathematics. However, FrankHawking had other plans. He wanted his son to follow him into acareer in medicine, for which Stephen would have to study A Levelchemistry. After much discussion and argument, Stephen agreed totake mathematics, physics, and chemistry A Levels, leaving open thequestion of his university course until the need for a final decisionarose a year later. 
The sixth form was probably Hawking’s happiest time at St.
Albans. The boys were allowed greater freedom in their final twoyears, and they basked a little in the respect they had gained by theirsuccess at O Level. In the sixth form, the close group of school-friends began to fragment as their A Level subjects diverged. ThoseSTEPHEN HAWKING 18Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmltaking arts subjects began, quite naturally, to lose touch with the
“scientists,” and different cliques established themselves. BasilKing, John McClenahan, and Hawking took only science subjects;the others followed the arts. The scientists gathered others of likemind around them and new groups formed. 
In the spring of 1958, Hawking and his friends, including new
recruits to the group, Barry Blott and Christopher Fletcher, built acomputer called LUCE—Logical Uniselector Computing Engine. Inthe 1950s in Britain, only a few university departments and theMinistry of Defence had computers. However, with the help andenthusiasm of a young mathematics master named Dick Tartar, whohad been recruited specifically to generate new ideas and injectsome life into the mathematics department, they designed and builta very primitive logic machine. 
It took a month to get anything at all out of the machine. The
biggest problem, it seems, was not the design or the theoretical sideof the project, but simply bad soldering. The guts of the device wererecycled parts from an old office telephone exchange, but a vastnumber of electrical connections were needed to make the devicework, and the group was forever finding faults in their soldering.Nevertheless, when they did eventually get it to work, it caused con-siderable excitement in the sixth form. The Mathematical Societywrite-up in the Albanian , the school magazine, sounds as though
plucked straight from a time warp: 
It is not unknown for the mathematician to leave his ivory tower and fulfill his
original role as a calculator. Thus in 1641 Pascal invented an arithmeticalmachine—forerunner of the modern computer that specifically replaces tally-stick, abacus or slide-rule [as] an aid to calculation. Until the happy day whenevery fourth-former has his pocket Ernie,* we have to be content with logarithmThe Day Galileo Died 19
*The computer used to select winners of the premium bonds.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmltables. Meanwhile, as a modest start we have LUCE, the St. Albans School
Logical Uniselector Computing Engine. 
This machine answers some useless, though quite complex logical problems.
Last term’s meetings of the society were devoted to it and proved lively and wellattended. With gained experience [the designers] forge ahead with the construc-tion of a digital computer, as yet unchristened, that will actually “do sums.”(Fourth-formers, take heart!)
5
Hawking and his friends received their first exposure to the press
when the local newspaper, the Herts Advertiser , covered the story
of the “schoolboy boffins” building their newfangled machine.And, as promised in the school magazine article, they did go on tomake a more sophisticated version of the machine later in the sixthform. 
When the present head of computing at St. Albans School, Nigel
Wood-Smith, took over the post many years later, he found a boxunder one of the tables in the mathematics room. To him the boxappeared to contain nothing more than a pile of old junk, transis-tors, and relays, with “LUCE” on a nameplate lying discarded atopthe tangle of wire and metal. He deposited the entire jumble in therubbish bin. It was only many years later that he realized how,unaware of the potential historical significance of things, he hadthrown out the computer that Stephen Hawking had built. STEPHEN HAWKING 20Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.html