2
Classical Cosmology
21Cosmology is the study of the Universe at large, its begin-
ning, its evolution, and its ultimate fate. In terms ofideas, it is the biggest of big science. Yet in terms of hard-
ware, it is less impressive. True, cosmologists do make use of infor-mation about the Universe gleaned from giant telescopes and spaceprobes, and they do sometimes use large computers to carry outtheir calculations. But the essence of cosmology is still mathematics,which means that cosmological ideas can be expressed in terms ofequations written down using pencil and paper. More than anyother branch of science, cosmology can be studied by using themind alone. This is just as true today as it was seventy-five years agowhen Albert Einstein developed the general theory of relativity andthereby invented the science of theoretical cosmology. 
When scientists refer to the “classical” ideas of physics, they are
not referring back to the thoughts of the Ancient Greeks. Strictlyspeaking, classical physics is the physics of Isaac Newton, who laidthe foundations of the scientific method for investigating the worldback in the seventeenth century. Newtonian physics reignedCopyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlsupreme until the beginning of the twentieth century, when it was
overtaken by two revolutions, the first sparked by Einstein’s generaltheory of relativity and the second by the quantum theory. The firstis the best theory we have of how gravity works; the secondexplains how everything else in the material world works. Together,these two topics, relativity theory and quantum mechanics, formedthe twin pillars of modern twentieth-century science. The HolyGrail of modern physics, sought by many, is a theory that will com-bine the two into one mathematical package. 
But to the modern generation of Grail seekers in the 1990s, even
these twin pillars of physics, in their original form, are old hat.There is another, more colloquial, way in which scientists use theterm “classical physics”—essentially to refer to anything developedby previous generations of researchers and therefore more thanabout twenty-five years old. In fact, going back twenty-five yearsfrom today does bring us to a landmark event in science: the dis-covery of pulsars, in 1967, the year Stephen Hawking celebrated hisown twenty-fifth birthday. These objects are now known to be neu-tron stars, the collapsed cores of massive stars that have ended theirlives in vast outbursts known as supernova explosions. It was thediscovery of pulsars, collapsed objects on the verge of becomingblack holes, that revived interest in the extreme implications ofEinstein’s theory of gravity, and it was the study of black holes thatled Hawking to achieve the first successful marriage between quan-tum theory and relativity. 
Typically though (as we shall see), Hawking was already working
on the theory of black holes at least two years before the discoveryof pulsars, when only a few mathematicians bothered with suchexotic implications of Einstein’s equations, and the term “blackhole” itself had not even been used in this connection. Like all hiscontemporaries, Hawking was brought up, as a scientist, on theclassical ideas of Newton and on relativity theory and quantumSTEPHEN HAWKING 22Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlphysics in their original forms. The only way we can appreciate how
far the new physics has developed since then, partly with Hawking’said, is to take a look at those classical ideas ourselves, a gentleworkout in the foothills before we head for the dizzy heights.“Classical cosmology,” in the colloquial sense, refers to what wasknown prior to the revolution triggered by the discovery of pulsars—exactly the stuff that students of Hawking’s generation were taught.
Isaac Newton made the Universe an ordered and logical place. He
explained the behavior of the material world in terms of funda-mental laws that were seen to be built into the fabric of theUniverse. The most famous example is his law of gravity. The orbitsof the planets around the Sun had remained a deep mystery beforeNewton’s day, but he explained them by a law of gravity which saysthat a planet at a certain distance from the Sun feels a certain force,tugging on it, proportional to one over the square of the distance tothe Sun—what is known as an inverse square law. In other words,if the planet is magically moved out to twice as far from the Sun, itwill feel one-quarter of the force; if it is put three times as far away,it will feel one-ninth of the force; and so on. As a planet in a stableorbit moves through space at its own speed, this inward forceexactly balances the tendency of the planet to fly off into space.Moreover, Newton realized, the same inverse square law explainsthe fall of an apple from a tree and the orbit of the Moon about theEarth, and even the ebb and flow of the tides. It is a universal law. 
Newton also explained the way in which objects respond to
forces other than gravity. Here on Earth, when we push somethingit moves, but only as long as we keep pushing it. Any moving objecton Earth experiences a force, called friction, which opposes itsmotion. Stop pushing, and friction will bring the object to a halt.Without friction though (like the planets in space or the atoms thateveryday things are composed of), according to Newton, an objectClassical Cosmology 23Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlwill keep moving in a straight line at a steady speed until a force is
applied to it. Then, as long as the force continues to operate, theobject will accelerate, changing its direction, its speed, or both. Thelighter the object, or the stronger the force, the greater the acceler-ation that results. Take away the force, however, and once again theobject moves at a steady speed in a straight line but at the newvelocity that has built up during the time it was accelerating. 
When you push something, it pushes back, and the action and
reaction are equal and opposite. This is how a rocket works—itthrows material out from its exhaust in one direction, and the reac-tion pushes the rocket along in the opposite direction. This last lawis familiar these days from the snooker table, where balls collideand rebound off each other in a very “Newtonian” manner. Andthat is very much the image of the world that comes out ofNewtonian mechanics—an image of balls (or atoms) colliding andrebounding, or of stars and planets moving under the influence ofgravity, in an exactly regular and predictable manner. 
All these ideas were encapsulated in Newton’s masterwork, the
Principia, published in 1687 (usually referred to simply by the short
version of its Latin title; the full English title of Newton’s greatwork is Mathematical Principles of Natural Philosophy ). The view
Newton gave us of the world is sometimes referred to as the “clock-work universe.” If the Universe is made up of material objects inter-acting with each other through forces that obey truly universallaws, and if rules like that of action and reaction apply preciselythroughout the Universe, then the Universe can be regarded as agigantic machine, a kind of cosmic clockwork, which will follow anutterly predictable path forever once it has been set in motion. 
This raises all kinds of puzzles, deeply worrying to philosophers
and theologians alike. The heart of the problem is the question offree will. In such a clockwork universe, is everything predetermined,including all aspects of human behavior? Was it preordained, builtSTEPHEN HAWKING 24Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlinto the laws of physics, that a collection of atoms known as Isaac
Newton would write a book known as the Principia that would be
published in 1687? And if the Universe can be likened to a cosmicclockwork machine, who wound up the clockwork and set it going? 
Even within the established framework of religious belief in sev-
enteenth-century Europe, these were disturbing questions, sincealthough it might seem reasonable to say that the clockwork couldhave been wound up and set in motion by God, the traditionalChristian view sees human beings as having free will, so that theycan choose to follow the teachings of Christ or not, as they wish.The notion that sinners might actually have no freedom of choiceconcerning their actions, but were sinning in obedience to inflexiblelaws, following a path to eternal damnation actually laid out byGod in the beginning, simply could not be fitted into the establishedChristian world view. 
Strangely, though, in Newton’s day, and down into the twentieth
century, science did not really contemplate the notion of a beginningto the Universe at all. The Universe at large was perceived as eternaland unchanging, with “fixed” stars hanging in space. The biblicalstory of the Creation, still widely accepted in the seventeenth cen-tury by scientists as well as ordinary people, was thought of asapplying only to our planet, Earth, or perhaps to the Sun’s family,the Solar System, but not to the whole Universe. 
Newton believed (incorrectly as it turns out) that the fixed stars
could stay as they were in space forever if the Universe were infi-nitely big, because the force of gravity tugging on each individualstar would then be the same in all directions. In fact, such a situa-tion is highly unstable. The slightest deviation from a perfectlyuniform distribution of stars will produce an overall pull in onedirection or another, making the stars start to move. As soon as astar moves toward any source of gravitational force, the distance tothe source decreases, so the force gets stronger, in line withClassical Cosmology 25Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlNewton’s inverse square law. So once the stars have started to
move, the force causing the nonuniformity gets bigger, and theykeep on moving at an accelerating rate. A static universe will soonstart to collapse under the pull of gravity. But that became clear onlyafter Einstein had developed a new theory of gravity—a theory,moreover, which contained within itself a prediction that theUniverse would certainly not be static and might actually be not col-lapsing but expanding. 
Like Newton, Albert Einstein made many contributions to science.
Also like Newton, his masterwork was his theory of gravity, thegeneral theory of relativity. It is some measure of just how impor-tant this theory is to the modern understanding of the Universe thateven Einstein’s special theory of relativity, the one that leads to thefamous equation E = mc
2, is by comparison a relatively minor piece
of work. Nevertheless, the special theory, which was published in1905, contributed a key ingredient to the new understanding of theUniverse. Before we move on to this, though, we should at least givea brief outline of the main features of the special theory. 
Einstein developed the special theory of relativity in response to
a puzzle that had emerged from nineteenth-century science. Thegreat Scottish physicist, James Clerk Maxwell, had found the equa-tions that describe the behavior of electromagnetic waves.Maxwell’s equations were soon developed to explain the behaviorof radio waves, which were discovered in 1888. But Maxwell hadfound that the equations automatically gave him a particularspeed,* which is identified as the speed at which electromagneticwaves travel. The unique speed that came out of Maxwell’s equa-tions turned out to be exactly the speed of light, which physicistsSTEPHEN HAWKING 26
*Strictly speaking, it is a velocity—a quantity that specifies speed and direc-
tion. For our purposes, it is easier to refer to velocities as speeds.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlhad already measured by that time. This revealed that light must be
a form of electromagnetic wave, like radio waves but with shorterwavelength (that is, higher frequency). And it also meant, accordingto those equations, that light (as well as other forms of electro-magnetic radiation, including radio waves) always travels at thesame speed. 
This is not what we expect from our everyday experience of how
things move. If I stand still and toss a ball to you gently, it is easyfor you to catch the ball. If I am driven toward you at 60 miles anhour in a car and toss the ball equally gently out the window, ithurtles toward you at 60 miles an hour plus the speed of the toss.You would, rightly, be dumbfounded if the ball tossed gently out thecar window reached you traveling only at the gentle speed of thetoss, without the speed of the car being added in, yet that is exactlywhat happens with light pulses. Equally, if one vehicle traveling at50 miles an hour along a straight road is overtaken by another travel-ing at 60 miles an hour, the second vehicle is moving at 10 miles anhour relative to the first one. Speed, in other words, is relative. Andyet, if you are overtaken by a light pulse, and measure its speed asit goes past, you will find it has the same speed you would measurefor a light pulse going past you when you are standing still. 
Nobody knew this until the end of the nineteenth century.
Scientists had assumed that light behaved in the same way, as far asadding and subtracting velocities is concerned, as objects like ballsbeing thrown from one person to another. And they explained the“constancy” of the speed of light in Maxwell’s equations by sayingthat the equations applied to some “absolute space,” a fundamentalreference frame for the entire Universe. 
According to this view, space itself defined the framework against
which things should be measured—absolute space, through whichthe Earth, the Sun, light, and everything else moved. This absolutespace was also sometimes called the “aether” and was conceived ofClassical Cosmology 27Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlas a substance through which electromagnetic waves moved, like
water waves moving over the sea. The snag was, when experi-menters tried to measure changes in the velocity of light caused bythe motion of the Earth through absolute space (or “relative to theaether”), none could be found. 
Because the Earth moves round the Sun in a roughly circular
orbit, it should be moving at different speeds relative to absolutespace at different times of the year. It’s like swimming in a circle ina fast-flowing river. Sometimes the Earth will be “swimming withthe aether,” sometimes across the aether, and sometimes against theflow. If light always travels at the same speed relative to absolutespace, common sense tells us this ought to show up in the form ofseasonal changes in the speed of light measured from the Earth. Itdoes not. 
Einstein resolved the dilemma with his special theory. This says
that all frames of reference are equally valid and that there is noabsolute reference frame. Anybody who moves at a constantvelocity through space is entitled to regard himself or herself as sta-tionary. They will find that moving objects in their frame of refer-ence obey Newton’s laws, while electromagnetic radiation obeysMaxwell’s equations and the speed of light is always measured to bethe value that comes out of those equations, denoted by the letter c.
Furthermore, anybody who is moving at a constant speed relativeto the first person (the first observer in physicists’ jargon) will alsobe entitled to say that they are at rest and will find that objects intheir laboratory obey Newton’s laws, while measurements alwaysgive the speed of light as c. Even if one observer is moving toward
the other observer at half the speed of light and sends a torch beamout ahead, the second observer will not measure the speed of thelight from the torch as 1.5 c: it will still be c! 
Starting out from the observed fact that the speed of light is a
constant, the same whichever way the Earth is moving throughSTEPHEN HAWKING 28Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlspace, Einstein found a mathematical package to describe the
behavior of material objects in reference frames that move with con-stant velocities relative to one another—so-called “inertial” framesof reference. Provided the velocities are small compared with thespeed of light, these equations give exactly the same “answers” asNewtonian mechanics. But when the velocities begin to become anappreciable fraction of the speed of light, strange things happen. 
Two velocities, for example, can never add up to give a relative
velocity greater than c. An observer may see two other observers
approaching each other on a head-on collision course, each travel-ing at a speed of 0.9 cin the first observer’s reference frame, but
measurements carried out by either of those two fast-movingobservers will always show that the other one is traveling at a speedless than cbut bigger (in this case) than 0.9 c. 
The reason why velocities add up in this strange way has to do
with the way both space and time are warped at high velocities. Inorder to account for the constancy of the speed of light, Einsteinhad to accept that moving clocks run more slowly than stationaryclocks and that moving objects shrink in the direction of theirmotion. The equations also tell us that moving objects increase inmass the faster they go. 
Strange and wonderful though all these things are, they are only
peripheral to the story of modern cosmology and to the search forlinks between quantum physics and gravity. We stress, however, thatthey are not wild ideas in the sense that we sometimes dismiss crazynotions as “just a theory” in everyday language. To scientists a the-ory is an idea that has been tried and tested by experiments and haspassed every test. The special theory of relativity is no exception tothis rule. All the strange notions implicit in the theory—the con-stancy of the speed of light, the stretching of time and shrinking oflength for moving objects, the increase in mass of a moving object—have been measured and confirmed to great precision in very manyClassical Cosmology 29Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlexperiments. Particle accelerators—“atom smashing” machines like
those at CERN, the European Center for Nuclear Research, inGeneva—simply would not work if the theory were not a good one,since they have been designed and built around Einstein’s equations.The special theory of relativity as a description of the high-speedworld is as securely founded in solid experimental facts as isNewtonian mechanics as a description of the everyday world; theonly reason it conflicts with our common sense is that in everydaylife we are not used to the kind of high-speed travel required for theeffects to show up. After all, the speed of light, c, is 300,000 kilo-
meters a second (186,000 miles a second), and the relativistic effectscan be safely ignored for any speeds less than about 10 percent ofthis—that is, for speeds less than a mere 30,000 kilometers asecond. 
In essence, the special theory is the result of a marriage of
Newton’s equations of motion with Maxwell’s equations describingradiation. It was very much a child of its time, and if Einstein hadn’tcome up with the theory in 1905, one of his contemporaries wouldsurely have done so within the next few years. Without Einstein’sspecial genius, though, it might have been a generation or morebefore anyone realized the importance of a far deeper insight buriedwithin the special theory. 
This key ingredient, to which we have already alluded, was the fruit
of another marriage—the union of space and time. In everyday life,space and time seem to be quite different things. Space extendsaround us in three dimensions (up and down, left and right, for-ward and backward). We can see where things are located in spaceand travel through it more or less at will. Time, although we allknow what it is, is almost impossible to describe. In a sense, it doeshave a direction (from past to future), but we can look neither intothe future nor into the past, and we certainly cannot move throughSTEPHEN HAWKING 30Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmltime at will. Yet the great universal constant, c, is a speed, and speed
is a measure that relates space and time. Speeds are always in theform of miles per hour, or centimeters per second, or any other unitof length per unit of time. You cannot have one without the otherwhen you are talking about speed. So the fact that the fundamentalconstant is a velocity must be telling us something significant aboutthe Universe. But what? 
If you multiply a speed by a time, you get a length. And if you do
this in the right way (by multiplying intervals of time by the speedof light, c), you can combine measures of length (space) with meas-
ures of time in the same set of equations. The set of equations thatcombine space and time in this way consists of the equations of thespecial theory of relativity that describe time dilation and lengthcontraction* and lead to the prediction that a mass mis equivalent
to an energy Eas described by the formula E = mc
2.  (Instead of
thinking about space and time as two separate entities, as long agoas 1905 Einstein was telling physicists that they should be thinkingabout them as different aspects of a single, unified whole—space-time. But this space-time, the special theory also said, was not fixedand permanent like the absolute space or absolute time ofNewtonian physics—it could be stretched or squeezed. And thereinlay the clue to the next great step forward. 
Einstein used to say that the inspiration for his general theory of
relativity (which is, above all, a theory of gravity) came from therealization that a person inside a falling lift whose cable hadsnapped would not feel gravity at all. We can picture exactly whathe meant because we have now seen film of astronauts orbiting theEarth in spacecraft. Such an orbiting spacecraft is not “outside” theClassical Cosmology 31
*In everyday language, time dilation means that a clock moving relative to an
observer runs slow, and length contraction means that an object moving relativeto an observer shrinks in the direction of its motion.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlinfluence of the Earth’s gravity; indeed, it is held in orbit by gravity.
But the spacecraft and everything in it is falling around the Earthwith the same acceleration, so the astronauts have no weight andfloat within their capsule. For them it is as if gravity does not exist,a phenomenon known as free fall. But Einstein had never seen anyof this and had to picture the situation in a freely falling lift in hisimagination. It is as if the acceleration of the falling lift, speeding upwith every second that passes, precisely cancels out the influence ofgravity. For that to be possible, gravity and acceleration must beexactly equivalent to one another. 
The way this led Einstein to develop a theory of gravity was
through considering the implications for a beam of light, the uni-versal measuring tool of special relativity. Imagine shining a torchhorizontally across the lift from one side to the other. In the freelyfalling lift, objects obey Newton’s laws: they move in straight lines,from the point of view of an observer in the lift, bounce off eachother with action and reaction equal and opposite, and so on. And,crucially, from the point of view of the observer in the lift, lighttravels in straight lines. 
But how do things look to an observer standing on the ground
watching the lift fall? The light would appear to follow a track thatalways stays exactly the same distance below the roof of the lift. Butin the time it takes the light to cross the lift, the lift has accelerateddownward, and the light in the beam must have done the same. Inorder for the light to stay the same distance below the roof all theway across, the light pulse must follow a curved path as seen fromoutside the lift. In other words, a light beam must be bent by theeffect of gravity. 
Einstein explained this in terms of bent space-time. He suggested
that the presence of matter in space distorts the space-time aroundit, so that objects moving through the distorted space-time aredeflected, just as if they were being tugged in ordinary “flat” spaceSTEPHEN HAWKING 32Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlby a force inversely proportional to the square of the distance.
Having thought up the idea, Einstein then developed a set of equa-tions to describe all this. The task took him ten years. When he hadfinished, Newton’s famous inverse square law reemerged fromEinstein’s new theory of gravity; but general relativity went farbeyond Newton’s theory, because it also offered an all-embracingtheory of the whole Universe. The general theory describes all ofspace-time and therefore all of space and all of time. (There is a neatway to remember how it works. Matter tells space-time how tobend; bends in space-time tell matter how to move. But theequations also insisted, space-time itself can also move, in its ownfashion.) 
The general theory was completed in 1915 and published in
1916. Among other things, it predicted that beams of light from dis-tant stars, passing close by the Sun, would be bent as they movedthrough space-time distorted by the Sun’s mass. This would shift theapparent positions of those stars in the sky—and the shift mightactually be seen, and photographed, during a total eclipse, when theSun’s blinding light is blotted out. Just such an eclipse took place in1919; the photographs were taken and showed exactly the effectEinstein had predicted. Bent space-time was real: the general theoryof relativity was correct. 
But the equations developed by Einstein to describe the distortion
of space-time by the presence of matter, the very equations thatwere so triumphantly vindicated by the eclipse observations, con-tained a baffling feature that even Einstein could not comprehend.The equations insisted that the space-time in which the materialUniverse is embedded could not be static. It must be either expand-ing or contracting. 
Exasperated, Einstein added another term to his equations, for
the sole purpose of holding space-time still. Even at the beginningof the 1920s, he still shared (along with all his contemporaries) theClassical Cosmology 33Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlNewtonian idea of a static Universe. But within ten years, observa-
tions made by Edwin Hubble with a new and powerful telescope ona mountaintop in California had shown that the Universe is
expanding. 
The stars in the sky are not moving farther apart from one
another. They belong to a huge system, the Milky Way Galaxy,which contains about a hundred billion stars and is like an island inspace. In the 1920s, astronomers discovered with the aid of new tel-escopes that there are many other galaxies beyond the Milky Way,many of them containing hundreds of billions of stars like our Sun.And it is the galaxies, not individual stars, that are receding fromone another, being carried farther apart as the space in which theyare embedded expands. 
If anything, this was an even more extraordinary and impressive
prediction of the general theory than the bending of light detectableduring an eclipse. The equations had predicted something that evenEinstein at first refused to believe but which observations latershowed to be correct. The impact on scientists’ perception of theworld was shattering. The Universe was not static, after all, butevolving; Einstein later described his attempt to fiddle the equationsto hold the Universe still as “the greatest blunder of my life.” Evenat the end of the 1920s, the observations and the theory agreed thatthe Universe is expanding. And if galaxies are getting farther apart,that means that long ago they must have been closer together. Howclose could they ever have been? What happened in the time whengalaxies must have been touching one another and before then? 
The idea that the Universe was born in a super-dense, super-hot
fireball known as the Big Bang is now a cornerstone of science, butit took time—over fifty years—for the theory to become developed.Just at the time astronomers were finding evidence for the universalexpansion, transforming the scientific image of the Universe atlarge, their physicist colleagues were developing the quantum the-STEPHEN HAWKING 34Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlory, transforming our understanding of the very small. Attention
focused chiefly on the development of the quantum theory over thenext few decades, with relativity and cosmology (the study of theUniverse at large) becoming an exotic branch of science investigatedby only a few specialist mathematicians. The union of large andsmall still lay far in the future, even at the end of the 1920s. 
As the nineteenth century gave way to the twentieth, physicists were
forced to revise their notions about the nature of light. This initiallymodest readjustment of their world view grew, like an avalanchetriggered by a snowball rolling down a hill, to become a revolutionthat engulfed the whole of physics—the quantum revolution. 
The first step was the realization that electromagnetic energy can-
not always be treated simply as a wave passing through space. Insome circumstances, a beam of light, for example, will behave morelike a stream of tiny particles (now called photons). One of thepeople instrumental in establishing this “wave-particle duality” oflight was Einstein, who in 1905 showed how the way in which elec-trons are knocked out of the atoms in a metal surface by electro-magnetic radiation (the photoelectric effect) can be explained neatlyin terms of photons, not in terms of a pure wave of electromagneticenergy. (It was for this work, not his two theories of relativity, thatEinstein received his Nobel Prize.) 
This wave-particle duality changes our whole view of the nature
of light. We are used to thinking of momentum as a property to dowith the mass of a particle and its speed (or, more correctly, itsvelocity). If two objects are moving at the same speed, the heavierone carries more momentum and will be harder to stop. A photondoes not have mass, and at first sight you might think this means ithas no momentum either. But, remember, Einstein discovered thatmass and energy are equivalent to one another, and light certainlydoes carry energy—indeed, a beam of light is a beam of pure energy.Classical Cosmology 35Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlSo photons do have momentum, related to their energy, even
though they have no mass and cannot change their speed. A changein the momentum of a photon means that it has changed theamount of energy it carries, not its velocity; and a change in theenergy of a photon means a change in its wavelength. 
When Einstein put all of this together, it implied that the momen-
tum of a photon multiplied by the wavelength of the associatedwave always gives the same number, now known as Planck’s con-stant in honor of Max Planck, another of the quantum pioneers.Planck’s constant (usually denoted by the letter h) soon turned out
to be one of the most fundamental numbers in physics, rankingalongside the speed of light, c. It cropped up, for example, in the
equations developed in the early decades of the twentieth century todescribe how electrons are held in orbit around atoms. But althoughthe strange duality of light niggled, the cat was only really setamong the pigeons in the 1920s when a French scientist, Louis deBroglie, suggested using the wave-particle equation in reverse.Instead of taking a wavelength (for light) and using this to calculatethe momentum of an associated particle (the photon), why not takethe momentum of a particle (such as an electron) and use it to cal-culate the length of an associated wave? 
Fired by this suggestion, experimenters soon carried out tests that
showed that, under the right circumstances, electrons do indeedbehave like waves. In the quantum world (the world of the verysmall, on the scale of atoms and below), particles and waves are  sim-ply twin facets of allentities. Waves can behave like particles; parti-
cles can behave like waves. A term was even coined to describe thesequantum entities—“wavicles.” The dual description of particles aswaves and waves as particles turned out to be the key to unlockingthe secrets of the quantum world, leading to the development of asatisfactory theory to account for the behavior of atoms, particles,and light. But at the core of that theory lay a deep mystery. STEPHEN HAWKING 36Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlBecause all quantum entities have a wave aspect, they cannot be
pinned down precisely to a definite location in space. By their verynature, waves are spread-out things. So we cannot be certain where,precisely, an electron is—and uncertainty, it turns out, is an integralfeature of the quantum world. The German physicist WernerHeisenberg established in the 1920s that all observable quantitiesare subject, on the quantum scale, to random variations in theirsize, with the magnitude of these variations determined by Planck’sconstant. This is Heisenberg’s famous “uncertainty principle.” Itmeans that we can never make a precise determination of all theproperties of an object like an electron: all we can do is assign prob-abilities, determined in a very accurate way from the equations ofquantum mechanics, to the likelihood that, for example, the elec-tron is in a certain place at a certain time. 
Furthermore, the uncertain, probabilistic nature of the quantum
world means that if two identical wavicles are treated in an identi-cal fashion (perhaps by undergoing a collision with another type ofwavicle), they will not necessarily respond in identical fashions.That is, the outcome of experiments is also uncertain, at the quan-tum level and can be predicted only in terms of probabilities.Electrons and atoms are not like tiny snooker balls bouncingaround in accordance with Newton’s laws. 
None of this shows up on the scale of our everyday lives, where
objects such as snooker balls do bounce off each other in a pre-dictable, deterministic fashion, in line with Newton’s laws. Thereason is that Planck’s constant is incredibly small: in standard unitsused by physicists, it is a mere 6 ×10
–34(a decimal point followed
by 33 zeros and a 6) of a joule-second. And a joule is indeed asensible sort of unit in everyday life—a 60-watt lightbulb radiates60 joules of energy every second. For everyday objects like snookerballs, or ourselves, the small size of Planck’s constant means that thewave associated with the object has a comparably small wavelengthClassical Cosmology 37Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmland can be ignored. But even a snooker ball, or yourself, does have
an associated quantum wave, even though it is only for tiny objectslike electrons, with tiny amounts of momentum, that you get a wavebig enough to interfere with the way objects interact. 
It all sounds very obscure, something we can safely leave the
physicists to worry about while we get on with our everyday lives.To a large extent, that is true, although it is worth realizing that thephysics behind how computers or TV sets work depends on anunderstanding of the quantum behavior of electrons. Laser beams,also, can be understood only in terms of quantum physics, andevery compact disc player uses a laser beam to scan the disc and“read” the music. So quantum physics actually does impinge on oureveryday lives, even if we do not need to be a quantum mechanic tomake a TV set or a hi-fi system work. But there is something muchmore important to our everyday lives inherent in quantum physics.By introducing uncertainty and probability into the equations,quantum physics does away once and for all with the predictiveclockwork of Newtonian determinism. If the Universe operates, atthe deepest level, in a genuinely unpredictable and indeterministicway, then we are given back our free will, and we can after all makeour own decisions and our own mistakes. 
At the beginning of the 1960s, the two great pillars of physics stood
in splendid separation. General relativity explained the behavior ofthe cosmos at large and suggested that the Universe must haveexpanded from a super-dense state, colloquially known as the BigBang. Quantum physics explained how atoms and molecules workand gave an insight into the nature of light and other forms of radi-ation. One young physicist, taking his first degree at OxfordUniversity, would have been given a thorough grounding in bothgreat theories. But he would hardly have suspected that over thenext thirty years he would play a key role in bringing the twoSTEPHEN HAWKING 38Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmltheories together, providing insight into how they might be unified
into one grand theory that would explain everything, from the BigBang to the atoms we are made of. Classical Cosmology 39Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.html