5
From Black Holes to the Big Bang
74In the early 1960s, astronomers already knew that any star
which contains more than about three times as much matter asour Sun ought to end its life by collapsing inward to form what
is now known as a black hole. More than twenty years previously,researchers had used Einstein’s equations of general relativity to cal-culate that such an object would bend space-time completely roundupon itself, cutting the central mass off from the rest of theUniverse. Light rays passing near such an object would be deflectedso much that even photons would orbit around the central “star” inclosed loops and could never escape into the Universe outside.Obviously, since it could emit no light, such an object would beblack, which is why the American relativist John Wheeler dubbedthem “black holes” in 1969. 
But although it was well known that the general theory made this
prediction, at the time Hawking was completing his undergraduatestudies and moving on to research no one took the notion of blackholes seriously. The reason is that there are very many known starsthat have more than three times the mass of our Sun. They do not col-Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmllapse because nuclear reactions going on inside the stars make them
hot. The heat creates an outward pressure that holds the star upagainst the pull of gravity. Astronomers knew that when such starsrun out of nuclear “fuel” they explode, blasting away their outerlayers into space. As recently as thirty years ago, astronomersassumed that such an explosion would always blow away so muchmatter that the core left behind would have less than three times themass of our Sun—or, perhaps, that some as yet undiscovered pressurewould come into play as the remnant of star stuff began to shrink. 
This prejudice was reinforced by the fact that astronomers had
indeed discovered many old, dead stars. These stellar cinders all hada bit less than the mass of our Sun, but compressed into a volumeonly about as big as that of the Earth. Such planet-sized stars areknown as white dwarfs. They are held up against the inward pull ofgravity by the pressure of the electrons associated with the atoms ofwhich they are made, acting like a kind of electron gas. A whitedwarf is so dense that each cubic centimeter of the star contains amillion grams of material. Before 1967 these were the densestknown objects in the Universe. 
But although astronomers did not seriously believe that anything
denser than a white dwarf could exist, a few mathematiciansenjoyed playing with Einstein’s equations to work out what wouldhappen to matter if it were squeezed to still greater densities. Theequations said that if three times as much matter as our Sun con-tains were squeezed until it occupied a spherical region with aradius of just under 9 kilometers, space-time in its vicinity would beso distorted that not even light could escape. Because nothing cantravel faster than light, this meant that nothing at all could everescape from such an object, which the mathematicians sometimesreferred to as a “collapsar” (from collapsed star). It would havebecome the ultimate bottomless pit into which anything could fallbut from which nothing could ever emerge. And the density insideFrom Black Holes to the Big Bang 75Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlthe collapsar would be greater than the density of the nucleus of an
atom; this, theorists of the time thought, was clearly impossible. 
In fact, they did consider (but not too seriously) the possibility of
stars as dense as the nucleus of an atom. By the 1930s, physicistsknew that the nucleus of an atom is made of closely packed parti-cles called protons and neutrons. The protons each carry one unitof positive charge; the neutrons, as their name suggests, are electri-cally neutral, but each has about the same mass as a proton. Ineveryday atoms, like the ones this book is made of, each nucleus issurrounded by a cloud of electrons. Each electron carries one unitof negative charge, and there is the same number of electrons asprotons, so the atom as a whole is electrically neutral. 
But an atom is largely empty space. The nucleus is tiny but very
dense, and the cloud of electrons is (by comparison) huge andinsubstantial. In proportion to the size of a whole atom, the nucleusis like a grain of sand in the middle of a concert hall. In white dwarfstars, some of the electrons are knocked off their atoms by the highprevailing pressure, and the nuclei are embedded in a sea of elec-trons that belong to the whole star, not to any particular nucleus.But there is still a lot of space between the nuclei, even though thatspace contains electrons. Each nucleus has positive charge, and likecharges repel, so the nuclei keep their distance from each other. 
But quantum theory said that there is a way to make a star denser
than a white dwarf. If the star were squeezed even more by gravity,the electrons could be forced to combine with protons to makemore neutrons. The result would be a star made entirely of neu-trons, and these could be packed together as closely as the protonsand neutrons in an atomic nucleus. This would be a neutron star. 
Calculations suggested that this ought to happen for any dead
star with a mass more than 20 percent larger than that of our Sun(that is, more than 1.2 solar masses). A neutron star would havethat much mass packed within a radius of about 10 kilometers, noSTEPHEN HAWKING 76Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlbigger than many mountains on Earth. The density of the matter in
a neutron star, in grams per cubic centimeter, would be 1014—that
is, 1 followed by 14 zeros, or one hundred thousand billion. Evenan object this dense would not be a black hole, though, for lightcould still escape from its surface into the Universe at large. 
Making a black hole from a dead star would require, as the
theorists of the early 1960s were well aware, crushing even neutronsout of existence. The quantum equations said, in fact, that there wasno way that even neutrons could hold up the weight of a dead star of3 solar masses or more and that, if any such object were left overfrom the explosive death throes of a massive star, it would collapseinward completely, shrinking to a mathematical point called a singu-larity. Long before the collapsing star could reach this state of zerovolume and infinite density, it would have wrapped space-timearound itself, cutting off the collapsar from the outside Universe. 
Indeed, the equations said that if you squeezed any collection of
matter hard enough it would collapse in this way. The special fea-ture of objects of more than 3 solar masses is that they will collapseanyway, under their own weight. But if it were possible to squeezeour own Sun down into a sphere with a radius of about 3 kilometers,it would become a black hole. So would the Earth, if it weresqueezed down to about a centimeter. In each case, once the objecthad been squeezed down to the critical size, gravity would takeover, closing space-time around the object while it continued toshrink away into the infinite density singularity inside the blackhole. But notice that it is much easier to make a black hole if youhave a lot of mass. The critical size is not simply proportional to theamount of mass you have; the density at which a black hole formsis larger if you have less mass to squeeze. 
For any mass there is a critical radius, called the Schwarzschild
radius, at which this will occur. As these examples indicate, theSchwarzschild radius is smaller for less massive objects—you haveFrom Black Holes to the Big Bang 77Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlto squeeze the Earth harder than the Sun, and the Sun harder than
a more massive star, in order to make a black hole. Once it hadformed, there would be a surface around the hole (a bit like the sur-face of the sea) marking the boundary between the Universe at largeand the region of highly distorted space-time from which nothingcould escape. It would be a one-way horizon (unlike the surface ofthe sea!) across which both radiation and material particles couldhappily travel inward, tugged by gravity to join the accumulatingmass of the singularity, but across which nothing at all, not evenlight, could travel outward. 
Some mathematicians worried, thirty years ago, about the predic-
tion that black holes must contain singularities. The notion of a pointof infinite density made them uneasy. But most astronomers weremore pragmatic. First of all, they doubted whether black holes couldreally exist at all. Probably, they thought, some law of physics wouldprevent any dead star from having enough leftover mass to collapsein this way. And even if black holes did exist, by their very nature theywould keep the singularities at their hearts locked away from sight orinvestigation. Did it really matter, after all, if theory said that pointsof infinite density could exist, if the same theory said that suchsingularities were safely locked away behind uncrossable horizons? 
One thing, however, should have worried those astronomers,
even in the early 1960s. Just as you need to squeeze a small masshard to make a black hole, a larger mass needs less of a squeeze todo the same trick. Indeed, a mass of about 4.5 billion solar masseswould form a black hole if it were all contained within a sphere onlytwice the diameter of our Solar System. That mass sounds ludicrousat first. But remember that there are a hundred billion stars in ourMilky Way Galaxy. If just 5 percent of the total mass were involved,such a supermassive black hole could indeed form. And the densityof such an object would be nothing like the density of the nucleusof an atom or a neutron star. It would be just 1 gram per cubicSTEPHEN HAWKING 78Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlcentimeter—the same density as water. You could actually make a
black hole out of water, if you had enough of it! 
One way to understand how this can happen is by an analogy
with running tracks. The important thing about a black hole is thatit bends space-time completely around itself, so that light rays at thehorizon would circle endlessly around the central singularity. Butthe photon “orbits” can be either very tight or follow a gentle curve.Indoor running tracks are usually tightly curved, to make them fitinto the space available. Outdoor running tracks are more gentlycurved and take up more space. But in both cases, if you run roundthe track you get back to where you started from—you follow aclosed loop. Similarly, a black hole can be very small, with space-time tightly folded around itself, or very large, with light rays fol-lowing gradual curves around the horizon (or, indeed, they can beany size in between). 
Very slowly, during the 1960s, the implications of this began to
dawn on cosmologists. The whole Universe, they realized, mightbehave in some ways like the biggest black hole of them all, witheverything in the Universe held together by gravity, and all of space-time forming a self-contained, closed entity that folded round onitself with the ultimate in gradual curvature. But there is one big dif-ference—black holes pull matter inward, toward the singularity; theUniverse expands, outward from the Big Bang. The Universe is likea black hole inside out. 
Einstein’s equations—the general theory of relativity—said that
the Universe could not be static, but must be either expanding orcontracting. Observations showed that the Universe is, indeed,expanding. So what did Einstein’s equations say about conditionslong ago, when galaxies were packed tightly together, and before?Taken at face value, the equations said that the Universe must haveemerged from a point of infinite density, a singularity, about 15 bil-lion years ago. “Obviously” (to astronomers of the 1940s andFrom Black Holes to the Big Bang 79Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.html1950s, that is) that was ridiculous. The fact that the equations pre-
dicted a singularity must mean that they were flawed in some way;no doubt in due course somebody would come up with a bettertheory, one that didn’t make such extreme predictions. But mean-while it seemed fairly reasonable to take the equations at face valueas far as they applied to conditions that bore some resemblance tothose we observe today. 
The densest form of matter familiar to us today is nuclear matter:
protons and neutrons packed together in the hearts of atoms. So afew brave souls were prepared to contemplate the possibility that thegeneral theory might provide a good guide to how the Universe hadevolved from a state in which the overall density was as great as thatof the nucleus of an atom, a “primeval atom,” if you like, contain-ing all the mass of the Universe in a kind of neutron superstar. 
What came “before” that? How did this primeval super-
density—sometimes referred to as the “cosmic egg”—come intobeing? Nobody knew; they could only make guesses. Perhaps thecosmic egg had existed for all eternity, until something triggered itinto expansion. Or perhaps there had been a previous phase of theUniverse in which space-time was collapsing, in line with Einstein’sequations. Such a contracting universe might compress itself tonuclear densities and then “bounce” outward again, into a phase ofexpansion, without encountering the troublesome singularity. 
The notion of the primeval atom, or cosmic egg, emerged in the
early 1930s and was refined over the next couple of decades. Evenat the beginning of the 1960s, however, this was all still just a math-ematical game played by a few experts, as much as anything fortheir own amusement. The notion of a super-dense cosmic egg, onlyabout thirty times bigger than our Sun but containing everything,which had burst asunder to create the expanding Universe, fittedEinstein’s equations and the observations. But nobody seems tohave felt, deep down in their hearts, that their equations describedSTEPHEN HAWKING 80Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlthe Universe. Nobody would have been too worried if it had turned
out that the whole idea of the cosmic egg was wrong. 
You can get a feel for the way people regarded the idea in the
1950s from their own shorthand terms for describing their work.The equations of the general theory of relativity actually allow formore than one possible description of the overall behavior of space-time. As we have mentioned, either expansion or contraction (butnot stasis) is allowed by the equations. Obviously, the Universe welive in cannot be expanding and contracting at the same time; thetwo solutions to the equations cannot both apply to the Universetoday. So the solutions are called models. A cosmological model isa set of equations that describes how a universe (with a small “u”)might behave. The equations have to obey the known laws ofphysics, but they do not necessarily purport to describe the actualbehavior of the real Universe (with a capital “U”). Both the expand-ing and the contracting solutions to Einstein’s equations describemodel universes, intriguing mathematical toys; the expanding solu-tion might describe the real Universe. At the beginning of the 1960s,however, most cosmologists would have preferred to call even theexpanding solution simply a model universe. 
But during the 1960s the whole notion of the Big Bang, as the
theory was known, firmed up. Cosmologists began to believe, asmore evidence came in confirming the accuracy of the predictionsimplicit in the general theory of relativity, that their equations reallydid describe what was going on out there in the real Universe. Thisencouraged more theoretical calculations, leading to new predic-tions, and more observations, in a self-stimulating upward spiralthat led to a dramatic revolution in our understanding of the birthof the Universe. By 1976 the Big Bang theory was so well estab-lished that American physicist Steven Weinberg was able to write abest-selling popular book, The First Three Minutes, describing the
early stages of the Big Bang, how the Universe had emerged fromFrom Black Holes to the Big Bang 81Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlthe super-dense state of the cosmic egg. Although written in the
1970s, the book encapsulated what was essentially the 1960sunderstanding of the Big Bang; we will not be getting too far aheadof our story if we give a brief résumé of that understanding now. 
One of the strangest things to grasp about all these descriptions of
the Universe—the relativistic cosmological models—is that the BigBang does not consist of a huge primeval atom sitting in emptyspace and then exploding outward. Many people still have thisimage, in which the galaxies are like fragments of an explodingbomb, hurtling outward through space. But it is wrong. 
What Einstein’s equations tell us is that it is space itself that
expands, taking galaxies along for the ride. Galaxies were closertogether long ago, when the Universe was younger, because the dis-tances between them were more compressed than they are today.You can see this by imagining two spots of paint on a strip of elas-tic or on a rubber band. When you pull on the ends of the strip, itstretches, and the two paint spots move apart, but they do not movethrough the material the strip is made of. 
So in the very early Universe, at the time of the explosion of the
primeval atom, there was no “outside” for the fragments of theexplosion to move into. Space was tightly wrapped around itself, sothat the cosmic egg was a completely self-contained ball of matter,energy, space, and time. It was, indeed, a super-dense black hole. Itstill is a black hole—the only difference is that, by expanding, it hasbecome a very low density black hole, in which light now followsvery gently curving orbits at the horizon. 
We live inside a black hole, but one so huge that the bending of
space-time within it is too small to be measured by any astronomi-cal instruments on Earth. The “explosion” of the Big Bang stretchedspace, literally creating more room in which the material compo-nents of the cosmic egg could move. Starting out very hot and dense,STEPHEN HAWKING 82Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlthe fireball thinned and cooled as the space available expanded. The
process is exactly the same as the way the fluid in the pipes of yourrefrigerator keeps the fridge cool. In the fridge, fluid expands into alarge chamber and cools; at the back of the fridge, it is squeezed intoa smaller space and gets hot, but the heat escapes from the piping onthe outside before the fluid goes back into the fridge to repeat thecycle. Like that fluid being squeezed, or like air being compressed ina bicycle pump when we use it to inflate a tire, the Universe musthave been much hotter when it was more compressed. 
How much hotter? If you run your cosmological model all the
way back to the singularity predicted by Einstein’s equations, youwould be dealing with infinite temperatures, as well as infinite den-sity. But nobody in the 1960s went to that extreme. The infinitieswere still taken as indicating a breakdown in the general theory ofrelativity, but even so the moment at which the infinities occurredin the models could be used as a marker for the beginning of time(at least until someone came up with a better theory). 
Although the physics of the 1960s could not say what went on
during the split second following that beginning of time, it coulddescribe in great detail everything that had happened to the Universein the 15 billion years beginning just one-tenth of a second later. Toan increasing number of cosmologists, the general theory did notreally seem such a bad description of the Universe, if it could explaineverything that has happened in the past 15 billion years except forthe very first one-tenth of a second. This is what it told them. 
One-tenth of a second after the “beginning” (or after the
“bounce,” as many cosmologists of the 1960s would have argued),the density of the Universe was 30 million times greater than thedensity of water. The temperature was 30 billion degrees,* and theFrom Black Holes to the Big Bang 83
*Physicists measure temperature in degrees kelvin, denoted by the letter K.
This scale of measurement starts from the absolute zero of temperature, at –273°C,Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlUniverse consisted of a mixture of very high energy radiation (pho-
tons) and material particles, including neutrons, protons, and elec-trons but also more exotic, unstable particles created ephemerallyout of pure radiation. This is the ultimate example of the equiva-lence between mass and energy, expressed in Einstein’s famousequation E = mc
2. On the Earth, in an atomic bomb, and inside the
Sun, where nuclear reactions take place, tiny amounts of matter ( m)
are converted into large amounts of energy ( E), because cis the
speed of light, which is 300,000 kilometers a second, and c2is a
very large number indeed. But if you had enough energy to playwith, you could actually make matter out of energy; and there wasample energy available to do the trick in the Big Bang—even if manyof the particles created in this way were unstable, destined to dis-appear again in a puff of radiation in far less than the blink of an eye. 
One second later, 1.1 seconds after the beginning, the Universe
had cooled dramatically—all the way down to ten billion K. At thattime, the density was just 380,000 times the density of water, andfrom then on the reactions between particles were very similar to thenuclear reactions that go on inside the Sun and other stars today. 
At a temperature of three billion K, just under 14 seconds from
the beginning, the first nuclei of deuterium could form, albeit tem-porarily. Hydrogen is the simplest atom, with just a single proton inits nucleus and one electron orbiting outside the nucleus. (In a sense,lone protons can be regarded as nuclei of hydrogen atoms.) Thenext most complicated atom is deuterium, which has a nucleuscomposed of one proton and one neutron, still with a single electronorbiting around it. Atoms that have the same number of electronsas each other but different numbers of neutrons still have identicalSTEPHEN HAWKING 84
where all thermal motion of atoms stops. But a little matter of 273 degrees is
neither here nor there when we are measuring temperatures in billions of degrees,so for all practical purposes the temperatures given for the fireball are the sameas degrees Celsius.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlFrom Black Holes to the Big Bang 85
chemical properties and are known as isotopes; deuterium is an iso-
tope of hydrogen and is often known as “heavy hydrogen.” 
Temperature is a measure of how fast, on average, the particles
that make up matter are moving (which is why there can be no tem-perature colder than –273°C, at which atomic motion stops), and attemperatures above three billion K, protons and neutrons move toofast to do anything except bounce off each other. Some particlesmove faster than the average for a particular temperature and someslower, although most have speeds close to the average. So as thetemperature fell below that value, some protons and neutrons weremoving slowly enough to stick together when they collided. Thething that makes them stick is an attraction known as the strongforce. As its name suggests, this is a powerful force of attractionthat operates between all protons and neutrons. But it has a veryshort range, and fast-moving particles brush past or bounce off eachother too quickly for the strong force to take hold of them duringthe brief time they are in range. At first, most of the deuteriumnuclei produced in this way were knocked apart by collisions withfaster-moving particles, but as the fireball cooled still further thedeuterium nuclei had a better and better chance of survival. 
Just 3 minutes and 2 seconds after the beginning, the temperature
had cooled to below one billion K—the entire Universe was thenonly seventy times as hot as the heart of the Sun is today. At thispoint, almost all the deuterium nuclei were able to combine in pairsto form nuclei of helium. These helium nuclei each contain two pro-tons and two neutrons, making four “nucleons” in all, so they areknown as helium-4 nuclei (and helium atoms, of course, each havetwo electrons orbiting around the nucleus). 
It happens that helium-4 nuclei are particularly stable. But there
are no stable nuclei containing five nucleons (such as you mightexpect to get if you added a proton or a neutron to a nucleus ofhelium-4) or eight nucleons (such as you might expect to get if youCopyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlstuck two helium-4 nuclei together). So the process of “nucleosyn-
thesis” in the Big Bang stopped with the production of helium-4.Less than 4 minutes after the beginning, matter had settled downinto a mixture of about 75 percent hydrogen nuclei and 25 percenthelium, intermingling with fast-moving electrons and bathed in asea of hot radiation. 
Half an hour later, 34 minutes after the beginning, the tempera-
ture was down to 300 million K, and the density of the Universewas only 10 percent of the density of water. But it took a further700,000 years for the Universe to cool enough to allow electrons tobecome attached to the nuclei and form stable atoms. Before then,as soon as a positively charged nucleus tried to latch on to a nega-tively charged electron, the electron would have been knocked awayby an energetic photon. After 700,000 years, however, the temper-ature of the Universe had fallen to about 4,000 K (roughly the tem-perature at the surface of the Sun today), and nuclei and electronswere at last able to hold together to form stable atoms. 
For most of the past 15 billion years, protons, neutrons, and elec-
trons have been bound up in stars and galaxies formed out of thisprimeval stuff as gravity pulled clouds of gas together in space. Theradiation left over from the Big Bang had nothing more to do withthe matter, once it was no longer hot enough to separate electronsfrom their atomic nuclei and simply cooled steadily as the Universeexpanded. But as we shall see, that background radiation, the echoof creation, had a key role to play in persuading cosmologists thatone of their “model universes” might actually be telling them some-thing deeply significant about the real Universe. And all this washappening while the person who was to become a key player in tak-ing cosmology that step further in the 1970s, back to the beginningitself, was experiencing upheavals of his own, both personal andprofessional. STEPHEN HAWKING 86Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.html