9
When Black Holes Explode
135In 1970, as we have mentioned in Chapter 7, Hawking had
shifted the focus of his scientific attention from what goes on atthe heart of a black hole, at the singularity, to events that occur
on the horizon surrounding the black hole, the nearest thing it hasto a “surface.” A key difference between these studies and the inves-tigation of singularities is that, whatever your theory predicts aboutthings going on at a singularity, you can never test the theory bylooking at a singularity because they are all hidden inside blackholes (except, of course, the Big Bang singularity at the beginning oftime, which Hawking was to investigate more fully later in hiscareer). But when you apply your theory to predict what goes on atthe surface of a black hole, at the horizon, then whatever strangeevents it describes ought to make their mark on the outside Universeand might even produce effects that could be detected by instru-ments here on Earth or on satellites in orbit around the Earth. 
It was, in fact, satellite borne instruments that identified, at about
this time, the first really plausible black hole candidate in our MilkyWay Galaxy. Just as great new discoveries in astronomy had comeCopyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlabout in the 1960s through the investigation of the radio part of the
spectrum, at wavelengths longer than those of light, so great newadvances came in the 1970s through the investigation of the X-raypart of the spectrum, at wavelengths much shorter than those oflight. Unlike radio waves, however, X-rays from space are blockedby the Earth’s atmosphere and do not reach the ground (which isjust as well or we would all be fried). So X-ray astronomy came ofage as a branch of science only when suitable detectors were placedin orbit around the Earth. These unmanned satellites transformedastronomers’ view of the Universe, showing it to be a much moreviolent and energetic place than they had thought. And at leastsome of that violence, they are now convinced, is associated withblack holes. 
It happens like this. An isolated black hole is, of course, unde-
tectable, except by its gravitational pull—the way it distorts spacein its vicinity. It is, after all, black. But a black hole in a binarysystem, orbiting around a more ordinary star, could make itspresence highly visible. Matter torn off the companion star by thegravitational influence of the black hole would funnel down intothe hole and be swallowed up. On the way in, it would form aswirling accretion disc, like water going down the plughole of abath, with gas piling up and getting hot as gravitational energy isconverted into energy of motion. It would, calculations showed, gethot enough to emit X-rays. 
But how likely is it that a black hole will just happen to be
orbiting a companion star? In fact, binary star systems are verycommon—most stars probably have at least one close stellarcompanion, and in this our Sun is an exception to the rule.Binaries are also easy to identify because the tug of the two starson each other makes them wiggle about, producing regularchanges that can be observed using telescopes on Earth. Theorbital variations also give astronomers a clue to the masses ofSTEPHEN HAWKING 136Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlthe two stars, and that turned out to be crucial in identifying
black hole candidates. 
The snag, for seekers of black holes, is that it is not enough just
to identify an X-ray source in a binary system. Both white dwarfsand neutron stars are also compact enough, with a strong enoughgravitational pull, to strip matter from a companion and pull it onto themselves, creating hot spots that radiate at X-ray wavelengths. 
Several of the first binary X-ray sources found could indeed be
identified as white dwarfs because the orbital variations showedthat their masses must be comfortably less than 1.5 solar masses.But four reasonable black hole prospects did emerge from the firstX-ray surveys of the sky, carried out in the early 1970s. A firstexamination showed that all were X-ray sources in binary sys-tems—small, energetic, compact objects orbiting normal stars.More detailed investigations gradually eliminated three of the can-didates. One had a mass 2.5 times that of the Sun and might verywell be a neutron star. Another had a mass three times that of theSun, which seemed a little high for a neutron star but left room fordoubt about its black hole status. The third had a mass only twicethat of the Sun. But the fourth had a mass estimated at between 8and 10 solar masses. 
The source is called Cygnus X-1. Only the most tortuous expla-
nations could be invoked to avoid the inference that it harbored ablack hole. For example, some astronomers suggested that theunseen companion in the binary system might actually consist oftwostars—a faint, unseen, ordinary star (too dim to be visible) with
a mass six times that of the Sun, itself orbited by a neutron star of2 solar masses. But the contrived explanations flew in the face of theattractive argument that the simplest explanation was probably thebest. Ultimate proof that Cygnus X-1 harbors a black hole wouldonly come if we were able to go and look at it close up; but theweight of evidence that has accumulated over two decades has con-When Black Holes Explode 137Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlvinced most astronomers, and the consensus today is that there is a
95 percent chance that Cygnus X-1 is the first black hole to be iden-tified. Several other promising candidates are also now known,which strengthens the case—we would hardly expect there to bejust one detectable black hole in our Galaxy. 
The identification of Cygnus X-1 itself as a black hole candidate
was the occasion of a famous bet, which sheds intriguing light onHawking’s character. Hawking, whose career has been founded onthe study of black holes, made a bet with Kip Thorne of Caltech,that Cygnus X-1 does not contain a black hole. The form of the betwas that, if it were ever proved that the source is a black hole,Hawking would give Thorne a year’s subscription to Penthouse ; but
if it were ever proved that Cygnus X-1 is not a black hole, Thornewould give Hawking a four-year subscription to the satirical maga-zine Private Eye. In June 1990 Hawking decided that the evidence
was now overwhelming, and paid up—although, being Hawking,he did so in a typically mischievous fashion, enlisting the aid of acolleague to break into Thorne’s office at Caltech. They extractedthe document recording the bet and officially “signed” his admis-sion of defeat with a thumbprint before returning the paper to thefiles for Thorne to discover later. Over the following months,Thorne duly received the promised issues of Penthouse . 
The disparity between the subscriptions wagered simply reflected
the different cover prices of the two magazines. But why didHawking bet against black holes? He called it an insurance policy.
If black holes didn’t exist, he had been wasting his time for most ofhis career, but at least he would have had the consolation of win-ning the bet. On the other hand, the only way he could have lost thebet would be if he were right about black holes, so he was happy tooffer Thorne some consolation. 
In the eyes of most astronomers, Hawking erred on the side of
extreme caution in waiting so long to pay up; he had lost his bet,STEPHEN HAWKING 138Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlthey reckoned, several years ago, for there is no reasonable doubt
that Cygnus X-1 is indeed a black hole. And since black holes doexist, that makes Hawking’s investigation of their properties duringthe early 1970s one of the most important pieces of scientificresearch ever carried out. This work succeeded not only in partiallyuniting the general theory of relativity and the quantum theory, butalso in bringing into the fold the great development of nineteenth-century science, thermodynamics. 
Just as Hawking and Penrose had shown that the physics of the Big
Bang actually gets simpler , not harder, the closer you delve back
toward the beginning, so in the late 1960s other research hadshown that collapsing black holes are much simpler than the objectsthat collapse to form them. You could, in principle, make a blackhole out of anything: by squeezing the Earth to the size of a pea; oradding scrap iron to a heap until you had enough for gravity to takeover; or by watching a star much heavier than our Sun run throughits life cycle, explode, and die. But however you make a black hole,what you end up with is a singularity surrounded by a perfectlyspherical horizon, with a size (surface area) that depends only onthe mass of the hole, not on what it is made of. 
This basic truth about black holes was established in 1967, by the
Canadian-born researcher Werner Israel. When he first developedthe equations, Israel himself thought that because black holes hadto be spherical, what the equations were telling him was that onlya perfectly spherical object could collapse to form a black hole. ButRoger Penrose and John Wheeler found that an object collapsing toform a black hole would radiate away energy in the form of gravi-tational waves—ripples in the fabric of space-time itself. The moreirregular the shape of the object, the more rapidly it would radiateenergy, and the effect of this radiation would be to smooth out theirregularities. Penrose and Wheeler showed that any collapsingWhen Black Holes Explode 139Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlobject would end up perfectly spherical by the time it formed a
black hole. The only thing that could affect the appearance of thehorizon surrounding the hole, apart from the amount of matterinside it, is rotation. A nonrotating hole is perfectly spherical, whilea rotating hole bulges at the equator. 
So it was established by the early 1970s that a black hole could
rotate, but it could not pulsate (Hawking played a small part in thiswork, too). The size and shape of a black hole depend only on itsmass and the speed at which it rotates; the horizon, all that we cansee from the outside Universe, carries no identifying features thatcan tell us what the hole was made of. Physicists call this lack ofidentifying features the “no hair” theorem. A black hole has no“hair” in the sense that it has no identifying features, and becauseall we can ever know about it is its mass and its rate of rotation, thismakes the mathematical study of black holes much simpler than sci-entists had feared it would be. 
As nothing can get out of a black hole, its mass can never
decrease. So the discovery that the surface area of the horizon cannever decrease may not seem that dramatic to ordinary mortals. ButStephen Hawking tells how the moment this hit him was so dra-matic that it has stuck in his memory for more than twenty years. Ithappened, as we mentioned in the last chapter, one evening inNovember 1970, not long after the birth of his daughter Lucy, as hewas getting ready for bed. The idea was so exciting that he spentmost of the night thinking about the implications. 
He was so excited largely because he and Penrose had only just,
at that time, come up with a practical mathematical definition of ablack hole horizon in terms of the tracks of light rays throughspace-time. With this definition, he realized, the surface area of theblack hole would always increase if matter or radiation fell into thehole, and even if two black holes collided with one another andmerged, the area of the new black hole would always be greaterSTEPHEN HAWKING 140Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlthan (or, just possibly, the same as) the areas of the two original
black holes put together. 
This discovery may have made Hawking so excited that he could
not sleep, and it may have impressed Roger Penrose when Hawkingtelephoned him the next day to discuss the idea, but initially it madevery little impression on other astronomers and physicists, whoregarded such notions as rather esoteric. After all, the X-ray obser-vations that led to the identification of Cygnus X-1 with a visiblestar were made the next year, in 1971, and it was not until the endof 1972 that the consensus that the X-rays come from a black holeorbiting that star was reached. What really began to make otherphysicists sit up and take notice of Hawking’s ideas about theincreasing area of a black hole was the seemingly outrageous sug-gestion that this might be connected with the branch of physicsknown as thermodynamics. 
Thermodynamics is simply the study of heat and motion, as the
name implies. It was developed as a branch of science during thenineteenth century and was of great immediate practical value inthe age of steam engines. It rests upon some simple, basic rules, suchas the fact that heat cannot flow from a cold object to a hot one(immortalized by the musical duo Flanders and Swann in the mem-orable couplet “Heat won’t flow from a colder to a hotter/You cantry it if you like but you’d far better notter”). But thermodynamicsgoes far beyond the day-to-day practicalities of making steamengines work more effectively and leads on to fundamental truthsabout the nature of time and the fate of the Universe. One especiallyimportant concept, closely linked to the inability of heat to flow“from a colder to a hotter,” is known as entropy. 
In everyday language, entropy is the law that tells us that things
wear out. Hot things cool off as time passes, and heat flows out ofthem. Buildings fall down and crumble away; living things grow oldand die. These changes are linked to the passage of time, marking aWhen Black Holes Explode 141Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmldistinction between the past and the future. They correspond to an
increase in the amount of disorder in the Universe. This disorder is
measured in terms of entropy. The flow of time from the past to thefuture means that the entropy of the Universe must always increase.The same applies to any closed system—the amount of entropy canonly increase (or, at best, stay the same); it can never decrease. Now,obviously, the presence of living things on Earth runs counter to thisrule. We create order out of disorder by building houses and so on.But the point is that the Earth is not a closed system. It “feeds” offthe energy flowing from the Sun, dumping entropy as a result. Ifyou take the whole Solar System and treat it as a closed system, theentropy does increase, just as the laws of thermodynamics require. 
So Hawking’s dramatic realization, coming with such force that
evening in November 1970, was to lead to the idea that the lawwhich says that the area of a black hole can only stay the same orincrease is equivalent to the law which says that the entropy of aclosed system can only stay the same or increase. But even Hawkingdidn’t make that connection at first. 
This is the kind of step that is quite often made in science by a
junior researcher, not yet hidebound by tradition. The thought oftrying to make a connection between the gravitational physics ofblack holes and the thermodynamic physics of Victorian steamengines would have daunted even the genius of a Hawking. But toa research student, just setting out on a scientific career and facedwith two pieces of information that seem to say the same kind ofthing in different ways, the similarity seemed worth remarking on. 
Of course, research students very often remark on odd similari-
ties and coincidences in science, and most of the time it turns outthat there is nothing significant in the “discovery” at all. But whena student at Princeton University, Jacob Bekenstein, suggested thatthe size of the horizon around the singularity might literally be ameasure of the entropy of a black hole, he started an avalanche ofSTEPHEN HAWKING 142Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlinvestigation which led Hawking to the discovery that black holes
are not necessarily black after all—they explode. 
Just as research students are expected to come up with wild ideas
(most of which prove fruitless), so it is a common theme in sciencethat some of the most important developments are a result of some-body trying to prove that somebody else’s theory is wrong. This hap-pened to good effect in the 1950s and early 1960s, when Fred Hoylebacked a rival model to the Big Bang, the steady state hypothesis,and became its most vocal proponent. Astronomers determined toprove Hoyle wrong worked much harder at establishing the accu-racy of the Big Bang model than they might have done had therebeen no rival on the scene. But sometimes the effort can rebound. 
Hawking was annoyed by Bekenstein’s suggestion. Even a
research student ought to have realized that there is a direct con-nection between entropy and temperature, so that if the area of ablack hole were indeed a measure of entropy it would also be ameasure of temperature. And if a black hole had a temperature,then heat would flow out of it, into the cold (–270°C) of theUniverse. It would radiate energy, contradicting the most basic factknown about black holes, that nothing at all—not even electro-magnetic radiation—can escape from them. Together with BrandonCarter and Jim Bardeen, Hawking wrote a paper, published inCommunications in Mathematical Physics, pointing out this seem-
ingly fatal flaw in Bekenstein’s suggestion. It gave the formula forworking out the temperature of a black hole according to thisridiculous notion and was published in 1973. But far from agreeingwith Bekenstein, the team commented, “In fact the effective tem-perature of a black hole is absolute zero. . . . No radiation could beemitted from the hole.”
1
Within a year, however, Hawking had changed his mind. The rea-
sons why he had second thoughts were related to another line ofresearch on black holes he had been pursuing: the possibility, firstWhen Black Holes Explode 143Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlaired in 1971, that very small “miniholes,” smaller even than the
nucleus of an atom, might have been produced in the Big Bang andcould still be at large in the Universe today. 
The critical mass needed to make a black hole simply by an object
collapsing under its own weight is, as we have mentioned, aboutthree times the mass of the Sun, and the Earth itself would becomea black hole if it were squeezed down to about a centimeter. Butabsolutely anything will make a black hole if it is squeezed hardenough—a bag of sugar, a coin, the book you are reading, anything .
The difficulty is that, the lighter the object you want to make into ablack hole, the harder you would have to squeeze it. 
Hawking reasoned that as we look back in time toward the
beginning, we look back to higher and higher densities and pres-sures. So if we look back far enough, we come to a time when thepressure was great enough to squeeze any amount of matter youfancy, even a few grams, into a black hole. 
The one snag with this argument is that, if the Universe were per-
fectly smooth and uniform back then, no miniholes could form; theonly black hole would be the entire Universe itself. But providedthere were some irregularities, some variations in density from placeto place in the early Universe, then at the appropriate stage of theBig Bang a few grams of matter, any region that just happened to bea little denser than the average, could indeed get pinched off fromthe rest of space-time, forming tiny black holes that would last for-ever (or so Hawking thought in 1971) and still be around today. 
We know that the Universe cannot have been perfectly smooth
and uniform in the Big Bang because, if it had, there would be noway that irregularities such as galaxies could have formed as theUniverse expanded. There must have been “seeds” in the form oftiny irregularities on which galaxies could grow by gravitationalattraction. So Hawking’s notion of primordial black miniholesseemed plausible, even if there was no obvious way to test the idea. STEPHEN HAWKING 144Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlIn fact, although lightweight by the standards of conventional
black holes, even a minihole may have rather a lot of mass byeveryday standards. A black hole weighing about a billion tons, forexample (the mass of a mountain here on Earth), would have aradius roughly the same as that of a proton. Less massive miniholeswould be correspondingly smaller. And if you are dealing withobjects as small as that, physicists knew, you have to use the quan-tum description of reality in order to understand what is going on. 
Now the plot began to thicken. In 1969 Roger Penrose had
shown that it is possible for a rotating black hole to lose energy and
slow down as it does so. The way this happens is rather like the wayin which space scientists sometimes use the gravitational pull of theplanets to speed up spacecraft moving around the Solar System. Forexample, at the time of writing a probe named Galileo has justundergone a “slingshot” maneuver around the Earth and will even-tually, if all goes well, end up in orbit around Jupiter. But in orderto get there it will have followed a circuitous route. 
After its launch, Galileo was sent not outward through the Solar
System toward Jupiter but inward to fly by Venus. By diving aroundVenus on a carefully calculated orbit, the spacecraft gained energyand speed and was deflected toward the Earth. Venus lost a corre-sponding amount of energy but, being vastly more massive than thespace probe, slowed down in its orbit by only a minuscule amount.At the end of 1990, the speeding Galileo carried out another sling-shot maneuver, this time involving the Earth, and entered an orbitthat will bring it back for a second slingshot past the Earth sometwo years later. Only then will it be moving fast enough to reachJupiter in a reasonable time—and it is a sign of how much theprobe’s speed will have been increased that it will reach Jupitersooner, even after years of delicate maneuvering to take advantageof the three slingshots, than if it had gone straight out through theSolar System when it was launched. When Black Holes Explode 145Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlPenrose showed that similar gravitational effects could boost the
energy of electromagnetic radiation near a rotating black hole. Theradiation gains energy; the rotation of the hole slows down. In 1973two Soviet researchers, Yakov Zel’dovich and Alex Starobinsky,extended this idea to show that a rotating black hole should alsothrow off particles. Their argument had to do with the uncertaintyprinciple of quantum physics, and we shall explain it shortly. Theypersuaded Hawking that the effect would be real, and he set abouttrying to find a precise mathematical treatment to describe the phe-nomenon. He was surprised, and at first annoyed, to discover thatthe equations said that the same process should be at work even fora nonrotating black hole. 
“I was afraid,” Hawking wrote in A Brief History of Time, “that
if Bekenstein found out about it, he would use it as a further argu-ment to support his ideas about the entropy of black holes, which Istill did not like.”
2In 1977 he wrote in the January issue of
Scientific American that he “put quite a lot of effort into trying to
get rid of this embarrassing effect”3but to no avail. In the end,
Hawking had to accept the mathematical evidence rather than hisprejudices. He had found that all black holes emit energetic parti-cles and that therefore every black hole has a temperature. Thetemperature exactly matches the thermodynamic predictions relatedto the surface area of the black hole. We shall now describe how itworks (leaving out the detailed mathematics). 
Quantum uncertainty doesn’t just mean that human instruments are
incapable of measuring any quantity precisely. It means that theUniverse itself does not “know” any quantity with absolute preci-sion. This applies to energy as much as to anything else. Althoughwe are used to thinking of empty space as containing nothing at alland therefore having zero energy, the quantum rules say that thereSTEPHEN HAWKING 146Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlis some uncertainty about this. Perhaps each tiny bit of the vacuum
actually contains rather a lot of energy. 
If the vacuum contained enough energy, it could convert this into
particles, in line with E = mc2. But things are not as simple as this.
If the hypothetical energy of uncertainty in the vacuum were con-verted into particles and the particles became permanent features ofthe Universe, the rules of uncertainty would be violated—bothhuman observers and the Universe would now be certain that therewas something, in the form of a particle or two, where previouslythere had been nothing. Uncertainty works two ways: it is just asforbidden to be certain that the energy is nonzero, in these circum-stances, as it is to be certain that the energy is zero. 
In fact, the precise version of the uncertainty rule says that energy
can only be “borrowed” from the vacuum for a very short time, atime determined by Planck’s constant. This is related to the uncer-tainty inherent in the measurement of time itself. The only way inwhich this energy can then be converted into particles is if particlesare always created in pairs, which then interact with one anotherand annihilate themselves before the Universe has time to “notice”that the energy has been borrowed. This means that the particlescreated out of the vacuum are matched in a special way. 
Every variety of particle, such as an electron, has a counterpart
known as an antiparticle (in the electron’s case a positron). Anti-particles have been manufactured in experiments using particleaccelerators, and they are also found in cosmic rays (energetic par-ticles reaching the Earth from space), as well as being predicted byquantum theory, so there is no doubt that they exist. In many waysan antiparticle is a mirror image of its particle equivalent: thepositron, for example, carries positive charge, whereas the electroncarries negative charge. And whenever a particle meets its anti-particle counterpart, the two annihilate each other. When Black Holes Explode 147Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlSo according to quantum theory, the vacuum is a seething sea of
“virtual” particles. Pairs such as electron-positron are constantlybeing created, interacting with one another, and disappearing inaccordance with the quantum rules. Overall, no energy is released,but virtual pairs flicker in and out of existence all the time, belowthe threshold of reality. 
What Hawking showed was that, even for a nonrotating black
hole, this process can drain off energy from a hole and release it intothe Universe at large. What happens is that a pair of virtual particlesis created just outside the horizon of the hole. In the tiny fraction ofa second allowed by quantum uncertainty, one of the particles iscaptured by the hole. So the other particle has nothing to annihilatewith, and escapes, carrying energy with it. 
Where has the energy come from? In effect, it is the gravitational
energy of the hole. The energy of the hole creates two particles, butit captures only one of them, so only half the energy debt is repaidand the net effect is that the hole loses mass. Other things beingequal—if the hole does not gain mass from somewhere else—it willsteadily shrink away as a result, evaporating like a puddle in thesunshine. This process is slow but sure, taking billions of years toshrivel even a proton-sized minihole to the point where it explodes.Hawking had contradicted his own earlier conclusion that the sur-face area of a black hole cannot decrease. Having established a linkbetween black holes and thermodynamics by showing that, accord-ing to general relativity alone, black holes cannot shrink, he hadnow found that if you add quantum theory to the brew the link withthermodynamics is strengthened, but now black holes must shrink. 
For ordinary black holes, made out of dead stars, this effect
would be of no real importance. A black hole with three or fourtimes the mass of our Sun and a horizon roughly as big as the sur-face of a neutron star will be constantly swallowing traces of gasand dust from its surroundings, even in the depths of space, and itSTEPHEN HAWKING 148Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlis simple to show that the mass lost by Hawking Radiation is much
less than the mass gained by this accretion. If nobody had thoughtof the notion of miniholes, nobody would have been very interestedin Hawking Radiation. But since Hawking had already come upwith the notion of miniholes, the idea of quantum evaporation ofblack holes made an immediate impact. 
A hole smaller than a proton will not eat up much material from
its surroundings, even if it happens to be inside a planet. To a holethat small, even solid matter is mostly empty space! So the HawkingRadiation from the surface of a minihole will actually dominate itsbehavior. Hawking showed that the radiation produced in this waygives the hole a temperature, exactly the temperature suggested bythe work of Bekenstein. For a black hole with the mass of our Sun,this temperature is about one ten-millionth of a degree K (with theresulting ultra-feeble Hawking Radiation easily overwhelmed byinfalling matter); but for a minihole with a mass of a billion tonsand the size of a proton, the temperature is about 120 billion K. Asthese examples indicate, the temperature depends on one over themass of the hole, so as it loses mass and gets smaller, such a holegets hotter and radiates energy faster, until it finally explodes in aburst of X-rays and gamma rays. 
Science fiction fans may be intrigued to know that if we could
find a proton-sized minihole today, it would be a more than usefulenergy source. The output from such a hole would be about 6,000megawatts and could make a substantial contribution to the energyrequirements of even a large country. Unfortunately, though, hold-ing on to such a hole if you found it would be tricky—rememberthat it would weigh a billion tons and that gravity would tend topull it down toward the center of the Earth. 
The lifetime of such a minihole depends on the exact mass it
starts out with, but roughly proton-sized black holes born in the BigBang should be exploding here and there in the Universe today.When Black Holes Explode 149Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlIntriguingly, detectors flown on satellites have reported occasional
bursts of gamma radiation coming from the depths of space, andthere is no universally accepted explanation for this phenomenon. Itis just possible that the Hawking Radiation from exploding blackholes has actually been discovered, although it will be almostimpossible ever to prove this. 
Hawking had achieved something that even he had thought to be
almost impossible, using a combination of general relativity andquantum physics (plus a smattering of thermodynamics) in onepackage to describe a physical phenomenon. It was this work thatmade his name outside the specialist circles of mathematicians andastronomers, and any physicist today can tell you what HawkingRadiation is and why it is important. But in a quirky gesture whichis in some ways typical of Hawking’s attitude toward establishedconventions, the astonishing discovery that “black holes are notblack” was announced first not in the pages of a scientific journalsuch as Nature but in an essay that Hawking entered for a some-
what obscure competition organized by the Gravity ResearchFoundation in America. 
The Gravity Research Foundation runs an annual competition
for articles describing new research into the nature of gravity. Untilthe 1970s, it had been almost exclusively a domestic U.S. competi-tion, with very few entries from abroad, although it had once beenwon by an expatriate Briton living in the USA. Then, with his lastcontribution to academia, one of us (J.G.) won the prize in 1970. Sowhen Stephen Hawking won the same prize a year or two later foran essay describing black holes, J.G. quickly sent him a congratula-tory note. It was nice, the note said, to see Hawking’s name on thelist of prizewinners because this added to the prestige of the awardand gave previous winners a chance to bask in the reflected glory.“I don’t know about the prestige,” Hawking wrote in reply, “butthe money’s very welcome.” STEPHEN HAWKING 150Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlThe “official” version of the exploding black hole story appeared
first in Nature on March 1, 1974.4While the Gravity Research
Foundation essay carried the dogmatic title “Black Holes Aren’tBlack,” the Nature paper, uncharacteristically for Hawking, was
equivocally headed “Black Hole Explosions?” It sparked a furiousdebate, as we saw in Chapter 8, with some opponents of the ideasuggesting that this time Hawking really was talking rubbish. JohnTaylor and Paul Davies, of King’s College in London, combined toproduce a retort in the issue of Nature dated July 5, 1974,
5headed
“Do Black Holes Really Explode?” and answered their own ques-tion with an unequivocal “No.” Even Taylor and Davies, though,were soon persuaded that they were wrong and Hawking was right. 
More important even than the specific idea that black holes
explode was the underlying basis for this discovery—that quantumphysics and relativity could be fruitfully combined to give us newinsights into the workings of the Universe. Soon Hawking would beusing that insight to focus, once more, on the puzzle of thesingularity at the beginning of time. But it seems, with hindsight,singularly appropriate that his election as a fellow of the RoyalSociety, Britain’s highest academic honor, should have come in thespring of 1974, within a few weeks of the publication of the Nature
version of the exploding black hole paper. Ten years after beinggiven just two years to live, however (and scarcely five years afterthe deterioration that had seemed likely to cut short his promisingcareer), Hawking’s research was really getting into its stride. In thesecond half of the 1970s he moved on to investigate the origin ofthe Universe itself, going back to the beginning of time. When Black Holes Explode 151Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.html