16
Hollywood, Fame, and Fortune
265From conception to best-seller list, A Brief History of Time
took over five years. During the same period, Hawkinghad continued his research and administration of the
DAMTP. In 1984, long before the first draft had been completed,Hawking went on a lecture tour of China. The itinerary for the tripwould have been strenuous for an able-bodied man, but he insistedon cramming in as much as possible during the visit. He motoredalong the Great Wall in his wheelchair, saw the sights of Peking, andgave talks to packed auditoriums in several cities. Dennis Sciamasaid that he believed the trip took a lot out of Hawking and haseven suggested that it helped precipitate his subsequent illness inSwitzerland less than a year later. 
However, there were other exertions along the way. In the early
summer of 1985, Hawking undertook a lecture tour of the world.One of the most important stopovers was at Fermilab, in Chicago.At the core of the cosmology group at Fermilab were three larger-than-life characters, Mike Turner, David Schramm, and EdwardKolb, who have perhaps contributed as much to legend andCopyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlanecdote surrounding the global cosmology fraternity as they have
hard science. 
Mike Turner is a tall handsome Californian with a voice indistin-
guishable from Harrison Ford’s. His office at Fermilab, where hespends most of his working life, is filled with toys and gadgets.Hanging from the ceiling are inflatable airliners and UFOs. Thewalls are plastered with postcards from friends around the world,humorous messages, and wacky pictures, the floor littered withbooks and boxes of scientific papers. One wall is taken up by ablackboard covered in the hieroglyphs of physics; another opensonto a view of the lakes and woods surrounding the massive con-crete columns of the central building which splay at the bottom andconverge at the top to form an inverted V. 
Edward Kolb, known as “Rocky” because of his penchant for
fighting, is a cosmologist from Los Alamos who joined the cosmol-ogy group at the same time as Turner in the early eighties. He andTurner became great friends and gained a reputation as a comic duoat Fermilab, forever playing practical jokes and initiating mischief.Their lectures were invariably witty, entertaining occasions,Turner’s often featuring brightly colored cartoons of Darth Vader toillustrate his ideas. 
The cosmology group was set up by David Schramm, who was
chairman of the astronomy department of the University ofChicago, a close friend of Hawking, and a formidable personalityon the international cosmology scene. 
Hawking arrived at Fermilab to give a technical lecture to a large
group of physicists from around the globe and promptly discoveredthat there was neither elevator nor ramp to enable him to reach thelecture theater in the basement. Turner recalls how he and Kolbwere escorting Hawking into the building when the horrifyingthought suddenly struck them: how were they to get Stephen to thestage? They looked at each other and, without saying a word,STEPHEN HAWKING 266Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlTurner lifted Hawking’s featherweight body into his arms and Kolb
grabbed the wheelchair. Halfway down the aisle of the lecturetheater, Turner became aware that the entire audience was watchingagog as they struggled to the stage, and suddenly remembered howHawking hated to have attention drawn to his disabilities. In theevent Stephen said nothing about the incident, realizing, he men-tioned later, that there was absolutely no alternative. 
Next day he gave a public lecture in Chicago, receiving a rock
star’s reception. The standing-room-only audience packed the audi-torium, and a number of people had to be turned away. He was rec-ognized everywhere he went, and people stopped him on the streetto express their interest in what he was doing. The title of his lecturewas “The Direction of Time.” To a startled audience he declaredthat, at some point in the distant future, the Universe would beginto contract back to a singularity and that during this collapse timewould reverse—everything that had ever happened during theexpansion phase would be reenacted but backward. 
There were many who opposed Hawking’s ideas, including his
close friend Don Page. Indeed, Hawking himself knew that he wasventuring into wild country. After the visit the two of them wroteopposing papers, published in the same issue of the scientificjournal Physical Review . Hawking’s paper led off the pair and con-
cluded by saying that Page had some interesting arguments on thesubject and that he may well be right. Eighteen months later, inDecember 1986, Hawking returned to Chicago to deliver a talkwhich announced that he had been wrong in 1985 and now pro-claimed the opposing view to be correct: time would not go intoreverse as the Universe contracted. 
By this time Hawking and Guzzardi were tidying up the manu-
script for A Brief History of Time , which Al Zuckerman was selling
to foreign publishers, and Hawking himself had grown accustomedto his computer-generated voice synthesizer. A Cambridge computerHollywood, Fame, and Fortune 267Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlengineer named David Mason had designed and built a portable
version of the device operated by a minicomputer that could beattached to Hawking’s wheelchair. Now his voice could go with himeverywhere he went. He began to deliver lectures with the newmachine in 1986. Suddenly, audiences could fully understand whathe was saying, and although the voice did not produce sentenceswith the Home Counties accent Hawking would have preferred,what he had to say was so much clearer now that he no longerneeded to use an interpreter. 
Attending a Hawking lecture is, initially, a very odd experience.
An assistant wheels him on to the stage, his voice synthesizer isplugged into the public address system, and the computer disks con-taining the text of his talk are inserted into the computer perchedon the arm of his wheelchair. To the audience, Hawking lookstotally passive, immobile but for facial expression, the tiny, imper-ceptible movements of his fingers operating the computer. He liftshis eyebrows and smiles at appropriate points; his eyes glint in thestage lights as his head lolls onto his chest. Standing in the wings aretwo nurses and a small group of research students, always ready tocome to his assistance if needed. After an introduction by the organ-izer, and when the applause dies down, a disembodied voice sud-denly bursts into the room from the PA speakers: “In this lecture, Iwould like to discuss . . . .” The preprogrammed disks can hold alittle under half an hour of his lecture, so that at a predesignatedpoint in the talk he has to announce to the audience that he isreloading his computer and will continue in a few moments. 
After the talk he invites the audience to ask questions but warns
that the responses will take some time for him to program into hiscomputer. “During this time,” he says, “please talk among your-selves, read newspapers, relax.” The answers can take up to tenminutes to come back. A spokesman announces that ProfessorHawking is now ready to reply, and the audience falls silent. ThereSTEPHEN HAWKING 268Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlis no possibility of any interaction between the questioner and
Hawking: the answer is accepted and the next person is already upand ready with another question. Sometimes Hawking’s answer is asimple “Yes” or “No,” a response that comes quickly. Sometimes,just for fun, he has been known to deliberately wait five minutesbefore responding with a monosyllabic reply. The audience loved itand burst into spontaneous laughter. On more than one occasion hehas been known to wait five minutes, only to ask for the questionerto repeat the question. As he has grown older, Hawking’s innatesense of mischief has not diminished in the slightest. 
In December 1990 he was invited to deliver a public lecture at a
symposium held in Brighton. The venue was a huge complex ofauditoriums called the Brighton Conference Center. Unfortunatelyfor the delegates, the complex had to be shared with the rock groupStatus Quo performing in one of the main halls. Between five andseven o’clock, the intense concentration of audiences in variousrooms and theaters around the building was broken by the bandsound checking in the Main Hall. 
Interspersed with talk of worm holes and neutron star astro-
physics came the thump, thump, thump of a bass drum and the yellsof roadies bellowing down microphones, “One, two; one, two; test-ing, testing; one, two. . . .” 
On the evening before Hawking’s talk, he was expected at an
unofficial meeting in his hotel room at 8:30. At the appointed time,a small group of journalists and friends arrived, were let in, and satdown to wait for him. Twenty minutes later, Hawking’s motherIsobel walked in, looking surprised to find them there. 
“Where’s Stephen?” one of the journalists asked. “He was sup-
posed to be here at 8:30.” 
“Stephen? He’s gone to see Status Quo,” Isobel replied. A group of Hawking’s students had wanted to see the band and
had sent a representative to find out if there were any remainingHollywood, Fame, and Fortune 269Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmltickets. Hearing that the concert had sold out months ago, the
student had told the organizers that Stephen Hawking was nextdoor and really wanted to see Status Quo. Within five minutes hewas handed a few complimentary tickets. According to one of hisstudents, Hawking thoroughly enjoyed himself and stayed through-out the whole concert. 
After the publication of A Brief History of Time , there was a subtle
shift of atmosphere at the DAMTP in Cambridge. There were inces-sant requests for interviews from newspapers and magazines fromaround the world. On several occasions over the next two years, atelevision crew took over the building to make a documentaryabout the life of the man who had become the most famous scien-tist in the world. The same stories appeared over and over again ina variety of languages, all telling of his courage in overcoming acrippling disease to become a scientific giant as well as a mediahero. Journalist after journalist visited the cluttered office in SilverStreet to spend an inspiring hour with the public’s latest hero.Returning to their offices, they wrote about the drab paint work atthe DAMTP, the scruffy assistants, the ever-present nurses, and theMarilyn Monroe poster pinned to the back of Hawking’s officedoor. 
Despite the countless thousands of words written about him, very
little new information about the man appeared in the pages of theworld’s press. The details of ALS and the succession of awards andhonors bestowed upon him were trotted out time and again, butHawking was determined to maintain a degree of privacy amid thewhirlpool of hype. 
In the United States, ABC profiled Hawking in its 20/20 series,
while in Britain a new documentary appeared called Master of the
Universe , which won a Royal Television Society award in 1990. In
the film, Hawking was shown bowling along the streets ofSTEPHEN HAWKING 270Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlCambridge and in one shot was seen entering the main entrance of
King’s College. The autumn after the program was televised, theadmissions officer at King’s was astonished to find a huge increasein the number of applications to study mathematics at the college.The television audience had obviously assumed that ProfessorHawking taught and worked at King’s College. In fact, he simplyused a route through the grounds of King’s as a convenient shortcutfor his wheelchair on the way to the DAMTP. But King’s did notdisabuse the bright young mathematicians suddenly eager for placesat the college. 
Hawking enjoyed the adulation and celebrity. He continued to
travel around the world. The invitations to give public lectures werebecoming overwhelming, and he could have spent his whole timedelivering them unless he carefully selected the ones he wouldattend and those he could not. In Japan he was received as an idol,getting the sort of reception usually reserved for heads of state orinternationally famous rock stars. Hundreds queued to hear himspeak in lecture theaters throughout the country. 
Back in Cambridge, the volume of mail Hawking received daily
had long since become too much for him to handle personally. Aresearch assistant and his secretary were given the responsibility ofsifting through the piles of invitations, letters, documents, and pro-fessional correspondence. For some years he had been receiving“crank mail,” a drawback of the job and experienced by manyother famous scientists throughout the world, especially physicists.However, by the late eighties Hawking was beginning to receive aninordinate quantity of bizarre letters spanning the entire spectrumof eccentricity. Correspondents ranged from amateur physicists incountry villages proposing ridiculous solutions to cosmologicalquestions, to religious extremists criticizing what they saw as theintrusion of science into sacred areas. Before long, a “cranks file”was set up at the DAMTP where the best examples of the genreHollywood, Fame, and Fortune 271Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlwere kept for entertainment value; the rest were put in the waste-
paper bin. 
Meanwhile, academic accolades and public acknowledgments of
his scientific work kept coming. As early as 1985, long before thepublication of A Brief History of Time , his portrait, commissioned
by the trustees of the gallery, was hung in the National PortraitGallery in London. In the late eighties alone he received five morehonorary degrees and seven international awards. In 1988 heshared the Israeli Wolf Foundation Prize in physics with RogerPenrose for their work on black holes. 
In January he traveled to Israel to receive the prize and a cash
award of $100,000 at a ceremony at the Knesset, Israel’s parliamentin Jerusalem, attended by the Israeli president and other politicaland scientific figures from around the world. The award did notpass without controversy. Jewish legislators boycotted the event,claiming that Hawking’s theories went against a tenet of Judaismthat neither time nor objects existed before God created theUniverse. Despite the protests, Hawking himself was pleased withthe award, and in a typically double-edged comment he told thepress, “I am very pleased. It shows that British science is still good,despite the government cuts.”
1
In 1989 the Queen again honored him when he was included in
the Honors List for the second time. This time he was made a com-panion of honor, one of the nation’s top honors, and attended areception at Buckingham Palace the following summer to receivethe award from the Queen. During the week when he officiallybecame a companion of honor, he received a very rare accoladewhen Cambridge University made him an honorary doctor ofscience. Only in very special cases do academics receive honorarydoctorates from their own universities. The award was presented byPrince Philip, chancellor of the university, at a special ceremony inCambridge. Hundreds of people lined the streets and applauded asSTEPHEN HAWKING 272Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlHawking wheeled along King’s Parade in the procession of digni-
taries, arriving at the Senate House to the accompaniment of thechoirs of King’s and St. John’s Colleges and the CambridgeUniversity Brass Ensemble. 
To complete an astonishing week, on the Saturday evening, as the
sun set over the spires and towers of a Cambridge basking in thesummer warmth, the strains of Bach, Vivaldi, Purcell, and Handelcould be heard as the Cambridge Camerata performed a specialconcert in Hawking’s honor at the Senate House in the center of thecity. That night there was not a dry eye in the house, according tothe local newspaper covering the event. As a special favor, theorchestra played Wagner’s “Ride of the Valkyries,” one ofHawking’s favorite pieces. As the applause for the musicians dieddown, Stephen wheeled up to the stage, turned and thanked theaudience through his voice synthesizer, receiving a standing ovationfrom his friends and family and members of the public there tohonor the man who had achieved so much against all odds.According to one journalist: 
There were tears rolling down the cheeks of men and women as a tribute to his
courage, as well as the exceptional brain that has continued to advance knowl-edge of time and space in spite of the ravages of a crippling disease.
2
Another journalist told him at a reception after the concert that A
Brief History of Time had received more inquiries from readers of
the “News” book page of his paper than any other book. 
With Hawking’s enhanced status as a world-famous scientist and
writer, his campaigning for the rights of the disabled stepped up agear. In 1989 a project was set up in Cambridge to create a specialhostel for handicapped students at the university. It was called theShaftesbury “Bridget’s” Appeal in memory of Bridget Spufford, thedisabled daughter of a Cambridge history lecturer who had beenHollywood, Fame, and Fortune 273Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlunable to find a single university in the country equipped for her
needs. Bridget Spufford had died in May 1989, and her mother,Margaret, had managed to solicit the help of Hawking who hadwillingly agreed to be a patron of the charity. 
The Hawking name carried weight, and an appeal to raise
£600,000 was launched in a blaze of local publicity. Hawking wenton record as declaring that the attitude of the university toward thehandicapped was appalling, stating that they were flouting the lawby ignoring an act of Parliament dating back to 1970, which madeit illegal not to provide appropriate access to disabled persons. Hespoke of his own situation and how the university had ignored hisspecial needs throughout his undergraduate and postgraduateyears, installing a ramp at the DAMTP only under duress and aftera long battle when he achieved the status of reader. The situationwas so bad in Cambridge, he revealed, that the National Bureaufor Handicapped Students advised people with serious disabilitiesnot to consider Cambridge because of inadequate accom-modations. 
Hawking also helped to establish a dormitory for handicapped
students at Bristol University, which upon completion was namedHawking House. On a filing cabinet in his office at the DAMTPstands an abstract sculpture presented to him for his help in gettingthe dormitory built. 
By 1989 royalties from A Brief History of Time had begun to flood
in, and with global sales in the millions it was obvious thatHawking no longer needed the financial support of charities toenable him to maintain a very comfortable lifestyle, provide for theeducation of his children, and pay for his round-the-clock nursing.He gratefully acknowledged his enormous debt to the foundationsthat had saved his life. But as A Brief History of Time gradually
became what seemed to be a permanent feature on the best-sellerSTEPHEN HAWKING 274Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmllist, unexpected storm clouds of controversy began to gather over a
particular passage in the book. 
In Chapter 8, “The Origin and Fate of the Universe,” Hawking
refers to the events surrounding the formulation of the cosmologi-cal theory of inflation, which we described in Chapter 11. He picksup the story in 1981, on a visit to Moscow, where the Russianphysicist Andrei Linde told him of his latest work on inflation.Linde had written a paper on the subject, but Hawking had pointedout a major flaw in the theory that subsequently took the Russiancosmologist several months to sort out before the rewritten versionwas ready for submission to a journal. 
In the meantime, the day after arriving back from Moscow,
Hawking had set off for Philadelphia to collect an award from theFranklin Institute, after which he was invited to deliver a seminar.He recounts the story thus: 
I spent most of the seminar talking about the problems of the inflationary model,
just as in Moscow, but at the end I mentioned Linde’s idea of slow symmetry-breaking and my corrections to it. In the audience was a young assistant professorfrom the University of Pennsylvania, Paul Steinhardt. He talked to me afterwardabout inflation. The following February, he sent me a paper by himself and astudent, Andreas Albrecht, in which they proposed something very similar toLinde’s idea of slow symmetry-breaking. He later told me he didn’t remember medescribing Linde’s ideas and he had seen Linde’s paper only when they had nearlyfinished their own.
3
When Steinhardt discovered what Hawking had written about
him he was understandably furious. The potential damage to hiscareer was immeasurable. At the time, Steinhardt was a junior pro-fessor, while Hawking was Lucasian Professor at Cambridge, andwidely acknowledged as one of the most eminent physicists in theworld. The whole incident was reminiscent of the conflict, early inthe eighteenth century, between the relatively unknown mathemati-Hollywood, Fame, and Fortune 275Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlcian Gottfried Leibniz and Isaac Newton over who had invented the
calculus. However, the inclusion of this passage in Hawking’s best-selling book was not the beginning of the story. The arguments hadstarted back in 1982 after a physics workshop organized byHawking in Cambridge. 
Mike Turner and John Barrow, who had been at the workshop,
showed Hawking their draft summary of the meeting and suggestedthat some remarks about the Linde and Albrecht-Steinhardt dis-covery of “new inflation” could be included. Hawking took excep-tion to the proposed cocredit. Instead of confronting Steinhardt orAlbrecht directly, he suggested to Turner and Barrow that theyeither delete their names or add a reference to a Hawking-Mosspaper, crediting it with codiscovery of “new inflation.” 
Hawking’s reasons for taking this attitude were, first, that he
claimed (incorrectly) that the Steinhardt-Albrecht paper hadappeared in print a full six months after Linde’s, and, second, that hehad discussed Linde’s theory at a seminar a few months earlier, aseminar which Steinhardt and Albrecht had been to as well. Angeredby Hawking’s attitude, Turner and Barrow alerted Steinhardt andAlbrecht to the conflict and simultaneously decided, at a risk tothemselves, not to follow through with Hawking’s request. 
Steinhardt wrote to Hawking explaining his position and sent
him notebooks and letters that verified that his work had alreadybeen under way before Hawking’s talk the previous October. Healso stated quite categorically that he had, in any case, no recollec-tion of Hawking mentioning Linde’s ideas at the seminar. Most ofall, Steinhardt was incensed by the fact that Hawking had gonebehind their backs and that if he had doubts about the validity oftheir work he should have raised the matter openly. He realized thatHawking was causing this dispute not so much to promote his owninterests as to support his friend Linde, but this did not in any wayexcuse his behavior. STEPHEN HAWKING 276Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlHawking wrote back to Steinhardt to say that he had meant
nothing by his remarks to Turner and Barrow and that he fullyaccepted that the Albrecht-Steinhardt work was independent ofLinde’s. He even concluded his letter with a friendly wish that theymight work together on future projects, making it clear that, as faras he was concerned, the matter was closed. 
This was in 1982, before Hawking had begun to write A Brief
History of Time. It came as quite a surprise, therefore, when in
1988, with Hawking’s book on the best-sellers’ list, Steinhardt wasinformed of the offending passage. By then Steinhardt had heardrumors that Hawking had mentioned the controversy in privateconversations over the years and had evidently not let the matter lieas he had implied in his letter to Steinhardt in 1982. However, itwas the circumstances in which Steinhardt discovered Hawking’scontinued pursuit of the matter that really caused offense.Steinhardt had requested some information on obtaining a NationalScience Foundation grant, and it was the funding officer whopointed out the offending section in Hawking’s book. Needless tosay, there was no further discussion of National Science Foundationgrants on that occasion. 
Steinhardt had to defend his reputation. Hawking’s behavior was
now having a potentially seriously damaging effect on his career. Hedecided to substantiate his claims about the Drexel seminar bygoing through his old notes and obtaining independent verification.Instead, he stumbled upon something much more useful—a video-tape of the 1981 seminar. Copying the tape with independent wit-nesses at every stage, he sent a copy to Hawking in Cambridge anda copy to Bantam in New York, by express mail. Several monthspassed before Hawking responded to Steinhardt’s challenge. Thistime he wrote to say that the offending text in A Brief History of
Time would be changed in the next edition and that the publishers
had drafted a press release to announce the change. However, heHollywood, Fame, and Fortune 277Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlneither apologized to Steinhardt for the damage his actions had
caused nor suggested that his original version had been in any waywrong. It was only after several of Hawking’s colleagues around theworld began to make it clear they thought he was wrong that herelented. 
Chief among Steinhardt’s supporters was Mike Turner at
Fermilab. He found himself in a very awkward position over thewhole affair. He was friendly with both men but saw Hawking’sactions as unjust. Finally, at a meeting in Santa Barbara in 1988,Hawking encountered Turner and asked, “Are you ever going tospeak to me again?” Still angry over the incident, Turner suggestedthat Hawking could do more to salve the wounds he had caused. Inan effort to lay the matter to rest Hawking wrote a letter to Physics
Today , which was published in the February 1990 issue, in which
he said he was sure that the two teams had been working inde-pendently on new inflation and that he was sorry if his account ofthe incident had been misinterpreted by the readers of his book. 
As far as both parties are concerned, the matter is now closed,
but Hawking’s behavior on this occasion was patently wrong. Thedarker aspect of his famous stubbornness had overridden fairness.Steinhardt is still smarting from the incident, which has undoubt-edly and quite wrongly damaged his career and caused him totallyunnecessary emotional distress. However, as evidenced by theLeibniz-Newton conflict, such disagreements and wrangles are farfrom uncommon in the history of science. Characters like Hawkingdo keep the world of science alive and energized by their ideas andimaginations, but the less creative aspects of such strong personali-ties can sometimes head off at personal tangents with an intensityparallel to their more creative contributions. 
Within weeks of A Brief History of Time entering the American
best-seller list, the film rights for the book were snapped up. An ex-STEPHEN HAWKING 278Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlABC news producer by the name of Gordon Freedman was quick to
see the potential of Hawking’s book as a film. He also happened toshare the same agent as Hawking, Al Zuckerman. Freedman andZuckerman did a deal and the film rights were sold. 
The problem for Freedman was what he was then going to do
with the acquisition. He did not want to make a straight documen-tary of Hawking’s life and work—there had been too many of thesealready, and they had covered the ground quite effectively. On theother hand, he felt there was plenty of scope in the ideas describedin the book to produce a film that explored the more esotericaspects of Hawking’s work as well as getting across the essentialhuman interest angle. A series of coincidences then occurred whicheventually led to a viable project. 
Freedman went to Anglia Television in Britain. Anglia is based in
Norwich, which is close enough to Cambridge for Hawking to beconsidered a local celebrity. Only a matter of weeks earlier anAnglia TV producer, David Hickman, had approached the commis-sioning editors with the idea of making a film about StephenHawking. Rival broadcasters at BBC East, also based in Norwich,had made the award-winning Master of the Universe , and Hickman
thought that they should make a program that tackled the subjectin a different way from that of the BBC team. Stirred by the offerfrom Freedman in the States and by Hickman’s proposal, Angliabecame interested in the concept and agreed to take on theFreedman project with Hickman as producer and GordonFreedman as executive producer. 
A year passed, during which the producers worked out how they
would raise the finances for their project. The original concept wasa large-budget TV special, a “ Super-Horizon ,”* as Hickman
described it. For that they would need big bucks. After lunch inHollywood, Fame, and Fortune 279
*Horizon is a science documentary series on British TV. Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlLondon with Caroline Thomson, then commissioning editor of
science programs at Channel 4, the network expressed interest inthe project but could not foot the entire bill. At this point Freedmandecided to try the big broadcasters in the States. Instead ofapproaching them directly, he went first to Steven Spielberg’s com-pany, Amblin Entertainment, in Los Angeles. 
Spielberg had been following Hawking’s work for many years
and, with an eye on the commercial worth of the project, was imme-diately interested in the idea of helping to increase public awarenessof what Hawking was trying to say in A Brief History of Time.
Spielberg is another of those who sees Hawking as the latetwentieth century’s answer to Albert Einstein and has felt a deep fas-cination with things extraterrestrial from a very early age. It wasSpielberg’s involvement that really brought the scheme into highprofile and secured the essential finances needed to bring the projectto fruition. 
Spielberg and Hawking actually met early in 1990 on the
Universal lot at Amblin Studios in Los Angeles, where they posedtogether for photographers and chatted for over ninety minutes inthe Californian sunshine. Expressing a mutual admiration, theyapparently got on very well. Hawking had enjoyed E.T. and Close
Encounters of the Third Kind . He even suggested jokingly that their
film should be called Back to the Future 4 . For his part, Spielberg
had been greatly taken by A Brief History of Time . According to
one journalist, observers at the meeting reported that it wasHawking who was the center of attention—quite a feat inHollywood, where Spielberg is perceived as a demigod. 
In the same month Freedman had contacted Amblin, a filmmaker
by the name of Errol Morris had approached them with an idea fora new film. Morris had written and directed the critically successfuland controversial The Thin Blue Line , a film about an alleged cop-
killer who was wrongly imprisoned after an incident in Dallas.STEPHEN HAWKING 280Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlMorris’s idea was to make a film about the mystery surrounding
what had happened to Einstein’s brain after his death. When theHawking proposal turned up, Spielberg suggested that Morrismight like to look at the idea with a view to directing the project. 
Morris had been aware of Hawking’s work since his student
days, when he had studied philosophy of science at Princeton andhad attended lectures given by the eminent American physicist JohnWheeler, who had first applied the term “black hole” in an astro-nomical context. David Hickman has suggested that Morris wasalso interested in the project because, at a certain level, he saw par-allels between Randall Adams, the protagonist in The Thin Blue
Line, and Stephen Hawking. Adams was trapped in a situation that
was entirely out of his control, caught up in a web of events overwhich he had little influence. In the same way Hawking, trapped ina crippled body, is physically ensnared but has mentally transcendedthis barrier to achieve greatness. Morris is inherently fascinated bysuch themes and uses them as a jumping-off point for his icono-clastic movies. 
By the end of 1989, with Spielberg’s involvement, NBC in
America had become interested. The president of the EntertainmentDivision of the network was a great admirer of The Thin Blue Line
and was sold on the idea almost immediately. NBC eventuallybecame the film’s major financial contributor. With the interest oftwo networks under his belt, Freedman then decided to try Japanesetelevision. The idea of a TV special about Hawking backed bySpielberg was very appealing to the Japanese, and TokyoBroadcasting took very little convincing. The project now had thefunding it needed. Between the three networks, the producers had abudget of three million dollars. They could effectively make the filmthey wanted. 
Errol Morris’s approach was to build the film around a series of
interviews, recording much more footage than is used in the finalHollywood, Fame, and Fortune 281Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlversion. Cutting this interview material to perhaps half its original
length, he then began to construct visual images around whatremained. In the first stage of the project, researchers drew up a listof Hawking’s friends, family, and colleagues from around the worldwho they thought might be interested in taking part in the project.However, they were soon surprised to discover that there weremany people who did not want to be in the film. 
Hickman believes there is some resistance to media people in
Cambridge. Like Peter Guzzardi, he felt that some of Hawking’sstudents—as well as more senior colleagues—resented the idea ofserious scientific work being oversimplified. He also detected that,despite the runaway success of A Brief History of Time , there was
a definite closing of ranks in certain quarters at the suggestion of acommercial film being made around Hawking’s ideas. 
“Cambridge University is a very tight community,” he said.
“There are numerous rivalries, jealousies, animosities. Despite thefact that the interviews were totally unscripted (they could talkabout what they had for breakfast if they wanted), there was anundoubted feeling that we were a News of the World on screen.” 
Fortunately for the producers, however, there were plenty more
interested participants than those suffering from delusions that theywere being coerced into something slightly unsavory. 
In January 1990, sound stages at Elstree Studios were block
booked for two weeks. The first people to move in were the setdesigners. Morris had the idea that he would give the designer thename of an interviewee and a rough idea of his or her relationshipwith Hawking, and the designer would then go away and createindividual sets for each interviewee to be filmed in. Sometimes theset had absolutely no relevance to the subject; for other interviewsit matched the topic of the interview. 
As the interviews were unscripted, Morris would often say to the
interviewee, “Look, I don’t really know how to start this interview.STEPHEN HAWKING 282Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlWhy don’t you just tell me some stories?” He has what he calls the
two-minute rule: “If you give people two minutes, they’ll show youhow crazy they are.” 
For A Brief History of Time they conducted over thirty interviews
in thirteen days at Elstree, using thirty-three different sets.Interviewees included Dennis Sciama, Dr. Robert Berman, IsobelHawking, friends from school and undergraduate days, and co-workers at the DAMTP such as Gary Gibbons. However, starbilling was reserved for Stephen Hawking himself. 
The most important set at Elstree during the fortnight of filming
was a reconstruction of Hawking’s office at the DAMTP. No effortwas spared in re-creating the room in intimate detail. EvenHawking was bemused by Morris’s attention to minutiae. 
“I’m surprised they went to all that trouble because most people
wouldn’t have known if it had been different,”
4he said. 
Morris had wondered about Hawking’s fascination with Marilyn
Monroe. Hawking smiled and explained that he had very muchenjoyed Some Like It Hot , and ever since his family and friends had
insisted on buying him Marilyn merchandise at every opportunity:posters from Lucy and his secretary, a Marilyn bag from Timothy,and a towel from Jane. “I suppose you could say she was a modelof the Universe,”
5he had joked. 
Morris had also decided to have built a reproduction of
Hawking’s wheelchair, accurate to the last detail of the license plate,for when he could not make a shoot. Using “macro-filming” tech-niques, he could get extreme close-ups of the chrome work andleather, filling the screen as an image to accompany an interview onvoice-over. According to Hickman, Hawking’s childhood home at14 Hillside Road was filmed almost brick by brick. 
Hawking himself was shot against a blue screen so that his image
could be projected on to any backdrop the director chose. The orig-inal intention was to have Hawking narrate relevant parts of theHollywood, Fame, and Fortune 283Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlfilm using his voice synthesizer. However, it soon became clear that
the harshness of the voice was irritating after a while when used asa voice-over. Consequently, Morris decided against the idea and theviewer hears Hawking’s voice only when he is actually talking tocamera. The use of blue-screen filming gives the director enormousflexibility. “I can place Stephen Hawking where he belongs, in amental landscape rather than a real one,”
6Morris has said. 
What the viewer does not see, however, are astronauts falling into
black holes or other such science documentary cliches. As Hickmanpoints out, “No one has seen a black hole—they are theoreticalobjects as far as we know. The subject matter of this film lies in therealms of the imagination.” 
With a three-million-dollar budget, Hickman, Freedman, and
Morris could call on the very best people in the business to handledesign, lighting, cinematography, sound production, and otheressential technical support. The background staff responsible fortransforming Morris’s ideas into a viable product had impeccablecredentials; between them they had worked on over a dozen majorHollywood films, including Edward Scissorhands, Batman II,
American Gigolo, and Wild at Heart . The American composer
Philip Glass was commissioned to write the film score, hispolyrhythmic electronic music acting as a perfect complement toMorris’s visual acrobatics. 
Hickman says that the film is really about God and time and not
so much about scientific investigation or Hawking’s disabilities: 
We are far more interested in the concepts Stephen has tried to portray in his book
than in producing a straight science documentary asking questions like “What isthe future of cosmology?” The most exciting thing about cosmology is the factthat it interfaces metaphysics and conventional science. It’s very interesting thatStephen has attracted a lot of attention over the religious aspects of his work, aswell as the fact that he is close to a number of physicists with deep theologicalconcerns, such as Don Page. STEPHEN HAWKING 284Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlOn the days when Hawking was called upon for shooting he
traveled to Elstree with his team of nurses and aides in the speciallyconverted VW van he acquired soon after receiving the cash awardthat came with the Wolf Prize. On the set, a reverent hush regularlydescended on the crew and technicians. Hawking, despite his dis-abilities, commands a powerful presence that surprises most peopleon their first meeting. Seated in his wheelchair he would spendhours under the studio lights, silently observing the frenzy ofactivity around him as the camera zoomed in for a close-up, ormakeup people dabbed rouge on his cheeks between takes. 
The filming of A Brief History of Time was completed in spring
1990, but Morris’s filmmaking technique is labor intensive duringthe editing stage of a project. This took up the rest of 1990 and theearly part of 1991, and the film was finally to hit cinemas inAmerica and Europe in the spring of 1992. The intention was toshow the movie in selected theaters for a short period and then forit to be networked internationally by the broadcasters who financedthe project, NBC in the States, Tokyo Broadcasting in Japan, andChannel 4 in the U.K. It was then sold to other broadcasters aroundthe world and destined ultimately to appear in the stores as a video. 
While the movie project was in the editing stage, during the summer
of 1990, the seemingly unthinkable happened. Shock-horror head-lines appeared in a number of national newspapers announcing thesad fact that Stephen and Jane Hawking had separated after twenty-five years of marriage. 
In fact, the two of them had been growing apart for a number of
years. As Hawking’s career reached new heights of fame and suc-cess, the awards and medals piling up along with honors from allparts of the world, Jane had felt increasingly isolated. She hadbegun to accompany Stephen on foreign trips far less frequently,and as she no longer had the responsibility of nursing her husband,Hollywood, Fame, and Fortune 285Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlshe had started to turn her attention toward her own interests—her
work, her garden, her books, and an increasingly active involve-ment in one of the best choirs in Cambridge. 
The academic community in Cambridge was shocked by the
news. For as long as anyone could remember, Stephen had takengreat pains to promote the role Jane had played in his life and,despite their disagreements, to outsiders their marriage was a modelof security. For weeks friends and colleagues were plagued by news-paper reporters who had staked out the Hawkings’ home on WestRoad in an attempt to get a scoop and dig the dirt on the marriagebreakup. Hawking was a world-famous figure, and in the minds ofthe Sunday rag editors there was the macabre twist of Stephen’s dis-ability to mix into a page-page splash. 
Thankfully, the gutter press never succeeded in finding the angle
they wanted. In Cambridge the scientific community closed ranks,and family friends, if they knew any details about why the couplehad parted, were saying nothing. Gradually, however, stories beganto emerge. There were rumors of extramarital relations developingover a number of years long before their marriage had reached crisispoint; but those who knew the couple well regarded as far more sig-nificant tales of increased tensions between Stephen and Jane overthe old religious arguments. Their disagreements had been sweptunder the carpet for many years, but with the writing of A Brief
History of Time , it appears that the wounds had been reopened. 
Through his work, Hawking’s early agnosticism had become
more overtly atheistic, and with his no-boundary theory he hadeffectively dispensed with the notion of God altogether. Yet,ironically, Jane’s deeply held religious convictions had been one ofthe strengths which had enabled her to cope so well with the burdenimposed by Stephen’s increasing disability. However, the couple hadlived with religious disunity for most of their married life, so thaton its own was certainly insufficient reason to separate. STEPHEN HAWKING 286Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlAs reported in a number of newspaper articles, the break came
when Stephen left Jane to move into a flat to live with the nurse whohad looked after him for a number of years, Elaine Mason. Accordingto reports, as Stephen and Jane had drifted apart, he and Elaine hadgrown closer. For a number of years it was Elaine rather than Janewho had accompanied him on his foreign travels and with whom hespent much of his working life. The situation was complicated by thefact that Elaine was married to David Mason, the computer engineerwho had adapted Hawking’s computer so that it could be fitted to hiswheelchair. The couple had two children, and in fact David Masonand Hawking had met at the gates of the primary school that bothTimothy and the Mason boys had attended. It was through this ini-tial contact, and Hawking’s request for a chair-mounted computer,that Mason had been able to start his own computer business andElaine Mason had later become one of Stephen’s team of nurses. 
Jane had cared for her husband for over twenty-five years, sacri-
ficing many of her own personal hopes and ambitions along theway, but as fame and international success had begun to take overhis life, and their paths diverged, it appeared that they no longerneeded each other. Some commentators have tried to place theblame on Stephen, but many others believe that such views are wideof the mark. In any marriage breakup, blame is not a word to uselightly. Certainly, Jane has devoted most of her life to Stephen,almost single-handedly taking care of him when he was a little-known physicist struggling to overcome disability and develop hiscareer. However, things change; many married couples grow apartfrom each other. A number of friends feel that Stephen should notbe blamed for leaving the woman who had done so much for him.It is an insult to Jane’s dedication and commitment for others toplace the past like a yoke around his neck. 
Like all breakups, theirs caused a great deal of sadness. The
Hawking children took the news particularly badly. Robert, thenHollywood, Fame, and Fortune 287Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmltwenty-three, had graduated in physics from Cambridge the
previous year and was already embarking on postgraduate work;Lucy, nearly twenty, was at Oxford University studying modern lan-guages. The two of them, though naturally upset, were old enoughto accept the situation and were developing their own lives awayfrom home, carving out their own independence. The separation hitthe youngest, Timothy, the hardest. Then barely eleven, he was tooyoung to understand fully the reasons why his father had left theirhome on West Road. 
There is little doubt that the trauma of separation had affected
Stephen as much as any of those involved, and reporters claimedthat the famous Hawking smile was now rarely seen. Otherspointed out that, at the time, he was displaying great emotionalswings. He could be outwardly very happy for a while, smiling andjoking with his colleagues and students, and then fall into a depres-sion, casting a mournful shadow over the atmosphere at theDAMTP. 
It is important to remember that, although a great many people
go through similar emotional upheavals, the vast majority of themhave a number of advantages over Stephen Hawking. There areways in which their emotions can be diverted and released; ineffec-tual as these methods often prove to be, they were not available tohim at all. He could not scream and shout, go for a run, or indulgein a drinking binge; he could not smoke himself stupid or evenspeak to friends with ease. And although it was he who made thebreak, the pain was undoubtedly still there. 
Many people who claim to know Stephen Hawking have been
overprotective toward him, especially since the announcement of theseparation. This attitude is misguided and is usually shown bypeople who turn out not to know him at all well. Close friends knowthat Hawking needs nobody to protect him—he is perfectly capableof looking after himself. The same people who try to protect StephenSTEPHEN HAWKING 288Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlalso make the mistake of attempting to imbue him with feelings and
emotions different from those of the rest of us, almost as if, becauseof his highly tuned intellect, he did not share the same dreams,hopes, and passions that the rest of humanity experiences. 
One of his closest friends, David Schramm, knew Hawking for
over twenty years and had little patience with those who try tocreate an image of Stephen as in any way emotionally different fromothers. He never pulled any punches when it comes to his friend’spersonal life. He once introduced Hawking at a talk he gave inChicago, by saying, “. . . [A]s evidenced by the fact that hisyoungest son Timothy is less than half the age of the disease, clearlynot all of Stephen is paralyzed!” Apparently half the audience wasshocked speechless, but Hawking loved it. 
Schramm believes that people are scared to face the fact that, in
emotional terms, Stephen Hawking is a normal man. Because of thepower of his intellect as well as the singular nature of his physicalcondition, they convince themselves that he does not feel the sameway as others. Stephen loves the company of women, he enjoys flirt-ing, and he appreciates physical beauty: why else would he have aposter of Marilyn Monroe in his office? Probably not for her intel-lect. Hawking’s relationship with Elaine Mason is not one based onpity or other such feeble foundations. According to Schramm, whohas spent a lot of time with the couple, there is a genuine lovebetween them. 
Hawking refuses to talk publicly about his private life and makes
that a stipulation of any interview these days. The journalists, fortheir part, continue to speculate on the causes and outcomes of thesplit. Jane, for her own reasons, has until recently remained equallytight lipped on the matter (see Chapter 18). She turned downrepeated requests from the producers to take part in the film of A
Brief History of Time and agreed to participate in interviews only
with journalists she knows personally. Hollywood, Fame, and Fortune 289Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlUntil some time after their separation, pictures of Jane and the
children still decorated Hawking’s office at the DAMTP, but thesplit was without doubt an acrimonious one. Friends claimed thatJane spoke bitterly about it. She was now under no obligation, asone acquaintance put it, to “promote the greater glory of StephenHawking.”
7Only a year earlier, Jane had told a reporter that 1989
had been the year when everything had fallen into place for them,when they had reached a new high point in their lives: 
For me the fulfilment stems very much from the fact that we have been able to
keep going, that we have been able to remain a united family. The awards werelike the sugar frosting on the cake. I wouldn’t say that is what makes all theblackness worth while. I don’t think I am ever going to reconcile in my mind theswings of the pendulum that we have experienced in this house—really from thedepth of a black hole to all the glittering prizes.
8
She explained to another journalist that her role was no longer to
look after a sick man but “simply to tell him that he’s not God.”9
Perhaps in such statements as this the murmurings of deep-rootedresentments and disquiet can be detected. Yet in the concludingscene of the BBC’s Master of the Universe program we see Stephen
and Jane looking down on a sleeping Timothy in their house onWest Road while Hawking’s computer voice declares, “I have abeautiful family, I am successful in my work, and I have written abest-seller. One really can’t ask for more.”
10
Hawking’s children have always known that their father can be a
difficult man to live with at times. In the late eighties, Lucy, in theMaster of the Universe documentary, said: 
I’m not as stubborn as him. I don’t think I would want to be that stubborn. I don’t
think I have quite his strength of mind, which means he will do what he wants todo at any cost to anybody else.
11STEPHEN HAWKING 290Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlSuch stubbornness was to hold him in good stead as his personal
life began to crumble and the pressures of global fame started toimpinge seriously upon him. While Hawking was reaching the pin-nacle of his success outside science, new complications began toaffect him as he made the transition from celebrity to icon. Hollywood, Fame, and Fortune 291Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.html