17
A Brief History of Time Travel
292Even though Stephen Hawking turned fifty in 1992 (coin-
cidentally, the year in which the first edition of this bookwas published) and had forecast the death of physics
twelve years earlier, he has continued to be involved in scientificresearch since then. But like many grand old men of science (adescription which, against all the odds, is now an entirely apt onefor Hawking), in his later years he has turned his attention to ideasat the wilder fringes of scientific respectability. During the middlepart of the 1990s, Hawking’s research contributions largelyinvolved the paradoxes and possibilities of time travel—a field heentered not as a pioneer, but following in the footsteps of his oldfriend and scientific sparring partner, Kip Thorne. 
You may be surprised to learn that the subject of time travel is a
respectable area of research at all, even at the wilder fringes ofrespectability. If so, you are not alone. When one of us wrote a bookabout time travel
1and it was reviewed in the pages of the astro-
nomical magazine Observatory , the magazine received an irate letter
from two engineers at the University of Hull, castigating the editorsCopyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlfor lending credence to such ridiculous notions by even acknowledg-
ing the existence of the book. But everything in that book, and every-thing we have to tell you in this chapter, is based on solid, respectablescience, jumping off from the work of Thorne and the equally emi-nent Igor Novikov (formerly of the Soviet Union, now working inDenmark)—and, of course, of Hawking himself. Building a timemachine may not yet be a practicable engineering prospect, but thepossibility that natural time machines may exist is one that anincreasing number of scientists are now taking very seriously indeed. 
The physical description of a working time machine that has
intrigued Hawking and other researchers recently is closely relatedto the physics of baby universes, described in Chapter 13. On thatscenario, matter that collapses into a black hole and toward a sin-gularity in our Universe can somehow be shunted sideways inspace-time, emerging to form a new expanding universe, in its ownset of space-time dimensions. But what we did not spell out in ourearlier discussion is that in principle the original black hole and thenew baby universe are still connected by the cosmological equiva-lent of an umbilical cord, a tunnel through space-time that the cos-mologists prosaically refer to as a “wormhole.” In the context ofbaby universes, such a wormhole would have a diameter compara-ble to the smallest quantum of length (the Planck length, about10
–35m) and since no information could get out of the black hole
marking the end of the wormhole in our Universe, the connectionseems to be only of academic interest. 
But there is another way of looking at wormholes, one that has
long been a favorite of science fiction writers. The equations of thegeneral theory of relativity also allow for the existence of a moremodest kind of wormhole, which links two places in our ownUniverse. Einstein himself, working with Nathan Rosen atPrinceton in the 1930s, worked out the appropriate mathematicalA Brief History of Time Travel 293Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmldescription of such a wormhole, which is known as an Einstein-
Rosen bridge. 
The usual problems with wormholes apply to an Einstein-Rosen
bridge, which is, in effect, a wormhole linking two black holes inour Universe—a shortcut through space-time. Such a wormholecould form naturally, the equations say; but the gravity of the blackholes at either end of the tunnel would snap the wormhole shutfaster than light could travel along it, closing it before there wastime for anything to get from one end to the other. 
This result was so well known that for fifty years no relativists
bothered to study the equations describing such wormholes indetail. But that didn’t stop the SF writers leaping on the idea andusing it as a basis for moving their characters (and spaceships)around the Universe more or less instantaneously. The idea is that ifyou had an Einstein-Rosen bridge connecting a region of space nearour Sun with a region of space on the other side of the Galaxy, aspaceship could dive in one end and come out of the other endessentially instantaneously, without the bother of covering all theintervening space at something less than the speed of light. But whatthose SF writers carefully swept under the carpet was the evidencethat any such tunnel through space would only be open for a frac-tion of a second and would in any case only be as wide as the Plancklength, so that their spaceships (and any passengers) would be dis-tinctly crushed by their journey. 
All of that changed, as Kip Thorne recounts in his book Black
Holes and Time Warps ,
2in the mid-1980s, when the noted scientist
Carl Sagan decided to turn his hand to fiction. Like other SF writ-ers, Sagan wanted to use the idea of a tunnel through space to getround the speed-of-light barrier. But being a scientist, he wanted atleast to pay lip service to the problem of the rapid collapse of awormhole and give his readers some scientific double-talk to pro-vide a fictional “explanation” of why the tunnel they were travelingSTEPHEN HAWKING 294Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlthrough did not collapse. He turned to Kip Thorne for advice on
how he might provide this necessary verbal camouflage, and Thornetook up the challenge. 
At the end of the 1984-1985 academic year, Thorne realized that
what would be needed to hold a wormhole open would be to threadit with so-called “exotic matter.” Exotic matter gets its namebecause it has a bizarre property—negative pressure, or negativetension. If you squeeze ordinary matter, it is compressed; but if yousqueeze exotic matter, it expands (it doesn’t just resist your squeeze;it really does expand). You might think that this is hardly a step for-ward, since nobody has ever seen exotic matter. And yet cosmolo-gists believe that it might occur naturally in the Universe, in theform of what is known as cosmic string. 
Cosmic string is hypothetical material left over from the Big
Bang, in the form of tubes of energy much narrower than an atombut possibly stretching across the entire Universe. It is a by-productof the era of the Big Bang itself, and the best way to think of it is asa piece of the Big Bang “frozen” and trapped inside a tube with adiameter of just 10
–14that of an atomic nucleus. Because the string
contains the energy density of the Universe as it was about 10–35
seconds after the moment of creation, even though it is so narroweach centimeter of cosmic string would contain the equivalent of 10trillion tons of mass. A loop of cosmic string a meter long wouldweigh as much as the Earth. 
There is no direct proof that cosmic strings exist or ever have
existed, but there is some circumstantial evidence—such objectscould have provided the “seeds” on which galaxies grew when theUniverse was young. The gravitational influence of loops of stringwould make clouds of gas clump together, eventually getting bigenough to carry on the job of galaxy formation unaided. 
And, you may have guessed, cosmic string has another strange
property. It operates under negative tension. If you pull a piece ofA Brief History of Time Travel 295Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlcosmic string, it will shrink; but if you squeeze it, it will stretch. It
is just the stuff to hold wormholes open with; the more the gravityof the black holes involved tries to squeeze the wormhole shut, themore the cosmic string will expand and hold it open. 
Sagan was delighted with Thorne’s suggestions on how to hold a
traversable star gate open, and the explanation duly appeared in hisnovel, Contact , published in 1985. At the time, few readers realized
that the “mumbo-jumbo” describing the structure of the wormholethrough which Sagan’s characters traveled was actually the mostup-to-date scientific theory about wormholes, at the cutting edge ofresearch. But what is really surprising, with hindsight, is that nei-ther Thorne nor Sagan immediately appreciated that the equationsThorne had found which allowed for the existence of a traversablewormhole would apply equally well to time travel as to space travel.The point, of course, is that Einstein’s equations of the generaltheory of relativity describe space-time, not just space alone. Awormhole (an Einstein-Rosen bridge) can link different parts ofspace-time in our own Universe. This means that it can link differ-ent regions of space at the same time (allowing instantaneous spacetravel). It can also link the same place at different times (allowinginstantaneous time travel). Or, indeed, it can link different places atdifferent times, allowing the intrepid voyager to travel through bothspace and time, simultaneously and instantaneously. Thorne onlyrealized the full power of the work he had started out on as a favorto Sagan when he went to a symposium in Chicago in December1986, and one of the other participants pointed out the implicationsof the work for time travel. 
This posed Thorne with what he thought was a real dilemma. He
had two students, Michael Morris and Ulvi Yurtsever, who wereeager to work on the theory of wormholes. But Thorne worried thatthey might blight their careers by publishing papers about timetravel and become a laughing stock in the scientific community. ItSTEPHEN HAWKING 296Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlwasn’t until 1988 that the three of them published a paper on time
travel, in the journal Physical Review Letters (vol. 61, p. 1446), and
even when the paper appeared Thorne instructed the staff at theCaltech public relations department to turn their job on its head—not only were they not allowed to publicize the paper, but they hadto try to suppress any publicity for the work! 
Of course, this didn’t work. News about the paper, and the evi-
dence that the laws of the general theory of relativity—the best the-ory of space-time that we have—do not forbid time travel, spreadquickly. The effect was exactly the opposite of what Thorne hadfeared. His own career received a boost, and the careers of his twostudents were kick-started triumphantly. Over in Russia, IgorNovikov had been thinking along similar lines but had been afraidto publish for fear of being ridiculed; encouraged by the receptionfor the Caltech work, he presented his own ideas in public, and timetravel studies became respectable. 
Hawking was one of the researchers who joined this cottage
industry in the 1990s. We should emphasize that none of this workis directed at developing any practical means of time travel, even inthe far future. Any civilization that wanted to build a time machine
would have to be able to manipulate stellar mass black holes, aswell as having access to a supply of cosmic string. The relativiststoday are more concerned about the implications that wormholesthat form time machines might exist naturally in the Universe, per-haps left over from the Big Bang itself. Even if the wormholes wereonly big enough for particles like electrons and protons to travelthrough them, there would be serious implications for our under-standing of the way the Universe works. 
So the efforts of the theorists in the 1990s concentrated on two
approaches to the problem. First, they tried to prove that time travelreally is impossible and that Thorne and his colleagues were mis-taken when they claimed otherwise. This approach has failed; thereA Brief History of Time Travel 297Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlis still no evidence that the laws of physics forbid time travel, only
that they make it very difficult to build a time machine. But thesecond approach is intriguingly different and is where Hawkingreally comes into the story of time travel, although he is also one ofthe people who would like to be able to prove that it is impossible.The aim is to show that the Universe is set up in such a way that theonly kind of time travel that can actually occur does not disturb thestatus quo. 
This is known as the “chronology protection conjecture” (a term
invented by Hawking), and you can see why it is important by pon-dering the implications of the “granny paradox,” a theme that hasbeen exhaustively explored, in different variations, by the sciencefiction writers. 
In the classic version of the paradox, a time traveler goes back in
time and inadvertently (or even deliberately) causes the death of hismaternal grandmother, before his own mother was born. So thetime traveler himself could never have existed, in which case, hisgranny was never killed, and he didexist—and so on. 
Physicists are uncomfortable when dealing with people (at least
when dealing with people as experimental objects), but Novikovand Thorne have treated the puzzle in terms any physicist can feelat ease with (the possibilities of this variation on the theme werefirst pointed out to Thorne in a letter from Joe Polchinski, of theUniversity of Texas in Austin). Imagine a wormhole that is bentround on itself so that it has two mouths alongside each other inspace but at different times. One mouth is a few seconds in the pastof the other. Now roll a billiard ball into the second mouth. The ballcomes out of the first mouth a few seconds before it goes in the sec-
ond mouth. This is already a neat trick; but with a little practice atrolling the ball on different trajectories into the second mouth, youcan do something even more interesting. Arrange the path of theball so that when it emerges from the first mouth it bumps into theSTEPHEN HAWKING 298Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlversion of itself that is still traveling toward the second hole, knock-
ing itself out of the way. So the ball never goes round the time loop,in which case, it did not knock itself out of the way, and it didenter
the time tunnel—and so on. 
The relevance of this puzzle is that it addresses subjects such as free
will and determinism, and whether the Universe “knows” in advancethe outcome of a scientific experiment—it asks how time itself works. 
One resolution of the puzzle, familiar from science fiction and
endorsed by some interpretations of quantum theory, is that thereare many different parallel realities (perhaps an infinite number)existing side by side, in some sense, in a multidimensional space-time. On that picture, the granny who gets killed is the one in theuniverse next door (or a few blocks over), and although in that real-ity she has no children, in the first reality the original granny (fromthe perspective of the time traveler) grows up and has a daughterwho has a son. This is the kind of time travel scenario explored inthe Back to the Future series of movies. In the first of those movies,
Marty has not changed the past to make his father a successfulauthor; Marty himself (as becomes clear in Back to the Future II )
has somehow slipped into a parallel reality, and in that reality hisfather always was a successful author (there ought, therefore, to betwoMartys in the “new” reality, but even Steven Spielberg some-
times misses a trick!). This approach also has a family resemblanceto the sum-over-histories approach to quantum mechanics, men-tioned in Chapter 10,
3although now the different realities are each
treated as “real” in their own right and are not averaged over. 
The other resolution to the granny paradox is sometimes called
the consistent histories approach, and says that even if people (orparticles) can travel in time, whatever happens when they do somust be a self-consistent solution to the laws of physics. So youcan’t go back in time and kill your granny when she was a little girl,because history already records that the killing did not occur. YouA Brief History of Time Travel 299Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlmay tryto do so, if you are nasty enough, but (as several SF writers
have entertainingly suggested) if you do try, something will happento deflect you from your intended course of action. 
Hawking discusses both possibilities in his latest book,
4where he
also points out a neat way to explain why we have not received anyvisitors from the future. After all, even though it might take thou-sands of years to develop the technology to travel in time, once acivilization had done so, wouldn’t the whole of the past be open toit for exploration? Perhaps not. A possible way to explain theabsence of visitors from the future today is that a time machinewould open up the entire future for exploration but would onlyallow time travelers to go back in time to the moment when the timemachine first became operational. They could not go any furtherback because at earlier times the machine would not exist! 
But the chronology protection conjecture may make all such
speculation redundant, if it operates the way Hawking himselfthinks it might. 
This has to do with the way a time machine doesn’t only act as a
time machine, but (as you may have noticed) as a matter duplicator.In the example of the billiard ball traveling round a time loop, thereis a short period of time—a few seconds in our chosen example, butit could be as long as you like—in which there are two copies of theball in the same present. The matter the second version of the ballis made of represents a substantial amount of energy (in line withEinstein’s equation, E = mc
2), and a human being (let alone a space-
ship) would represent much more energy. This energy requirementis another constraint on the construction of a practical timemachine—you would have to supply an enormous amount of addi-tional energy to send anything through the machine, equivalent tomaking a duplicate of the object being transmitted, although thatmight not be much of a problem to a civilization that could manip-ulate cosmic string. STEPHEN HAWKING 300Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlOne of the arguments proposed in an attempt to prove that time
travel wormholes could not exist drew on this “photocopying”propensity of time machines. It said that if such a wormhole didexist, a beam of light (or even a few photons, the particles of light)shone into one mouth would go round and round the time loop,duplicating itself each time, and adding up to make an infinitelylarge blast of energy that would blow the time machine apart.Thorne convinced himself (and the other time travel researchers)that this would not happen, because each time the beam of lightcomes out of the mouth of the wormhole it is defocused and spreadout to fill the Universe. Only a tiny fraction gets caught in the othermouth of the wormhole and repeats the round-trip. 
But there is another kind of radiation that also has to be taken
into account—the equivalent for a wormhole of the HawkingRadiation associated with a black hole. Quantum uncertainty, as wediscussed in Chapter 9, allows the existence of vacuum fluctuations,usually temporary particles created out of nothing at all; these fluc-tuations can be promoted to become real particles in regions ofintense gravity, like the surroundings of a wormhole. This obviouslyhad to be taken into account in any satisfactory discussion of thephysics of time machines. But the equations that describe the condi-tions that allow these quantum fluctuations to produce a shower ofphotons in a beam that would grow and circulate around a worm-hole are horrendously complicated, and Thorne and his colleagueSung-Won Kim struggled with the puzzle throughout most of 1990. 
The reason why they calculated the effects of photons, rather
than any other particles, is not just because photons are simpler towork with but because they travel at the speed of light, so that theyloop round and round a time tunnel faster than anything else cango. At first, Thorne and Kim found that, unlike ordinary light, thevacuum fluctuations effectively refocused themselves of their ownaccord. The vacuum radiation spraying out into the Universe fromA Brief History of Time Travel 301Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlone end of the whole would, the equations insisted, be bent back
toward the other mouth, as if by a mysterious force, repeatedlytraveling through the time loop and building up to disastrous levels.Then the two researchers decided that they were wrong. Theythought they had discovered that the buildup of electromagneticenergy could only be infinite for “a vanishingly small interval oftime.” Why should this matter? Because as we explained inChapter 11, quantum physics tells us that even time has a kind ofgraininess and that there is no interval of time shorter than thePlanck time, 10
–45sec. So there is no such thing as “a vanishingly
small interval of time.” 
When Thorne and Kim reworked their calculations making
allowance for the graininess of time implied by the Planck time,they found that quantum effects would stop the disastrous buildupof radiation. So they wrote the work up in a paper that they sub-mitted to the journal Physical Review , and at the same time sent
copies of the paper to various colleagues around the world, includ-ing Hawking. 
Hawking found the flaw in their argument. Although the Planck
time is the smallest interval of time, as Einstein showed with hisspecial theory of relativity, the measured length of a time intervaldepends on how the clock doing the measuring is moving. For thebuildup of radiation in a wormhole, the relevant time is the timemeasured by someone sitting outside the wormhole and watchingwhat is going on. For a clock traveling through the wormhole athigh speed, the cutoff caused by the effects of quantum gravity doesindeed stop the buildup of vacuum radiation 10
–45sec before the
wormhole becomes a time machine. But to anybody sitting outsidethe wormhole and watching the buildup of radiation, this cutoffhappens later—only 10
–95sec before the time machine starts to
operate. Hawking’s revision of the timescale meant that there waspotentially still time for the buildup of radiation to destroy theSTEPHEN HAWKING 302Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlwormhole before it could begin operating as a time machine. But
nobody has yet been able to prove (or disprove) this conjecture. 
The numbers involved are so tiny that it is mind-boggling to
think that physicists can even begin to take note of these effects intheir calculations. The number 10
–95is a decimal point followed by
94 zeroes and a 1. In order to be certain whether or not timemachines can exist, we will need an understanding of quantumgravity, operating over such ridiculously small intervals of time as10
–95sec, to explain what happens to the buildup of quantum fluc-
tuations inside a wormhole. And this is why the subject of timetravel is now of intense interest to physicists—not so much becausethey aim to prove or disprove that time machines can be built, butbecause they are still seeking a successful quantum theory of grav-ity, and by tackling puzzles such as the chronology protection con-jecture they hope to be able to find which variations on the quan-tum gravity theme are worth pursuing. We are right back at thesearch for a theory of everything, the Holy Grail that always seemsto lie just twenty tantalizing years into the future. 
Hawking’s chronology protection conjecture can be summed up,
in its latest form, as saying that whenever any civilization, no mat-ter how advanced, tries to build a time machine, by whatevermeans, just before the device starts to operate in time machine modea beam of vacuum fluctuation radiation akin to Hawking Radiationwill build up inside the machine and destroy it. Although Thorneagrees that “we cannot know for sure until physicists havefathomed in depth the laws of quantum gravity,”
5it is significant
that on this occasion he refuses to place a bet against Hawking andsays that “Hawking is likely to be right.” The chronology protec-tion conjecture is likely to be Hawking’s last significant contribu-tion to science; appropriately, it may mark the end of time travel, ifnot the end of time. A Brief History of Time Travel 303Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.html