18
Stephen Hawking: Superstar
304The audience of 1,500 music lovers gathered at the Aspen
music festival in Colorado burst into spontaneousapplause as the master of ceremonies, Professor Stephen
Hawking, appeared on stage beneath the enormous white canopycovering the outdoor stage. Aspen is a favorite watering hole of theAmerican scientific community and a frequent venue for meetingsof the world’s foremost physicists. The music festival is patronizedby many of those scientists, including Stephen Hawking, and hisfirst announcement of that evening was to introduce one of his all-time favorite pieces, the Siegfried Idyll , by Wagner, the composer he
had played loudly in his postgraduate rooms in Cambridge in 1963,a short time after learning he was suffering from a life-threateningdisease. This occasion could not have been more different. Nowlauded as the most famous scientist of his generation, he had beenspecially invited to introduce the pieces for the concert, and as soonas he appeared on the stage in his wheelchair and his synthesizedvoice boomed out across the audience he was recognized. But thesymbolism went further. Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.html“This is the Siegfried Idyll ,” he announced,6“which Wagner wrote
in 1870 to be performed on Christmas morning outside the bedroomof his new wife. I am here with my fiancée Elaine and we will bemarried in September, so I think this piece is rather appropriate.” 
By the time of this concert in August 1995, the world had known
for some time that Stephen Hawking’s marriage to his wife of aquarter of a century, Jane, was over. Indeed, the decree absolute hadarrived at their separate homes earlier that summer, a couple ofmonths before the planned wedding date, and the press was alreadyhungry for anything it could discover about the forthcoming event. 
For Stephen Hawking the 1990s had become a decade of even
greater achievement than earlier years, but this success was largelyoutside of science and many would argue that his potency as a top-flight physicist had begun to wane at the end of the 1980s and thathis life was now dominated instead by public activities. The 1980shad been the decade during which he had reached a global audiencewith his best-selling book and his television appearances; thenineties were the years when he became a household name, a publicfigure comfortably discussed in the same breath as other icons ofpopular culture—Hollywood stars, television celebrities, worldleaders, and pop stars. 
But this was only one facet of Hawking’s growing fame. He
seemed to have gained a greater self-confidence from the incredibleand unexpected success of his book and he capitalized on it rapa-ciously. Stephen Hawking has always been a great self-publicist anda very determined man. He had written A Brief History of Time
with the simple intention of making enough money to pay for thehealth care he needed; his success had far exceeded his wildestexpectations. But he is of course a very quick learner and soonadapted to the great wave of acclaim that swept over him at the endof the 1980s. Ironically, this accomplishment, one that had precipi-tated the single most important change in his life, is not somethingStephen Hawking: Superstar 305Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlhe now sees as his greatest achievement. He has said that he is not
“proud” of the success of the book but is merely “pleased” by it.1
During the early 1990s Hawking set about adding to his literary
canon with a collection of other books. First came the book-of-the-film-of-the-book— The Companion to A Brief History of Time ,
which was based upon the script of the Errol Morris film A Brief
History of Time broadcast in 1992, a production that was itself
partly based upon Hawking’s original book. Next came a collectionof essays called Black Holes and Baby Universes which contained a
mixture of separate short pieces covering a range of subjects fromtechnical lectures to descriptions of the author’s personal life andviews on religion and philosophy. Some time later, in 1996, a com-pletely new version of A Brief History of Time appeared, called The
Illustrated Brief History of Time . This was not merely an illustrated
version of the 1988 original but a very different book, which,although based on the original manuscript, was far more accessible.To date this has sold an estimated 100,000 copies in hardback. 
But by far the most significant commercial addition to Hawking’s
literary canon was the publication, late in 2001, of The Universe in
a Nutshell . In this book, Hawking considered many of the themes
he had covered in A Brief History of Time but attempted to deal
with them in clearer terms aimed squarely at a lay audience. 
The responses to this book were mixed. It certainly did well in the
marketplace (although not in quite the same league as A Brief
History of Time ). Many found The Universe in a Nutshell far more
approachable than Hawking’s earlier work, yet some found littlemerit in it. The Guardian ’s reviewer, Jon Turney, declared “ The
Universe in a Nutshell is more episodic than A Brief History of
Time , but is mainly a commentary on the same ideas.”
2
The fact that the early 1990s saw the start of a Hawking indus-
try (of which the original version of this book was a significant part)should come as no surprise. The man had become an internationalSTEPHEN HAWKING 306Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlcelebrity and his personal life was as fascinating to the general pub-
lic as his work had been for many years to the scientifically inclined.And Hawking was quick to place himself at the very center of thisprocess. But at the same time there was a noticeable iciness towardjournalists and writers on the part of many of his friends andstudents, who began to resent the intrusion of fame into the equa-tion. And is not difficult to see why. 
Hawking himself had fallen into a trap of his own making,
ensnared by his own success. On the one hand he wanted to exploithis fame and success, but on the other he genuinely did not want itto interfere with his work. So began a difficult juggling act—keep-ing up a public persona, keeping the books flowing, but at the sametime maintaining his position at the cutting edge of his field. 
Hawking may appear to possess superhuman abilities as a scien-
tist and as a survivor, but he could not keep all the balls in the airat once, and many of those who know him and work with himwould admit that his scientific work has indeed suffered and thatStephen Hawking no longer leads but follows closely behind otherless famous innovators. 
Hawking knew early on that he could use A Brief History of
Time as a stepping stone rather than leaving it as an end in itself.
From the moment the book reached a global audience, he rightlyexploited the phenomenon he had created and was determined togain as much as he could from it. This manifested itself in a numberof ways. Some of the things Hawking has done with his fame arepurely selfish, others are totally altruistic, and some he has donesimply for fun. 
On Christmas Day 1992 he appeared on Radio 4’s Desert Island
Discs . He revealed little about his life that was not already known
but he came across well, portraying his charm and charisma despitethe mechanical sound of his voice. He talked about the ways inwhich he dealt with his illness and how he had succeeded in hisStephen Hawking: Superstar 307Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlvaried career despite the affliction of ALS, hinting that in some
respects it had helped him by allowing him to focus on his thoughtswithout the distraction of administration and playing a practicalrole in his domestic life. His choice of music was a fairly predictableconfection that included Beethoven, Brahms, his beloved Wagner,and the Beatles. 
The following spring Hawking was approached by BT to star in
a new set of commercials being produced for them by Saachi andSaachi (ironically, the company that had created the winning pub-licity campaigns for a Tory party Hawking absolutely detests). Themessage was built around the theme of the importance of commu-nicating, even when it is very difficult to do so, and the 90-secondads showed Hawking in various impressive locations with his voice-over stating how important the ability to communicate is to human-ity and how talking had been the means by which everything hadbeen achieved in history, thereby implying that we should all investmore in the benefits to be gained from talking to others on the tele-phone. BT have never disclosed how much Hawking was paid forhis services, but have been happy to repeat the message that Stephenwas tailor-made for the job. “Hawking is a perfect example ofsomeone who lives to communicate. He acts as a very powerfulmetaphor for BT.”
3
Although he made a significant sum from these advertisements,
far more important for Hawking was the exposure they affordedhim. Although he constantly claims that he is not a media animaland resents the intrusion of publicity into his life and the demandsit entails, he loves the attention he gets from appearing on millionsof television screens. Among the many paradoxes that make upStephen Hawking, one is the fact that he simultaneously shuns andcourts the attention of the media, especially television and film. Hegenuinely feels that the crescendo of celebrity that followed the suc-cess of A Brief History of Time has damaged what, at the core ofSTEPHEN HAWKING 308Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlhis being, is most important to him—his scientific work; but at the
same time his not inconsiderable ego propels him into more activi-ties that will heighten his profile and take him away from theDAMTP. It was known in media circles that Hawking was desper-ately keen to acquire his own television show, and the BT advertswere an important stepping stone in this direction. In the autumn of1997, almost five years after those ads, he achieved his dream whena new series, Stephen Hawking’s Universe , was broadcast for the
first time. If fame was his motivation for doing the series of ads thenit worked, because for a surprising number of people in Britain,Hawking is the man from the BT ads first, the author of A Brief
History of Time second, and one of the world’s leading physicists
third. For a depressingly large number he is only the first of these. 
In the summer of 1995, riding on the crest of this new wave of
fame, Hawking accepted an invitation to deliver a lecture at theRoyal Albert Hall. By doing this he was again following in the foot-steps of the scientist with whom he is most frequently identified—Albert Einstein. As a refugee from Nazi Germany, Einstein gave apublic lecture at the Albert Hall in London when he lived inEngland briefly during 1933. Hawking’s was the best-attended pub-lic physics lecture delivered in Britain since that occasion and heeasily filled the 5,000-seat arena; on the pavements outside toutssold tickets for the event at inflated prices to fans who had notmanaged to obtain them through official means. In typical fashionHawking decided to end the lecture on a controversial note similarto the way he ended his best-selling book, by discussing the ques-tion of God’s role in the mechanisms that govern the universe. Heconcluded, “God still has a few tricks up his sleeve.” 
Although Hawking could have made a fortune from the lecture,
and indeed could command almost any price to conduct a publiclecture tour anywhere in the world, he provided his services for theAlbert Hall event free and only agreed to be involved because theStephen Hawking: Superstar 309Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlproceeds were given over to a charity concerned with motor neuron
disease. And indeed, Hawking’s greatest redeeming quality since thesuccess of his literary career has been the fact that as his fame hassoared he has exploited it as much to help others as to help himself. 
Throughout the 1990s, Hawking has made every effort to help
charities he believes in to gain publicity by association with hisname. Quite naturally he is most keen to help charities dealing withphysical disability and in particular motor neuron disease. He hasbeen vociferous in his efforts. Writing to The Times in March 1994,
he attacked the establishment by saying that disabled people 
. . . face great obstacles when they want to take part in any normal activities like
going to the theatre or cinema, or eating in restaurants. As I know only too well,very few London theatres and cinemas have wheelchair places. If there were suchdiscrimination against blacks or women there would be a public outcry.
4
But although he has endorsed national campaigns and protests, he
has also worked on a local level, pushing Cambridge Council intoproviding local residents with better access to theaters, museums,libraries, and other public places and generally helping to raiseawareness of the special needs of physically handicapped people. 
He also firmly believes that the technology now available to him
through the money he has earned as an author should be madeavailable to other seriously disabled people via the NHS and claimsthat reliance upon charity (and in his case good fortune) is “simplynot good enough.” To help the plight of others who have beenparalyzed either through accidents or diseases such as ALS,Hawking has spearheaded several campaigns to generate funds.Part of this effort involved his endorsing an exhibition of the poten-tial future technology associated with disability, called Speak to Me ,
based at the Science Museum in London. Merely having Hawking’sname associated with the exhibition and having him open it guar-STEPHEN HAWKING 310Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlanteed its success, attracting the interest of the media and a public
who would normally not be drawn to so esoteric an exhibition. 
Shortly afterward he went on to support a charity called Aspire
(Appeal for the Professor of Disability and Technology), whose aimwas to create a seat at University College London devoted entirelyto research into technology to be used by the disabled. Hawkingsaid of the project: 
The scope is enormous. There are over six million disabled people in this country,
some very disabled like me, and a large proportion of these can be helped.Disabled people are people first and disabled second. They should not be con-demned to a lifetime sentence of solitary confinement without the power to movethem or communicate with the outside world.
5
When the Civil Rights Bill eventually fell upon stony ground in
1994, Hawking urged people to react by opposing the government,saying, “I don’t think any disabled person should vote for the pres-ent government unless they do something to atone for the shabbyway they killed the Civil Rights Bill.”
6
But at the same time as he has been furthering his own career and
helping others, he has had some fun. In 1993, while he was visitingthe set of Star Trek, the Next Generation , Hawking let slip to the
executives taking him around the Enterprise that he had always fan-
tasized about appearing in an episode of the program. No soonerwas it mentioned than the producers managed to work him into thescript in a cameo role for an episode being filmed at the time. Inthis, his first and only dramatic role to date, Hawking appeared onthe holodeck of the USS Enterprise to play poker with Data, Isaac
Newton, and Albert Einstein. Afterward, one of the executives whohad arranged for Hawking to appear said, “He may admire theshow but we are bigger fans of his.”
7Stephen Hawking: Superstar 311Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlNot surprisingly, Hawking was soon in demand within the enter-
tainment world. Pink Floyd sampled him talking for their album The
Division Bell ; and in OK Computer , released in the summer of 1997,
Radiohead composed a musical collage built around Hawking read-ing from a preprepared script the band had written for him. 
On the Internet, Hawking also attracts a great deal of attention
from surfers not only interested physics and the extreme edge ofcosmological research but also fascinated by his celebrity status, hisrelationship with science fiction and now even popular music. Thereare literally thousands of Stephen Hawking and A Brief History of
Time sites on the World Wide Web, and through Internet forums it
is remarkably easy to find people around the world at any time ofthe night or day happy to discuss obscure aspects of the professor’swork and thoughts. Not all of these are trivial fan websites andforums—there is the official Stephen Hawking website and lecturespublished by Hawking supporters and detractors. These range fromother scientists working in allied fields, through producers andjournalists putting their interviews and scripts online, to vigorousopponents of Hawking’s religious and philosophical views publish-ing online arguments refuting his statements and offering alterna-tives to his ideas. 
Within the cloistered world of Cambridge University, Hawking is
certainly the most famous and revered academic since IsaacNewton. Today he is tended round the clock by no fewer than tennurses. He has a sumptuous office in a new building on the westside of Cambridge. Here he has had new pictures and posters puton the walls including a mock-up poster that shows MarilynMonroe leaning against a Cadillac with Hawking in his wheelchairbeside her as though they are about to go out on date together. Healso has a sign on the wall that reads: “Yes, I am the centre of theuniverse.” Pictures of his three children are still in evidence, butthere are now none of Jane Hawking, of course. STEPHEN HAWKING 312Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlAdoration and respect are the upside of Hawking’s new-found
status as some sort of universal guru, but as his fame has escalatedcontroversy has naturally followed close behind; controversy thathas often overshadowed his scientific pronouncements and upset hisprivate life. 
The backlash (and that is really not too harsh a description)
began in the early 1990s, when some of his colleagues within thescientific community began to question openly what they saw as theridiculous hyperbole that had appeared in the wake of Hawking’strail-blazing career. Rival writer and physicist John Barrow com-mented in one newspaper interview: “In a list of the twelve best the-oretical physicists this century, Steve would be nowhere near.”
8And
a new attack soon began. Articles started to appear by journalistscondemning what they saw as Hawking’s own lack of qualificationin making his now-famous comments about religion and the inter-face between his scientific and religious ideas. In October 2001 apoll run by the science journal Physics World to find those whom
physicists themselves believed to be the greatest practitioners oftheir profession throughout history placed Einstein top with 119votes and Newton second with 46, but Hawking received only 1vote and came last (along with many other scientists).
9
Most prominent among Hawking’s critics is Bryan Appleyard,
who has repeatedly attacked Hawking in the popular press, callinghim “arrogant” and claiming that his remarks outside the world ofphysics are “intellectually feeble.” Appleyard’s principal contentionis that Hawking knows nothing of philosophy but is trying to belit-tle the subject and to replace religious and philosophical convictionwith a purely empirical view of the universe. But in our opinionAppleyard is blinded by his own misguided conviction thatphilosophy is the noblest of subjects, declaring in one particularlyvitriolic piece: Stephen Hawking: Superstar 313Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlThe admittedly thrilling and extraordinary nature of speculative physics works to
convince readers they are in the hands of a great universal adept, and that thiswizard will surely be as able to navigate the human realms as deftly as he doesthat of the stars. The first danger of this kind of belief is that it diminishes anddiscredits science itself. Hawking’s idea of science is that of a rarefied disciplinefar above the heads of ordinary people and definitely superior to all competingforms of knowledge.
10
If this were so, why did Stephen Hawking write a popular science
book, why does he go out of his way to give free lectures to thepublic, and why is he so keen to have his books reach as wide amarket as possible? His motivation can certainly not be solelyattributed to financial reward and egomania. 
The general feeling among many scientists who support
Hawking’s stance is that Appleyard has an axe to grind and haspicked on Hawking as the embodiment of what he most despisesabout science. Hawking himself has said of the journalist, “He hasa real chip on his shoulder. I don’t know that I have seen him writeapprovingly of anyone. I feel he’s a failed intellectual and so he hasto decry everyone else.”
11
Appleyard is certainly not the only public critic of Hawking.
Several academics have gone on record criticizing what they see asHawking’s pure and even dangerous atheism and a few have takentheir grievances with them to the lecture circuit. One of Hawking’smost able critics is the Nobel Prize nominee chemist Dr. “Fritz”Schaefer of the Center for Computational Quantum Chemistry atthe University of Georgia in the United States. In a lecture deliveredin 1994 and now available on the Net, he quoted the great physicist(and atheist) Richard Feynman, who once said:  “Everything inphysical science is a lot of protons, neutrons and electrons, while indaily life, we talk about men and history or beauty and hope. Whichis nearer to God—beauty and hope or the fundamental laws? Tostand at either end and to walk off that end of the pier only, hopingSTEPHEN HAWKING 314Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlthat out in that direction is a complete understanding, is a mistake.”
Schaefer then added, “I would have to say that what StephenHawking has done is to walk off one end of that pier.” 
Most of the flak has come not only from Hawking’s uncompro-
mising empirical stance but also from his seeming disrespect for reli-gious or philosophical explanations of the origin and nature of theuniverse. For this part, Hawking considers the many public state-ments of his antagonists as a touch hysterical and has wryly com-mented that if he had not included the famous line of A Brief
History of Time —“However, if we do discover a complete theory . . .
then we would know the mind of God”—he would have probablyhalved his sales at a single stroke. 
Although he may not be quite so evangelical as some other
acclaimed science popularizers, his clinical dismissal of religion andwhat has been seen as unforgivable arrogance are backed by a gen-uine belief in the claims he makes for science. Looked at dispas-sionately, Hawking merely offers an alternative purist view thatmay be taken or left at the discretion of the individual. 
At the same time, whether his reputation is justified or not, there
is no denying that Professor Stephen Hawking is now established asthe “scientific genius” of our age and as such he is approached forcomment upon almost anything that happens, even on the fringes ofscience, and perhaps unwisely, in his ongoing search for evengreater fame he is always quick to respond. 
Following the tragedy of September 11th, and as fears of biologi-
cal attack swept across America, Hawking was reported as saying: “Idon’t think the human race will survive the next 1,000 years unlesswe spread into space. There are too many accidents that can befall lifeon a single planet.” When asked for his views on nuclear weapons, heresponded: “In the long term I’m more worried about biology.Nuclear weapons need large facilities, but genetic engineering can bedone in a small lab. You can’t regulate every lab in the world.”
12Stephen Hawking: Superstar 315Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlA list of the subjects upon which Hawking has offered comment
in recent years includes aliens: “I think that any alien visitationwould be obvious and probably unpleasant.” Of the NationalLottery he declares: “I object to the National Lottery because itencourages gambling and because it takes money from those whoare least able to afford it. . . . It is pretty shabby of the governmentto exploit their weakness.”
13He has dabbled in politics, nominat-
ing Anne Campbell as the labor candidate in Cambridge during the1997 general election, and he became a representative forCambridge University in protracted discussions with the computerentrepreneur Bill Gates when Cambridge made its successful bid tosite a massive new Microsoft research complex in the city. He is agreat fan of the Internet. After having his computer systemupgraded by Intel, Hawking claimed that he must be “one of themost connected people in the world and I can truly say, I’m Intelinside.”
14The company was so pleased with this publicity it added
free new software to his wheelchair enabling him to use radiosignals to operate lights, doors, and other electrical devices byremote control. He has even had a word or two to say about popmusic, announcing in the Cambridge University student magazineVarsity that he likes Oasis. 
In 1998 Hawking met President Bill Clinton at the White House.
During the election campaign of 2000, he made it very clear that heconsidered Al Gore to be the best hope for America and the world,declaring to the press his belief that, “Mr. Gore is more preparedthan any other world figure I know of to meet the challenges of thefuture. . . . The next president of the United States is more than aleader of your country. He will have to pilot the whole worldthrough a period of ever-increasing change brought about by theadvances in science and technology that are transforming our lives.Al Gore understands the implications of this change and will be ableto shape it and seize its opportunities.”
15STEPHEN HAWKING 316Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlAt the same time as he has been seen endorsing products and
promoting good causes, Hawking’s sudden international fame hasalso set him up as a target for the gutter press. When he and ElaineMason decided to marry in 1995, the story made headlines aroundthe world and not all of the comments that appeared in print werecomplementary or congratulatory. 
Naturally, all the ingredients for a sensational story were there.
Hawking, the most physically disabled person in public life, thecliché of the purely cerebral entity confined to a wheelchair, washaving an extramarital relationship with his nurse and had left hisloving wife of twenty-five years and his three children. DavidMason, former husband of Hawking’s fiancée, had been left devas-tated with the two heartbroken children from the marriage. And totop it off, deep down, between the lines of print, the hyperbole andthe hypocrisy lay the fact that Hawking and Elaine were clearlyhaving a sexual relationship. It was perfect media fodder. 
Sadly, behind the sensational coverage of Hawking’s remarriage
lay genuine pain and heartache for a collection of people includingStephen and his new partner. Jane was naturally devastated by thenews, and for almost the first time she broke her silence concerningher feelings about Stephen, their marriage, and their breakup. As isoften the case with couples splitting up, by the time Hawking hadannounced his marriage to Elaine and the papers were full of thecouple’s plans, the relationship between Jane and Stephen had longsince slid into recrimination and bitterness, and for a long time theydid not speak to each other except over matters concerning theirchildren. During 1995 Jane was the subject of a collection of inter-views in daily newspapers and was candid about her feelings. “I donot know the dynamics of their situation,” she said referring toStephen and Elaine, “but I believe it was ill-advised.” She then wenton to comment cryptically: “I fear he has been caught up in forcesbeyond his control. I have been very concerned about what is hap-Stephen Hawking: Superstar 317Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlpening to Stephen for a long time and I will continue to be
concerned.”16
Hawking’s daughter, Lucy, also broke her silence and wrote a
very revealing piece for a national paper in which she described asuppressed but deep sadness and resentment over the breakup ofher parent’s marriage. But at the same time she pointed out that shehad never had what might be considered a “normal” childhood,and despite the best efforts of her parents she had been caught upin the offshoots of her father’s celebrity status. Apparently oneanonymous Hawking fan whom she had never met had written pro-posing marriage—on the condition that she first read his physicsthesis. 
Lucy was in Prague when her father married Elaine Mason and
Hawking’s eldest son, Robert, was in the United States where henow lives and works. On the day of the wedding, Jane andStephen’s youngest son, Tim, stayed at home with his mother, andneither of the Mason children attended the ceremony. 
By this time Jane was living with a classical musician, Jonathan
Hellyer-Jones, and her life had moved on in other ways. She hadbecome an author herself and had written a book about convertingproperties in France called At Home in France . But clearly the
wounds still ran deep, because despite having rebuilt her life afterthe separation in 1990, recriminations continued. Jane said ofStephen and Elaine’s big day: “I wasn’t invited to the wedding andif I had been I wouldn’t have attended.” And years later, in 1999,she had published her autobiography, Music to Move the Stars , in
which she gave a no-holds-barred account of her life with Stephen.Her book painted a far from pretty picture of the Hawkingmarriage. Meanwhile, David Mason (who had been doubly dam-aged by the loss of his wife because much of his computer businesswas built around Hawking’s system) simply commented thatHawking “uses people.”
17STEPHEN HAWKING 318Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlEven Hawking’s mother, Isobel, made a rather dignified public
comment about the treatment Stephen and Elaine had received fromthe press, revealing in an interview that she thought her son’s rela-tionship had been misrepresented. “The coverage of the weddingand the barrage beforehand were thoroughly unpleasant,” she said.“The impression was that Elaine was an interloper—and she is not.There is nothing disreputable about the wedding, as the press sug-gested. It is quite normal for people who have been together for fouryears to get married.”
18
Indeed, the media seemed determined to portray the Hawking
wedding as something of a freak show. The occasion was variouslydubbed “Best-seller weds,” “Einstein wedding boycott,” and“Genius weds nurse,” and more than one national newspaper jour-nalist wrote condescending features heavy with the whiff of sancti-moniousness. 
But perhaps in reflective moments Hawking accepts this furor as
the downside of having by now become public property, a figure asmuch in the public eye as Hollywood actors, pop stars, and royalty.If he is happy to appear in any newspaper commenting upon almostanything, then he cannot justifiably complain too much if the pressfails to treat his personal life with due respect. He has never madeany form of public complaint over the issue, although his mother’scomment on this was that: “Stephen and Elaine have never said ithas hurt them, but I think it has caused them pain.”
19
A poignant reminder of Hawking’s many-faceted life and career
came with the celebration of his 60th birthday. A press releaseannounced that there would be “a special birthday symposiumphotocall and that space for TV crews and photographeres wouldbe very limited.” Newspapers around the world covered the storyand great attention was given to the fact that the professor is stillwith us, almost 40 years after being diagnosed with ALS and givenonly a short time to live. But at the same time, “Hawking theStephen Hawking: Superstar 319Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlscientist” was not forgotten and he chaired a special four-day sym-
posium at Cambridge University on “The Future of TheoreticalPhysics and Cosmology.” On the evening of his birthday, January 8,he hosted a private party to which over two hundred family, friends,colleagues, and former students were invited. 
So beneath the hyperbole and the media gloss, who is the real
Stephen Hawking? He is a force to be reckoned with, of that thereis little doubt. His strength of personality is formidable—given hisphysical condition, how else could he have survived and achievedgreatness in more than one arena? He can be ruthless; he drives ahard bargain with life and approaches it head on. He finds it diffi-cult to compromise; his force of will can sometimes work againsthim. Many people find him abrasive, but on the other hand he isfamous for his sense of humor. He has many close friends andadmirers and has proved himself to be a loving and affectionatefather. It is impossible to know the man’s inner thoughts, so inti-mately linked as he is to machines, a set of cold devices enablinghim to move, speak, and breathe. His face is, if anything, moreexpressive than most because, aside from his gift for succinct lan-guage, it is just about our only window into his mind. A major partof Stephen Hawking is his work, but so few of us can understand itexcept in the vaguest pictorial terms. His attempt to communicatehis understanding to the world at large through his best-sellingbook has succeeded. Of course, a great many copies of A Brief
History of Time have hardly been opened, left to adorn bookshelves
as fashion accessories, but despite this there are many—perhapsmillions—who have learned more about the universe we live inthrough reading his words. He has achieved astounding success byawakening a skeptical public and an even more skeptical media tothe beauty of science, a subject at the heart of our society and thefuture of civilization. The popularization of science has seen a newSTEPHEN HAWKING 320Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlrenaissance, thanks in large measure to his efforts, and indeed there
is now a recognized “Hawking factor” in science publishing. 
Beyond all this, running deeper than his hugely successful writing
career, beyond even his scientific achievements, there remains thehuman triumph of his very survival, the strength of his spirit inaccomplishing more than most of us dream about. Some claim thatStephen Hawking has made it only because of the unfortunate cir-cumstances in which he has found himself, but such glibness deniesthe very essence of humanity. Others crumble under far less strain.It is the Stephen Hawkings of this world who soar, no matter whatbefalls them. To those intent upon destroying legends and denigrat-ing achievement, he has a typically modest but perfectly accurateresponse. It would stand equally well as his own epitaph and as aphilosophy of life for all of us to follow: “One has to be grown upenough to realize that life is not fair. You just have to do the bestyou can in the situation you are in.”
20Stephen Hawking: Superstar 321Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.html