10
The Foothills of Fame
152Reflecting on his achievements during the first thirty-two
years of his life, Stephen Hawking must have felt a deepsense of pride in what he had accomplished. The 1970s
were the years when he established himself as a world-class physi-cist, and they marked the beginning of two decades of startling suc-cess in the disparate worlds of arcane research and popular writing. 
Soon after becoming a fellow of the Royal Society, Hawking was
invited to spend a year away from Cambridge at Caltech, inPasadena. The research year, funded by a Sherman FairchildDistinguished Scholarship, was to study cosmology with the emi-nent American theoretician Kip Thorne. 
Pasadena is a leafy suburb of Los Angeles, nestling up against the
San Gabriel Mountains to the northeast of Hollywood. The wideboulevards intersecting the district are lined with grand old houses,and in the heyday of Hollywood it was a favorite haunt of filmstars. The main street, Colorado Boulevard, was immortalized inthe Jan and Dean song “Little Old Lady from Pasadena,” and therehas been no shortage of celebrity names who have taken up resi-Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmldence there over the decades. However, in the summer Pasadena is
one of the smoggiest areas of Los Angeles because the mountainsinhibit the escape of ozone. If a Stage 2 Smog Alert is sounded,citizens are advised to stay indoors unless on essential business, andthe authorities have the power to make industry and commerce tem-porarily shut down. Smog alert warnings are broadcast on theradio, and illuminated signs are switched on over freeways. Perhapsthe American Indians displayed great powers of premonition, when,long before white men arrived, they named the region “Valley of theSmokes.” 
Caltech itself is unique in that, for such a prestigious institution,
it is tiny. In the mid-seventies it was home to no more than fifteenhundred students and was a tenth the size of colleges with compa-rable reputations such as Harvard or Yale. But despite its size,Caltech is the West Coast’s mecca for science and technology.Throughout its history it has attracted the leading people in theirfields from all over the world. Nobel Prize-winning physicist RobertMillikan arrived there in the twenties and was frequently visited byAlbert Einstein. Money simply pours into the place from benefac-tors ranging from private individuals fascinated with scientificresearch to multinationals such as IBM and Wang. With some of thebest telescopes in the world a matter of miles away on MountWilson and the massive Jet Propulsion Laboratory as a gargantuan“annex” dwarfing the mother campus, it has everything a scientistcould wish for. 
Some of the world’s best physicists were based at Caltech in the
seventies. Kip Thorne headed the relativity group there, and thecharismatic Nobel laureate Richard Feynman still taught there andplayed bongos in college bands during the evenings. Academicquality aside, the contrast between Caltech and Caius could nothave been starker. The buildings making up the campus, althoughtastefully designed and constructed in sand-colored stone, are allThe Foothills of Fame 153Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlSpanish-style, light and airy, with the nine-story Millikan Library
block rising at the center. Those admitted to Caltech are among thevery best students in the country, and they are driven hard. There isvery little social life on campus, and the suicide rate among studentsranks almost as high as its academic reputation. Having said that,there was no shortage of colorful characters around the place at thetime of Hawking’s sabbatical. 
Richard Feynman, a physics professor, had already acquired a
formidable reputation as an amiable eccentric and once took on thelocal authorities who were trying to close down a topless bar inPasadena. In court he claimed that he frequently used the place towork on his physics. Feynman and Hawking shared an offbeatsense of humor, and although their work rarely overlapped they hada lot of time for each other. Both men have achieved internationalfame as scientists and live-wire characters, and each has acquiredcult status in the wider world outside his own discipleship of grad-uate students and fascinated laypeople. When Feynman died ofcancer in 1988, the whole of Caltech mourned and the globalvillage of science felt the loss. 
Kip Thorne, now viewed as the West Coast’s relativity guru,
favors floral shirts, beads, and shoulder-length gray hair. He intro-duced Hawking to another physicist who was to play a significantrole in collaborations and become one of Hawking’s lifelongfriends—Don Page. Page, who was born in Alaska and graduatedfrom a small college in Missouri, was working on his Ph.D. at thetime of Hawking’s visit. The two of them immediately hit it off, andbefore Hawking’s year at Caltech was over they had written a blackhole paper together. 
The family was excited by the move. Jane organized all the
details, booking airline tickets, packing, and arranging schedules, aswell as managing to transport a severely disabled husband and twoyoung children to the other side of the world almost single-STEPHEN HAWKING 154Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlhandedly. At Caltech Hawking was treated with the respect he
should have received at his own college in Cambridge. Woodenramps were fitted against the curbs in the vicinity of his office sothat he could get around easily in his wheelchair, and he was pro-vided with a smart office and every aid and resource he would needto help him with his research. The work was satisfying, and hefound collaboration with Thorne’s team both stimulating and sci-entifically rewarding. Jane and the children enjoyed the SouthernCalifornia climate. Despite the air pollution, noise, and trafficcongestion of Los Angeles, the beaches and the blue Pacific made awelcome change from the often monotonous lifestyle and erraticweather of Cambridgeshire. 
With her blonde hair, four-year-old Lucy was the epitome of the
California flower child and loved the place. Robert had to continuewith his schooling, but there was plenty of time for the family to betogether and do at least some of the things they enjoyed back home.Within Caltech’s cloistered environment, the family was shelteredfrom the extremes Los Angeles had to offer and, moving in privi-leged academic circles, Pasadena was not unlike the coziness ofCambridge—but with sunshine. Jane took the children toDisneyland, and Stephen joined them to travel around SouthernCalifornia when he could take time off from his research. Friendsand colleagues would often visit. They took trips in hired cars toPalm Springs and resorts along the coast, as well as getting to see alittle more of America between duties at Pasadena. 
Back in Britain, the government had finally agreed to join the
European Common Market by the end of the decade and oil hadbegun to flow from the North Sea rigs. It seemed that the early-seventies gloom of strikes, power cuts, and the three-day week mayat last have begun to lift. American astronauts and Soviet cosmo-nauts shook hands hundreds of miles above a burning Cambodia.The Foothills of Fame 155Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlReturning to England in 1975, the family was ready for changes
and improvements in their own lives. 
It often takes a protracted change of lifestyle to highlight the
alterations that can be made when things return to the old routine,and the Hawkings saw immediately that they did not want to goback to the old pattern of life in Cambridge. In some ways theywere glad to be back home. The countryside was greener, theweather less predictable, the television less obtrusive, and the teatasted as God had ordained it to taste. But the simple fact was that,having experienced the comforts of California, they were no longerprepared to put up with some of the inconveniences of their lives inCambridge. 
The first thing that hit them was that, quaint and nostalgic as it
may have been, the house in Little St. Mary’s Lane was far too smallfor them. Stephen was finding it impossible to use the stairs, and itwas too cramped for a family of four. Hawking asked the college tohelp them find somewhere more suitable for their needs. On thisoccasion, the authorities were more than willing to come to theirassistance. As Hawking puts it, “By this time, the College appreci-ated me rather more, and there was a different Bursar.”
1
They were offered a ground-floor flat in a large Victorian house
owned by the college, on West Road, not far from the gate of King’sCollege and a mere ten minutes’ wheelchair ride from the DAMTP.The house has a large garden, regularly tended by college gardenerswho kept it in a permanent state of elegance. The children loved it,and there was never a problem about their playing on the lawns, aninformal truce with the gardeners having been established. Widedoorways made it easy for Hawking to maneuver his wheelchairaround the entire flat, and because it was all on one level he nolonger had to struggle upstairs to get to the bedroom. 
By 1974 Hawking was having difficulty getting in and out of bed
and feeding himself. Until their return from the States, Jane hadSTEPHEN HAWKING 156Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlbeen Stephen’s unpaid, twenty-four-hours-a-day nurse, as well as
his wife. She had, of course, been fully aware of the responsibilitiesexpected of her when she decided to marry Stephen in 1965, but theeffort of bringing up two young children and running the home aswell as looking after her husband was beginning to take its toll onher emotional well-being. They decided to invite one of Hawking’sresearch students to live with them on West Road. The flat was bigenough for another adult, and in return for free accommodation thestudent would help Jane look after Stephen. 
The system worked well. In fact, as Hawking’s prestige grew it
was considered an honor and a good career move to become his“student-in-residence.” It was inevitable that close bonds wereestablished between the young research assistant and his mentor.While Jane received much-needed help, the student gained a closerinsight into Hawking’s mind, and some of his genius was bound torub off. At least that was the theory. There was, of course, anotherside to this: as Hawking himself has said, “It was hard for a studentto be in awe of his professor after he has helped him to the bath-room!”
2Bernard Carr, who was one of Hawking’s earliest students
to have this honor and is now at the University of London, describeshis time there as “like participating in history.”
3The duties of the
lodgers were manifold. To earn their keep they were expected toplay as required the roles of nanny, secretary, and handyman, help-ing with travel arrangements, babysitting the children, drawing uplecture schedules, and managing general household repairs. 
Another early lodger was the American physicist Don Page. After
finishing his Ph.D. at Caltech, Page had written to Hawking askingfor a job reference. In the months that followed, several researchgroups wrote to Hawking about Page, and each time he gave afavorable reference. Then, some time later, he wrote to the youngphysicist, “I’ve been writing letters of reference for you, but I mayhave a position myself.”
4Hawking managed to help Page secureThe Foothills of Fame 157Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlfunding for a year and then organized a grant for a further two
years of research. Page joined the Hawking household in 1976 andreestablished the close friendship they had enjoyed in California, afriendship that has survived to the present day. 
One of Page’s duties was to commute with Hawking each day
between West Road and the DAMTP. This was seen as a good timeto talk, to summarize the previous day’s efforts, and to consider thetasks for the day ahead. It was a very productive time, even thoughPage found Hawking’s way of working through complex mathe-matics in his head quite hard to get used to. Talking about thetwice-daily journey, he has said: 
I found it very good training. During the three years I was a post-
doc, I lived with the Hawking family, and a lot of times I’d walkback and forth with him. Of course I couldn’t write while I waswalking, and sometimes he would ask me something, and I’d try tothink it out in my head. When you have to do it in your head, youhave to get really to the heart of the matter and try to eliminate theinessential details.
5
Around the time of the move to West Road, Hawking found that
he could no longer use the three-wheel invalid car he had had onloan from the National Health Service since 1969 and in which hetraveled to the Institute of Astronomy three times a week. At firstthis appeared to be another blow, but, as has often been the casewith the Hawkings, they were able to turn the situation to theiradvantage. Jane says: 
It was a blessing in disguise, because the roads are so dangerous out to the
Institute anyhow. It didn’t matter because we could afford to buy the electricwheelchair . . . which he runs along in, and is really much more convenient forhim because he doesn’t have to be sure of having people to help him in and outas he does with the car. So he’s completely independent in the electric wheelchair.There’s always some compensating factor that makes deterioration acceptable.
6STEPHEN HAWKING 158Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlHawking became a real demon of a wheelchair driver. One jour-
nalist described his skills thus: 
He hurtles out into the street. At full throttle the chair is capable of a decent trot-
ting pace, and Hawking likes to use full throttle. He also knows no fear. He sim-ply shoots out into the middle of the road on the assumption that any passing carswill stop. His assistants rush nervously out ahead of him to try to minimize thedanger.
7
Jane’s relief that he no longer had to use the three-wheeler on the
roads of Cambridge could so easily have been misplaced. Indeed, inearly 1991, Hawking was involved in an accident in his wheelchair.He is a very familiar figure in the city, and passersby stop and talkto him. However, on this occasion a driver failed to see the chairwith the slumped figure of the world’s most famous living scientistat the controls. The car hit the chair, and Hawking’s frail body wasthrown on to the road. It could have been a disastrous accident, butfortunately he suffered only minor injuries, cutting his face anddamaging a shoulder. It is typical of the man that, against medicaladvice, he was back in his office within forty-eight hours anddemanding that his papers and books be propped up in front of himso that he could work. 
On other occasions, his “boy-racer” antics have caused great
embarrassment. In June 1989, Hawking was to deliver the presti-gious Halley Lecture at Oxford University. A young, newlyappointed physics professor, George Efstathiou, was given the unen-viable task of looking after the eminent visiting lecturer before, dur-ing, and after the talk. Hawking arrived at the Department ofZoology, where the university’s largest lecture theater is housed, andwas escorted into reception. It was Efstathiou’s job to get hisfamous charge to the theater, one floor below, where the vice-The Foothills of Fame 159Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlchancellor of the university and six hundred students, city digni-
taries, and interested laypeople were waiting in expectation. 
A two-man lift at the end of the reception area would take them
to the floor below and lead, via a short corridor, to the lecturetheater. The lift doors were open. Before Efstathiou had a chance ofhelping Hawking into the lift, Hawking set the chair to full throttleand headed for the open doors a dozen yards ahead of him. 
Efstathiou remembers clearly that he estimated, even from that
distance, that Hawking could not make it into the narrow liftentrance, and he could do nothing but watch in horror as his guestspeaker hurtled toward the aperture. At last propelled into action,Efstathiou gave chase but could not catch up. To his amazementHawking made it through the lift doors. 
But that was only the beginning of Efstathiou’s troubles. For as
Hawking had entered the lift, the chair had twisted at an angle andjammed in the narrow space. The lift doors closed automaticallybehind the chair, trapping its wheels between them. Efstathiou waspanic stricken. Downstairs, hundreds of people were waiting forHawking, who was already late. The disabled scientist could notreach any of the control buttons, but the doors had closed on him.What was to be done? 
Meanwhile, seemingly unperturbed by events, Hawking was
busily punching instructions into his computer to get it to put thechair into reverse. If Efstathiou could have seen his face, he wouldundoubtedly have encountered the famous, mischievous Hawkingsmile. Finally, Efstathiou succeeded in squeezing his arm into thecrack between the doors and just managed to reach the door-open-ing button. Freed, Hawking sent the chair into high-speed reverseand reemerged unscathed and grinning. As Efstathiou says, “Thatexperience was quite an initiation into college administration!” 
Hawking uses his wheelchair as an appendage to his paralyzed
body, a device for the physical expression of his personality. He can-STEPHEN HAWKING 160Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlnot shout and scream at people. Nowadays, of course, his
computer-generated voice is totally expressionless, but he can cer-tainly move his wheelchair around. Hawking has, as one journalistput it, “a strain of fierceness running through [his] personality, sur-facing in spates of impatience or anger.”
8If he feels that someone is
wasting his time, he simply spins his wheelchair on the spot andspeeds out of the room in a huff. 
John Boslough recalls an incident when he got on the wrong side
of Hawking and received the usual rebuff. While talking to him hehad become so oblivious to the other’s condition that he began talk-ing about a problem he was having with his elbow as a result of asquash match in London the day before. “Hawking made nocomment. He simply steered his wheelchair out of the room andwaited in the hall for me to return to the subject at hand—theoret-ical physics.”
9Perhaps talking to a paralyzed man about squash
was not the most subtle of things to do, but the incident illustratesthe very well known fact that Hawking is certainly not a man tocross lightly. 
His favorite move, when he is annoyed by something someone
has said, is to drive over their toes. By all accounts, a number of hisstudents and colleagues have had to develop pretty fast reflexes.One of Hawking’s former students, Nick Warner, claims, “His greatregret is that he’s not yet run over Margaret Thatcher!”
10Perhaps
he will get the chance one day. 
There is, of course, a very different side to his personality:
Hawking the family man. He loves nothing more than using hiswheelchair skills when playing with his children and applies hisusual recklessness when racing around the garden of West Roadplaying tag. The sad fact is that he can play no other physical gameswith them. It was Jane who taught them cricket and playedStephen’s old game of croquet on warm summer evenings withRobert, Lucy, and, later, Timothy. As one journalist wrote, The Foothills of Fame 161Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlIn many ways, she has had to be both mother and father to her children. Even the
hours she spent as a schoolgirl on the cricket pitch of St. Albans High School,alternately bored to tears and terrified of the ball, were to have their value. “I have been the one who has to teach my two boys to play cricket—and I can getthem out!” she has said.
11
As their first two children were growing up, Hawking was receiv-
ing greater and greater accolades as a scientist. In the space of justtwo years, 1975 and 1976, he won six major awards. First was theEddington Medal from the Royal Astronomical Society in London,given the year he returned from California. This was followedshortly by the Pius XI Medal, bestowed by the Pontifical Academyof Science at the Vatican. In 1976 came the Hopkins Prize, theDannie Heinemann Prize from the USA, the Maxwell Prize, and theRoyal Society’s Hughes Medal—the citation for which noted “hisremarkable results in his work on black holes.” As the internationalphysics community began to recognize his talents, his own univer-sity was increasingly acknowledging Hawking’s worth. During themove from Little St. Mary’s Lane to West Road, he was made readerin gravitational physics at the DAMTP, an academic position some-where between a fellow and a professor. 
As the awards and prizes mounted up, Jane was becoming
increasingly disillusioned with their life and her role in it. It was atime of great change in the way the West perceived women and theirposition in society. The sixties, for all their sexual liberation andpermissiveness, saw very little real change in the role played bywomen or the way in which they were treated by the other half ofthe population. What sexual permissiveness and “liberation” reallymeant was a different system by which the average woman could beexploited, the whole thing wrapped in a sugarcoating of freelyavailable contraception and shifted morality. STEPHEN HAWKING 162Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlIn the seventies, women gained a little more self-respect. This was
in part backed up by changes in the law and the support of themedia. Some of these events undoubtedly altered Jane’s perceptionof her role. She was happy to play nurse, support her husbandthrough his glittering career, and raise a family almost single-handedly. But she had a growing feeling that she was being ignoredas a human being, as an intelligent woman who was academicallysuccessful in her own right. She was beginning to feel like nothingmore than a sidekick to the great Stephen Hawking. As she hasput it: 
Cambridge is a jolly difficult place to live if your only identity is as the mother of
small children. The pressure is on you to make your own way academically.12
Cambridge looks like a quaint little English town, but there is a
certain degree of bitchiness within its refined academic elite.Although the university community has always been quick to rein-force the image of Jane Hawking as a caring and devoted motherand wife, an element of professional jealousy does undoubtedlycreep in. The claws are only sheathed by a thin veneer of civiliza-tion, and while her husband was collecting prize after prize, Janewas sliding into a state of declining self-respect: 
I felt very hurt. I saw myself single-handedly making everything possible for
Stephen and bringing up the two children at the same time. And the honors wereall going to Stephen.
13
She decided to do something about it and embarked on a Ph.D.
course in medieval languages, specializing in Spanish andPortuguese poetry. She has said on reflection: The Foothills of Fame 163Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlIt was not a very happy experience. When I was working I thought I should be
playing with the children, and when I was playing with the children I thought Ishould be working.
14
Jane survived the course and went on to become a schoolteacher
in Cambridge. But the feeling, as she puts it, of being “an appendage”has never left her entirely: 
I’m not an appendage, though Stephen knows I very much feel I am when we go
to some of these official gatherings. Sometimes I’m not even introduced to people.I come along behind and I don’t really know who I’m speaking to.
15
To be fair to Stephen Hawking, according to his friends and
colleagues he has never failed to bolster Jane’s contribution to hissuccess and well-being. He takes every opportunity to speak of thegreat efforts and sacrifices she has made in order to allow them tolive as normal a life as possible. One of his great regrets is that hehas been unable to play a greater role in helping to raise the chil-dren, and he would love to be able to play more than tag and chesswith them. 
Naturally, Hawking’s condition has freed him from many duties
other than helping to run the home. His various positions at the uni-versity have all come with reduced teaching and administrationloads, and he has been allowed to spend a far greater proportion ofhis time thinking than ever the average professor can manage. Somehave attributed his great successes in cosmology to this enhancedcerebral freedom, yet others have claimed that the turning point inthe application of his abilities was the onset of his condition andthat before then he was no more than an averagely bright student.Whatever the reason for his great insight and astonishing grasp ofhis subject, it may be true to say that he would not have progressedso quickly or soared to such heights if he had been expected toSTEPHEN HAWKING 164Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlspend vast amounts of time organizing committees, attending fac-
ulty meetings, and overseeing undergraduate applications. 
Feelings of growing resentment over their respective roles within the
partnership were not the only difficulties slowly growing into prob-lems for the couple during the seventies. There was the question ofreligion. Jane was raised as a Christian and has very strong religiousviews. To one interviewer she has said: 
Without my faith in God, I wouldn’t have been able to live in this situation. I
wouldn’t have been able to marry Stephen in the first place, because I wouldn’thave had the optimism to carry me through, and I wouldn’t be able to carry onwith it.
16
Hawking, for his part, is not an atheist; he simply finds the idea
of faith something he cannot absorb into his view of the Universe.His outlook is not unlike that of Einstein, and he has been quotedas saying: 
We are such insignificant creatures on a minor planet of a very average star in the
outer suburbs of one of a hundred thousand million galaxies. So it is difficult tobelieve in a God that would care about us or even notice our existence.
17
It is clear from these two statements alone that the couple has had
very different views almost from the moment they met. Jane attrib-utes Hawking’s religious views partly to his physical condition: 
As one grows older it’s easier to take a broader view. I think the whole picture
for him is so different from the whole picture for anybody else by virtue of hiscondition and his circumstances—being an almost totally paralysed genius—thatnobody else can understand what his view of God is or what his relationship withGod might be.
18The Foothills of Fame 165Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlBut is this really the case? There have been many philosophers
and scientists throughout history who would have made very simi-lar statements to Hawking’s, but they did not suffer from ALS.Equally, of course, there are a number of practicing scientists whohave very strong Christian convictions, and some have claimed thatHawking is simply not qualified to make statements about religionbecause he knows nothing about it. But what qualifications doesone need? Hawking works in a field that does impinge on religion.
His work deals with the origins and early life of the Universe. Coulda subject be any more religious? He once stated: 
It is difficult to discuss the beginning of the Universe without mentioning the con-
cept of God. My work on the origin of the Universe is on the borderline betweenscience and religion, but I try to stay on the scientific side of the border. It is quitepossible that God acts in ways that cannot be described by scientific laws. But inthat case one would just have to go by personal belief.
19
And that has never been Hawking’s way. 
When asked if there is any conflict between religion and science,
Hawking tends to fall back on the same argument about personalbelief and sees no real conflict. “If one took that attitude,” hereplied, when asked whether he believed that science and religionwere competing philosophies, “then Newton would not have dis-covered the law of gravity.”
20And what, in the light of Stephen’s
and Jane’s dilemma, do we make of the famous last paragraph of A Brief History of Time?
However, if we do discover a complete theory, it should in time be understand-
able in broad principle by everyone, not just a few scientists. Then we shall all,philosophers, scientists, and just ordinary people, be able to take part in the dis-cussion of the question of why it is that we and the Universe exist. If we find theanswer to that, it would be the ultimate triumph of human reason—for then wewould know the mind of God.
21STEPHEN HAWKING 166Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlScience, it seems, may one day answer the question “how?” but not
“why?”
Despite such statements, what really began to cause problems for
Jane was a growing feeling that her husband was trying to eradicateany necessity for God in his view of the Universe. And as his fameand influence grew, she saw this as an escalating problem. It isdoubtful that she believed he was fighting any kind of antireligiouscrusade with his work or that he was deliberately trying to provethe faithful wrong. It simply seemed to her that, in his Universe,pure mathematical reasoning overrode any need for God: 
There’s one aspect of his thought that I find increasingly upsetting and difficult to
live with. It’s the feeling that, because everything is reduced to a rational, mathe-matical formula, that must be the truth. He is delving into realms that really domatter to thinking people and in a way that can have a very disturbing effect onpeople—and he’s not competent.
22
But who is? If nothing else, religion is a very personal matter. Are
the leaders of the various churches any more knowledgeable aboutthe origins and meaning of life than a scientist? Why should StephenHawking be any less competent to talk about God than the nextperson—or the next pontiff, come to that? Were the men of Godright to sentence Galileo to end his years in solitary misery? Werethey right to burn Giordano Bruno at the stake for daring to pro-pose a contrary view of the Universe? Have all the religious wars ofhuman history, with their accompanying terror and misery, beenjustifiable? Has organized religion been competent in those circum-stances? 
Jane is not scientifically trained and cannot share her husband’s
insight into the subject, which he can articulate only with his pro-fessional colleagues. She has said: The Foothills of Fame 167Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlOne of my greatest regrets is that, not being a mathematician, I can understand
Stephen’s work only in picture terms. He has to keep everything down to earth toexplain it to me. It’s a good discipline for him.
23
This had never been a problem before, but when Jane began to see
that Hawking was approaching territory whose philosophical foun-dations were very close to her personal beliefs, it must have setalarm bells ringing. 
What she objects to most strongly is Hawking’s “no-boundary”
model of the Universe, which suggests that the Universe is self-con-tained. It is a model with which Hawking is particularly pleased. Hehas said of the idea, “It really underlies science because it is reallythe statement that the laws of science hold everywhere.”
24When
addressing the problem of whether, if the Universe is self-contained,we need to explain how it got there in the first place, his answer isthat we do not—“It would just BE.”
25
Hawking has at least one close colleague with strong religious
convictions, his friend and collaborator Don Page. In fact Page is aborn-again Christian, an evangelist as well as a cosmologist. Heseems to find no difficulty in marrying the two extreme aspects ofhis life and work. He says of the no-boundary model: 
[In] the Judaeo-Christian view, God creates and sustains the entire Universe rather
than just the beginning. Whether or not the Universe has a beginning has no rel-evance to the question of its creation, just as whether an artist’s line has a begin-ning and an end, or instead forms a circle with no end, has no relevance to thequestion of its being drawn.
26
Jane once told a reporter that she had been saddened when, soon
after he had taken up residence in their home, Page tried to engageHawking in a religious discussion but was forced to give up. Despitetheir vastly differing outlooks, the two men have remained friends,simply agreeing not to discuss any form of personal God. STEPHEN HAWKING 168Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlHawking confounds both his critics and supporters with seem-
ingly ambiguous statements, such as: 
Even if there is only one possible unified theory, it is just a set of rules and equa-
tions. What is it that breathes fire into the equations and makes a Universe forthem to describe?
27
Surely Hawking is not here suggesting that there may be a role for
a Creator after all. On this matter he seems to take pleasure in leav-ing things open ended. By simply limiting the need for a God, he hasheld back from denying God’s existence altogether: 
Einstein once asked the question, “How much choice did God have in construct-
ing the Universe?” If the no-boundary proposal is correct, he had no freedom atall to choose initial conditions. He would, of course, still have had the freedom tochoose the laws that the Universe obeyed. This, however, may not really havebeen all that much of a choice; there may well be only one, or a small number ofcomplete unified theories . . . that are self-consistent and allow the existence ofstructures as complicated as human beings who can investigate the laws of theUniverse and ask about the nature of God.
28
Thinkers on both sides of the divide—those who support con-
ventional religious views as well as the cynics and atheists—havequoted and misquoted Hawking on so many occasions that onewriter recently compared his eloquence and quotability to that ofShakespeare or the Bible. Hawking scoffs at such suggestions,restating the fact that his quotability is derived from his succinct-ness, a talent he has had to nurture because of the difficulty he hascommunicating. 
Hawking seems to have done little to help Jane through this cri-
sis. She was, and perhaps still is, left exasperated by his stubborn-ness on the issue. “I pronounce my view that there are differentways of approaching it [religion], and the mathematical way is onlyone way,” Jane has said, “and he just smiles.”
29The Foothills of Fame 169Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlIt is not only conventional religion for which Hawking feels
extreme skepticism. The lessons he learnt from the ESP experimentsin the fifties have never left him, and he has no time for mysticismor metaphysics in any shape or form. A number of writers havemade attempts to bridge the gap between mysticism and late-twen-tieth-century physics. There are many who see parallels betweenEastern religion and quantum mechanics, ancient teachings, andchaos theories, but Hawking pooh-poohs the whole scene. In hisbook Lonely Hearts of the Cosmos, Dennis Overbye describes an
occasion when he met Hawking in the seventies and managed tosteer him onto the topic of mysticism without getting his toescrushed. Overbye quoted the anthropologist Joseph Campbell onthe Hindu goddess Kali, “the terrible one of many names whosestomach is a void and so can never be filled, whose womb is givingbirth forever to all things.” He then tried to draw a connectionbetween Kali and black holes. Barely able to contain himself,Hawking snorted: 
It’s fashionable rubbish. People go overboard on Eastern mysticism simply
because it’s something different that they haven’t met before. But, as a naturaldescription of reality, it fails abysmally to produce results. . . . If you look throughEastern mysticism you can find things that look suggestive of modern physics orcosmology. I don’t think they have any significance.
Calling these things black holes was a master-stroke by Wheeler because it
does make a [psychological] connection, or conjure up a lot of human neuroses.If the Russian term “frozen star” had been generally adopted, then this part ofEastern mythology would not at all seem significant. They’re named black holesbecause they relate to human fears of being destroyed or gobbled up. So in thatsense there is a connection. I don’t have fears of being thrown into them. I under-stand them. I feel in a sense that I’m their master.
30
However, a number of journalists and commentators on the
periphery of Hawking’s world have made some quite ridiculousSTEPHEN HAWKING 170Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlextrapolations on this theme. To some, Hawking is a metaphor for
his own work, a black hole astronaut himself. When Overbye putthis to him, he was understandably ruffled by the suggestion. 
“I’ve always found I could communicate,”
31he snapped back,
and went for Overbye’s toes. 
Black hole astronaut or not, the amount Hawking traveled during
the seventies was increasing each year. In the winter of 1976 heundertook an American tour, taking in talks at important confer-ences in Chicago and Boston. Even to other scientists who knewhim from symposia and conferences around the globe, his speechwas all but unintelligible, and when members of the general publicand journalists were in attendance they found it almost as difficultto grapple with Hawking’s speaking voice as with his subject matter. 
Despite the fact that conference organizers were invariably fore-
warned of Hawking’s disabilities, more often than not there wouldbe no easy access to the stage in the lecture theater. He would haveto make it there without ramps or lifts. On such occasionsHawking’s friends and colleagues would come to his rescue, up tosix of them manhandling his heavy wheelchair. Although Hawkinghimself weighed little more than ninety pounds, the chair ran on carbatteries which added to the weight and, according to those whohave taken part in these exercises, there was always the fear thatthey would drop him or that he would hurt his neck. One friend hasdescribed how he could see Hawking’s head bobbing around as sixof the biggest scientists in his group lifted the wheelchair five feet upon to the stage, and how he was terrified that one day somethingwould go disastrously wrong, simply because the organizers hadn’tthought things through. 
Hawking made a great impression during his 1976 trip to the
States. The stick-like figure hunched in his wheelchair was, to thevast majority of the audience, mumbling incomprehensibly, appear-The Foothills of Fame 171Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmling to make his pronouncements to a point on the stage six feet in
front of him. But despite this, those who came to hear him speakalways took him very seriously. Close colleagues who could under-stand what he was saying translated for their neighbors as best theycould, with one ear concentrating on the mathematics Hawking wasdescribing. Slides and the relief of numerous corny jokes helped, butit was always hard work. 
By this time he had completely reversed his ideas about black
holes and thermodynamics, the very ideas that had created sucharguments a few years earlier. At a talk in Boston entitled “BlackHoles Are White Hot,” he caused a stir with a conclusion refutingEinstein’s famous statement “God doesn’t play dice.” “God notonly plays dice,” Hawking proclaimed, “he sometimes throws themwhere they can’t be seen.” 
Interviewers were queuing up to speak to Hawking. In January
1977 the BBC broadcast a program called The Key to the Universe,
with an accompanying book, by Nigel Calder. The program was inlarge part devoted to Stephen Hawking’s latest work and profiledthe man and his efforts to unify general relativity and quantummechanics—“the key to the Universe” of the title. For the first time,the general public was exposed to the thirty-five-year-old Dr.Stephen Hawking and the facts of his disability as well as his work.It had the British public watching in their millions. 
From 1977 publicity surrounding Hawking and his achievements
began to escalate on a local, national, and global scale. Betweenreports of punks signing record contracts in front of BuckinghamPalace and growing excitement over the Queen’s Jubilee that com-ing summer, there were mutterings in the Cambridge press aboutthe odd fact that this famous scientist, a member of the RoyalSociety and black hole celebrity, appearing on television and withhis face in the papers on an increasingly regular basis, did not holda professorial position at Cambridge University. STEPHEN HAWKING 172Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlThere were muted suggestions that perhaps the university was
disinclined to give the severely disabled scientist a professorshipbecause he might not live too long. By March 1977, however, theuniversity had decided to offer him a specially created chair ofgravitational physics, which would be his for as long as he remainedin Cambridge; the same year he was awarded the status of profes-sorial fellow at Caius, a separate professorship bestowed by thecollege authorities. 
The awards and honors continued to flood in. Robert Berman,
Hawking’s undergraduate supervisor at Oxford, had recommendedhim as an honorary fellow of University College. In his letter to theGeneral Purposes Committee, he said: 
The current issue of Who’s Who shows some of his achievements, but cannot
keep pace with the rate of award of honors. 
I can’t imagine that the College has ever produced a more distinguished scien-
tist, and it would bring us honor if our association with his career were mademanifest (the outside world assumes he is entirely a Cambridge product). 
It might seem surprising to ask to consider someone not yet 35 as an Honorary
Fellow, but there are two reasons for this. First, his distinction is quite exceptionaland we don’t have to wait for it to be generally recognized that he has made hismark. Hawking is mentioned in practically every article or lecture on black holes.His book ( The Large Scale Structure of Spacetime ) was what every cosmologist
was waiting for. 
Secondly, Hawking is gravely ill and is confined to a wheelchair with a type of
creeping paralysis that normally cuts the lives of its victims very short. He is in anappalling physical state but his mind functions normally. 
I hope that it won’t be felt that we must wait to see whether he actually gets a
Nobel Prize! 
Berman thought that he might have to argue his case further. He
was subsequently staggered when the recommendation wasaccepted without a single objection at the committee’s first meeting. The Foothills of Fame 173Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlThe graffiti-daubing sluggard who, at Oxford University only
sixteen years earlier, had spent more time drinking than workinghad come a very long way. STEPHEN HAWKING 174Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.html