8
The Breakthrough Y ears
117The 1960s ended with Hawking being forced to make a
concession to his physical condition. After a great deal ofpersuasion from Jane and a number of close friends, he
decided to abandon his crutches and take to a wheelchair. To thosewho had watched his gradual physical decline, this was seen as amajor step and viewed with sadness. Hawking, however, refused tolet it get him down. Although the acceptance of a wheelchair was aphysical acknowledgment of his affliction, at the same time he gaveit not the slightest emotional or mental endorsement. In every otherway, life went on as usual. And he could not deny that it did enablehim to get around more easily. Never giving in to the symptoms ofALS more than he is physically compelled to is all part of theStephen Hawking approach to life. As Jane said, “Stephen doesn’tmake any concessions to his illness, and I don’t make any conces-sions to him.”
1That seems to be the way he has survived against all
the odds for so many years and also how Jane managed to remainsane living with him. Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlEarlier, in 1968, Hawking had been invited to become a staff
member at the Institute of Theoretical Astronomy housed in a mod-ern building on the outskirts of Cambridge. Originally Fred Hoyleheaded it, but he resigned his post in 1972 after a final blazing rowwith the Cambridge establishment. This time the dispute was overthe administration of British science in general and Cambridge sci-ence in particular. When Hoyle left, the institute was merged withthe Cambridge Observatories and came under the control ofProfessor Donald Lynden-Bell. Under his leadership “Theoretical”was dropped from the name, and it has been the Institute ofAstronomy ever since. In the same year a young radio astronomer,Simon Mitton, was appointed administrative head of the institute.He subsequently worked closely with Hawking during the years hespent there. 
Hawking worked at the institute three mornings a week. It was
too far from Little St. Mary’s Lane to get to by wheelchair. Instead,he had managed to acquire a three-wheeled invalid car, which hedrove out into the suburbs on the main roads. Mitton would meethim at his car and help him out of the little blue vehicle and into themain building. Hawking had his own office, and as his prestigegrew during the following years, a string of eminent astronomersand theoretical physicists were drawn to the institute to confer withhim. Mitton describes him as a human magnet in the world ofphysics. Graduate students as well as professional scientists from allover the world were attracted to the institute mainly because of hispresence there. 
Hawking was never interested in observational astronomy. While
an undergraduate at Oxford, he had attended a vacation course atthe Royal Greenwich Observatory, helping then-Astronomer RoyalSir Richard Woolley to measure the components of double stars.However, so the story goes, upon looking through the telescope andseeing nothing more impressive than a couple of hazy dots in theSTEPHEN HAWKING 118Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlstar field, Hawking was convinced that theoretical physics would be
more interesting. To this day he has looked through a telescope nomore than a handful of times. At the Institute of Astronomy thework Hawking was interested in pursuing was conducted in hishead or with pen, paper, and computer. 
Mitton recalls that Hawking was not the easiest person to work
with. He found him irritable and impatient, and he remembers verylittle of the famous Hawking wit and humor. Secretaries apparentlyalso found him difficult, and there were many occasions when anewly employed assistant would come to see Mitton on the verge oftears, complaining of over-demanding workloads. Hawking alwayswanted things done yesterday. At such times Mitton had to remindhimself and the secretaries working for him that such moods wereperhaps a symptom of the man’s condition. 
Others would disagree. Roger Penrose has pointed out that
Hawking displays an unusual cheerfulness and sense of humor inthe face of adversity. He has seen Hawking in a bad mood, irritableand impatient with those around him, but he believes that manypeople with ALS develop a compensation mechanism, a systemwhich acts as an antidepressant. It would perhaps be nearer themark to say that Hawking’s behavior is more to do with his owncharacter than any effect of his illness. Like the rest of us, he issometimes short and impatient with those around him, and he doesnot suffer fools gladly. Because he works at such an intense pace,putting great demands on himself, he expects everyone else to havethe same energy and drive. Perhaps he simply didn’t get on with thesecretaries at the Institute of Astronomy. 
However, the institute seemed to be more aware of his worth
than his own college was. The authorities made every effort to assisthim in his work and to compensate for his disabilities. They had anautomatic phone fitted in his office, preprogrammed to enable himto reach other numbers at the push of a single button. But this wasThe Breakthrough Years 119Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmllong before digital technology, and the device was really little more
than a box of tricks with a vast number of leads and connectionssprouting from a junction box in the corner of the room. It tookpost office engineers over a week to install it. 
There was a definite buzz in Cambridge about Hawking and his
work, even before he joined the Institute of Theoretical Astronomy.He had a certain aura about him. Long before he had made hismark on cosmology, among graduate students there was an air ofreverence accompanying the name Stephen Hawking. Such earlydiscipleship illustrates the beginnings of the cult status that has sur-rounded many of the things Hawking has said and done during hiscareer. Even in the early 1970s, it was possible to see that the imageof the crippled genius, so beloved of the media, was beginning totake root in the minds of those on the periphery of Hawking’s lifeand work. Instead of this image diminishing or fading away as hiscareer has blossomed, with each fresh achievement his status as thenew Einstein, the purely cerebral creature trapped inside an inoper-ative body, has grown. 
Mitton recalls that, by the time of their first meeting in 1972,
Hawking’s speech had deteriorated considerably. It was essential toconcentrate hard on what he was saying in order to understandhim. Mitton found that he always had to face Hawking and watchwhat he was saying as well as listen intently; even then it was noteasy. The best way to communicate, Mitton found, was to askquestions that required only negative or affirmative answers. Soinstead of asking, “When would you like to go to lunch, Stephen?,”it was far easier to say, “We are going to lunch at 12:30. Is that allright?” Fischer Dilke, who wrote and directed one of the first tele-vision documentaries about Hawking, disagrees. He says thatHawking hates nothing more than being asked such questionsbecause it is a sign to him that the person he is talking to is nottreating him in a normal way. It obliges him to answer only “Yes”STEPHEN HAWKING 120Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlor “No,” and he would, quite naturally, like to be engaged in a stan-
dard conversation. 
In retrospect the seventies may be viewed as something of a gray
decade. After the optimism and hope of the sixties, the West, withthe possible exception of West Germany, was thrown into recession;only in Japan did a combination of postwar determination, a flairfor the commercial application of Western technology, and sheerhard work set the pattern for industrial growth. Britain’s economynearly foundered, hammered by a series of disastrous strikes andpolitical turmoil. The decade began with a Labor government,which lasted until June of 1970 when Edward Heath narrowly beatHarold Wilson in a surprise victory, and ended with a new style ofTory government in the shape of the country’s first woman primeminister, Margaret Thatcher. 
In April 1970 the world held its breath as the drama of Apollo 13
was enacted hundreds of thousands of miles out in space, and thecrippled spaceship limped home to safety. In September high dramaof a different kind was played out in the Jordanian desert whenMiddle Eastern terrorists blew up three jet airliners. The world losta charismatic and influential figure in the shape of Hawking’sschoolboy hero, Bertrand Russell, who died at age 97. And it wasin that year that Stephen Hawking began to turn his attentiontoward the exotic astronomical objects recently dubbed “blackholes” and once again found himself in collaboration with themathematician Roger Penrose. 
It is often the case with scientific discovery that a crucial step for-
ward comes through inspiration at an unexpected moment, andHawking is fond of recalling the story of when his first black holebreakthrough came to him. Soon after the birth of his second child,Lucy, in November 1970, he was thinking about black holes as hegot ready for bed one night. As he says: The Breakthrough Years 121Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlMy disability makes this rather a slow process, so I had plenty of time. Suddenly,
I realised that many of the techniques that Penrose and I had developed to provesingularities could be applied to black holes.
2
At that time, notions of what a black hole was really like were
pretty hazy, and both Penrose and Hawking had been trying tocome up with some way of stating which points in space-time wereinside a black hole and which were outside. It was just as he wasabout to get into bed that an obvious solution struck him. Theanswer to the problem was actually one which he claims Penrosehad originally suggested but had not applied to the situation theywere studying. The science is described in the next chapter; sufficeit to say that the resolution was so exciting that Hawking got verylittle sleep that night. Early the next morning he was on the phoneto Penrose. 
For the next two years (as we describe more fully in Chapter 9)
the pair of them developed their ideas about the physics of blackholes. As they worked, they came to see that the way they hadoriginally perceived black hole physics was not as clear cut as itought to be. To get to grips with it properly required them to dustaway the mental cobwebs of dimly remembered physical conceptsthey had not thought about since undergraduate days. In particular,Hawking was gaining a renewed interest in a field called thermo-dynamics, developed by Lord Kelvin and others in the nineteenthcentury. 
No one would have imagined that thermodynamics had any rel-
evance to black holes at all. As Dennis Overbye has put it, “It wasas if he had popped the hood on a Ferrari and found an antiquesteam engine chugging away inside.”
3It was ridiculous—thermo-
dynamics was used to study gases under pressure, heat transfer, andthe efficiency of steam engines, not such exotic objects as blackSTEPHEN HAWKING 122Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlholes. Little did Hawking realize at the time that thermodynamics
was to have a huge influence on the future of black hole theory andwould shortly lead him into his second major scientific confronta-tion with another physicist. 
By early 1973, Hawking and Penrose were beginning to use
thermodynamics as an analogy for what was happening in a blackhole. Scientists often do this: an everyday model helps them tounderstand situations as bizarre as those found in a singularity.However, a young researcher named Jacob Bekenstein, working atPrinceton University, was taking things a lot further. He was notcontent to use thermodynamics as an analogy but instead wasapplying its precepts literally. And he was coming up with somevery interesting results. 
When Hawking discovered Bekenstein’s work he was incensed.
He had been using thermodynamics as nothing more than a modelfor what was going on and believed it totally ridiculous to take itfurther and actually apply it to black holes. Together with his old
friend from Cambridge, Brandon Carter, and the American rela-tivist James Bardeen, he published a paper in the scientific journalCommunications in Mathematical Physics that attempted to dis-
claim the suggestion. The argument raged in the scientific press andacross the Atlantic for many months. Hawking was becoming moreand more irritated by what he saw as Bekenstein’s absurd notions.In reply to a paper Bekenstein published, Hawking, Carter, andBardeen responded with their own, entitled “The Four Laws ofBlack Hole Mechanics.” Both papers were later shown to beincomplete. 
Most physicists sided with Hawking and his coauthors, but
Bekenstein was not put off by the massed ranks of the scientificcommunity ranged against him. Years later he said of the con-frontation: The Breakthrough Years 123Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlIn those days in 1973 when I was often told that I was headed the wrong way, I
drew some comfort from Wheeler’s opinion that “black hole thermodynamics iscrazy, perhaps crazy enough to work.”
4
Hawking continued to think that Bekenstein’s notion was simply
crazy—at least for a while. What brought about the change was aseries of events that would lead him to a far more important con-clusion about black holes and propel him to the forefront of theo-retical physics. But that was half a year away, and in the interven-ing period the arguments continued. 
Meanwhile Hawking was finding the mathematics of the work
increasingly difficult to deal with. The equations for interpreting thephysics of black holes are amazingly complex, and by this stage ofhis illness he could use neither paper and pen nor a typewriter.Instead, he was forced to develop techniques for keeping such infor-mation in his mind and ways of manipulating equations withoutbeing able to write them down. Such a feat has been described byone of Hawking’s friends and collaborators, Werner Israel: 
[The] achievement is as though Mozart had composed and carried an entire sym-
phony in his head—anyone who saw the lines of complex mathematics coveringthe blackboard like musical staves at a recent seminar would have appreciated thecomparison.
5
Hawking has the great advantage of possessing a superb memory.
In his book Beyond the Black Hole: Stephen Hawking’s Universe,
John Boslough recounts an incident that demonstrates Hawking’sability to retain detailed information in his head: 
One of Hawking’s students told me that, while driving him to London for a
physics conference once, Hawking remembered the page number of a minor errorhe had read in a book years before.
6STEPHEN HAWKING 124Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlAnother anecdote describes how a secretary who worked for
Hawking was amazed when he had once recalled, twenty-fourhours later, a tiny mistake he had made while dictating—from mem-ory—forty pages of equations. Hawking is not unique in having thistalent. In 1983 he dazzled students at a Caltech (California Instituteof Technology) seminar when he dictated a forty-term version of animportant equation from memory. As his assistant finished writingthe last term, his colleague, Nobel laureate Murray Gell-Mann, whohappened to be sitting in on the talk, stood up and declared thatHawking had omitted a term. Gell-Mann was also working frommemory. 
Despite his disabilities, by the early 1970s Hawking was begin-
ning to travel extensively. His status as a physicist had grown withhis work in collaboration with Penrose, and he was frequentlyinvited to deliver talks and address seminars around the world. Atthe same time as his scientific reputation was building, Hawking’simage as a determined fighter, who would go to any extreme to betreated as a normal human being, was spreading far beyondCambridge. 
One of his oldest and closest friends, the late David Schramm, of
the University of Chicago, had a wealth of anecdotes aboutStephen’s exploits. His favorite recollection from the early seventiesconcerns the occasion when he first became aware of Stephen’s hugepotential for enjoying himself. After a conference in New York,Schramm took the Hawkings to a party thrown by a friend inGreenwich Village. Stephen really enjoyed himself, dancing withJane, spinning his wheelchair around the room and generally havinga great time. 
Schramm is also happy to dub his friend an incorrigible flirt and
to describe his eyes as tremendously expressive. Women, Schrammclaims, were always very interested in Stephen long before his inter-national fame brought him wide attention. Indeed, David Schramm’sThe Breakthrough Years 125Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlwife, Judy, was tremendously taken by him when they first met and
found his ability to convey his personality by facial expressionextremely attractive. 
Hawking’s interest in dancing has never diminished, and the
annual college parties at Caius would not be the same without hisjoining in with the other fellows and their partners on the dance-floor. Nowadays, in his elevated position as professor and head ofthe DAMTP, he is still to be seen at Christmas discos organized bythe students, dancing the night away. His energy, both at work andat play, has become a legend. As David Schramm said, Stephen is areal party animal. 
Between trips abroad and working on black holes with Roger
Penrose, Hawking was collaborating with George Ellis on a bookeventually to be called The Large Scale Structure of Spacetime . The
idea for the book had arisen back in 1965, when Hawking was stillworking toward the completion of his Ph.D. Ellis remembers thatthe two of them had drawn up a list of future plans, which included“getting married” and “writing a cosmology book together.”Because both of them were busy with other projects and domesticchanges, work on the manuscript went very slowly. Ellis spent sometime in Hamburg and then in Boston, and the two of them began tosee each other less frequently. Through Dennis Sciama they man-aged to secure a contract with Cambridge University Press, whichwas just starting a series of high-level research monographs aimedat professional physicists. 
It took six years to finish the manuscript. They divided up the
various topics between them and worked independently, meetingwhen they could to go through each other’s contributions and makechanges where appropriate. Ellis did all the typing; when Hawkingcould no longer write, he dictated his material to Ellis, who wroteit up for him. George Ellis was one of Hawking’s close associatesSTEPHEN HAWKING 126Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlwho could understand his speech, but even he found it difficult at
times. He soon discovered that it was much easier to follow whatHawking was saying in discussions about scientific matters, whenthe conversation consisted largely of familiar technical terms. It wasin everyday conversations, which could be about almost anything,that the going got tough. 
Because The Large Scale Structure of Spacetime took so long to
write, events overtook it in a number of areas. In particular,Hawking’s own work on black holes (with which Ellis was notdirectly involved) had progressed faster than they could amend thetext. The book dealt purely with classical theories of cosmology, butby the time of its publication in 1973, Hawking had made greatstrides in the quantum interpretation of black hole physics, and itwas not until it went into a second edition that they were able toupdate the text. The book caused quite a stir in academic circles anddid a great deal for the general prestige of the series. Indeed,Hawking is now considered by Cambridge University Press to bethe most distinguished author in its catalog. 
The book is incredibly complex, completely unreadable except by
experts working in the field of cosmology. Hawking and Ellis hadno intention of writing a popular book, and their manuscript fit therequirements perfectly. However, a favorite story in the sciencedepartment at Cambridge University Press recounts an occasionwhen an associate of Hawking’s ventured his opinion of this firstpublication. Hawking and Simon Mitton were returning toCambridge from a meeting at the Royal Astronomical Society inLondon and happened to be sharing a railway carriage with theradio astronomer John Shakeshaft. As they pulled out of the sta-tion, Shakeshaft, who was sitting in the seat opposite Hawking,leaned forward and said, “Well, I got a copy of your book, Steve.” 
“Oh, did you enjoy it?” asked Hawking. The Breakthrough Years 127Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.html“Well,” Shakeshaft replied, “I thought I might make it to page
10, but I only got as far as page 4, and I’ve given up, I’m afraid!” 
Despite the complexity of the book, the latest sales figures show
that, since its publication, it has notched up 3,500 copies in hard-back and over 20,000 in paperback—one of the best-sellingresearch monographs ever published by Cambridge University Press.
Simon Mitton, who left the Institute of Astronomy in 1977, is
now the science director at Cambridge University Press. He has sug-gested that the book has sold to a large number of undergraduateswho bought it because it looks good on their bookshelves but haveprobably never got beyond the second page of tightly packed equa-tions. The Large Scale Structure of Spacetime and other, later, tech-
nical books of Hawking’s showed a definite upturn in their salescurves upon the publication, many years later, of A Brief History of
Time . After that the original coauthor’s name, “S. W. Hawking,”
printed on the jacket was hurriedly changed to “Stephen Hawking,”and the sales figures took another climb. 
In the world of black hole research, work was moving forward at a
startling pace, and Hawking was in the vanguard. It was becomingmore and more clear to him that the purely classical interpretationof black holes was deficient. In September 1973 he visited Moscow.The head of the Institute for Physical Problems of the USSRAcademy of Sciences in Moscow was a fiery little man with a baldhead and boundless energy named Yakov Boris Zel’dovich. He andhis team had been working on black holes, in particular on the wayin which they interacted with light. Hawking returned toCambridge convinced that they were on to something but weregoing about things the wrong way. As he said many years later, “Ididn’t like the way they derived their result, so I set out to do itproperly.”
7STEPHEN HAWKING 128Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlWhat he then decided to attempt was quite revolutionary. As we
saw in Chapter 2, the two great pillars of twentieth-century physicsare quantum mechanics and relativity, but they are at opposite endsof the spectrum as far as physics is concerned. They speak a differ-ent language, and nobody had managed to reconcile the two theo-ries. But this was exactly what Hawking had set his sights on. Itseemed to be the only way forward if he were to explain thebehavior of black holes thrown up by the contradictory ideas ofBekenstein on the one hand and of him and Penrose on the other. 
Sorting out the problem was easier said than done. Working on
the equations in his head was difficult enough, but after months ofintense work Hawking kept coming up with completely nonsensicalresults. According to the equations, black holes appeared to beemitting radiation. He, and everyone else at the time, believed thisto be impossible. He was still convinced that he was really on tosomething but took the conscious decision not to discuss theproblem with anyone until he had settled the matter one way oranother. 
Christmas 1973 came and he was still in as much of a mess with
the mathematics as he had ever been. He decided to rework theequations. He knew that he had cut corners with some of the deri-vations and believed that these shortcuts may have held the key tothe problem. During the Christmas vacation he spent lonely weeksrunning and rerunning the equations through his mind, forcinghimself to use ever more complex processes to eradicate the annoy-ing anomalies. Finally, in January 1974 he took the plunge and con-fided in Dennis Sciama, who was organizing a conference at thetime. To Hawking’s surprise, Sciama was very excited by the ideaand, with Hawking’s permission, set about spreading the word. 
A few days later it was Hawking’s thirty-second birthday, and his
family arranged a dinner party to celebrate. Soon after the meal wasserved, the phone rang. It was Roger Penrose calling fromThe Breakthrough Years 129Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlLondon—he had heard the story propagated by Sciama and wanted
to know all about it. The discussion went on and on. The food grewcold, and the other guests waited patiently for Hawking to return tothe table. Forty-five minutes later, with the meal ruined, he hung up.Penrose was tremendously excited and wanted to discuss it further. 
Going against all current ideas about black holes, by the power of
mathematical reasoning, Hawking had been forced to the unarguableconclusion that not only did tiny black holes emit radiation, butunder certain conditions they could actually explode. By late Januaryone of his colleagues and friends from postgraduate days, MartinRees, was convinced that Hawking had made a great discovery.Inspired by his latest discussion with Stephen, he bumped into DennisSciama in a corridor at the Institute of Astronomy. “Have youheard?” he said, excitedly, “Stephen’s changed everything!” 
Sciama dashed off to see Hawking. By the end of the conversa-
tion, he too was convinced and persuaded his former student toannounce his results at the conference he was organizing inFebruary at the Rutherford-Appleton Laboratory outside Oxford. 
Hawking was driven to the laboratory through the icy chill of
midwinter Oxfordshire and assisted into the building by one of hisresearch students. Sitting patiently to the side of the main group, helistened to the other speakers announcing their latest news. Asusual, he asked his customary penetrating questions, trying hard tocontrol his great feeling of excitement. He had a hunch, now sup-ported by a number of his respected colleagues and peers, that hewas on to something very big. At last he was wheeled to the frontof the lecture theater, and his illustrations were projected on to theback wall while he delivered his talk in the almost unintelligibletones to which his colleagues had become accustomed. His final linewas delivered. A stunned hush fell over the entire room. You couldhear a pin drop as the audience of scientists tried to absorb theastonishing news. Then the backlash began. STEPHEN HAWKING 130Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlThe moderator of the meeting, the English theorist John G.
Taylor, jumped up from his seat and proclaimed that what Hawkinghad said was complete nonsense. Pausing only to drag one of hiscolleagues from the seat beside him, Taylor stormed from the roomand immediately started writing a paper denouncing Hawking’sclaim. Hawking had expected a reaction but nothing like this. Hesimply sat at the podium in shocked silence. 
John Taylor’s paper was dashed off and sent to the scientific jour-
nal Nature for publication. The editor of Nature sent the draft man-
uscript to Hawking for his comments before making the decision topublish it. Hawking wrote back to recommend publication. Hewould not want to stand in the way of anyone rash enough to dis-claim his work without having investigated the matter thoroughly. 
A month after the meeting outside Oxford, Hawking published
in Nature his own paper describing the newly discovered phenom-
ena. Within weeks, physicists all over the world were discussing hiswork, and it became the hot topic of conversation in every physicslaboratory from Sydney to South Carolina. Some physicists went sofar as to say that the new findings constituted the most significantdevelopment in theoretical physics for years. Dennis Sciamadescribed Hawking’s paper as “one of the most beautiful in the his-tory of physics.” The radiation that he had discovered could beemitted by certain black holes was from then on known as HawkingRadiation. 
However, not everyone was convinced, and it was quite a while
before many groups working around the world came to terms withthis revolution in black hole physics. It took until 1976 forZel’dovich’s team in Moscow to accept the new ideas. Zel’dovichran his institute in an extremely dictatorial manner. What he saidwent. When he finally gave his endorsement to the theory, his teamwas compelled to go along with it, just as they had followed whenhe had disagreed with it. The Breakthrough Years 131Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlAt the time of Zel’dovich’s change of heart, Roger Penrose was
invited to Moscow to give a talk that Zel’dovich, as Penrose’s col-league and head of the institute, would be attending. In his lecturenotes Penrose had assumed the validity of Hawking’s deductionsand had built his talk around them. When he arrived, a day beforethe lecture, he was told bluntly that Zel’dovich did not agree withHawking, nor did any of his students. Not only that, but he wouldprefer it if Penrose did not mention Hawking’s findings. Penrosewas completely thrown. It meant, quite simply, that he had torewrite his lecture; he set to work, laboring into the small hours.Then, a few hours before he was due on the podium, an assistantturned up at his hotel to inform him that Zel’dovich had changedhis mind about Hawking—and so had all his students. 
Another story relates how the American physicist Kip Thorne
was in Zel’dovich’s apartment when the transformation in histhinking actually occurred. Zel’dovich was pacing the room whenThorne arrived, and in a theatrical display of resignation theRussian physicist threw up his arms in despair and said, “I give up,I give up. I didn’t believe it, but now I do.”
8
The mid-seventies saw the beginnings of a renaissance in publicawareness of science, and the idea of such exotic objects as blackholes that could eat whole solar systems for breakfast caught thepublic imagination. It was at about this time that the name ofStephen Hawking first impinged on popular awareness. It was alsothe time when a great deal of hot air was circulated around the seri-ous theories by writers overpopularizing the ideas the physicistswere propounding. 
Hawking himself began to pass as a metaphor for his own work.
He was becoming the black hole cosmonaut trapped in a crippledbody, piercing the mysteries of the Universe with the mind of alatter-day Einstein, going where even angels feared to tread. WithSTEPHEN HAWKING 132Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlthe arrival of black holes in the public consciousness, the mystique
that had begun to gather around him in Cambridge at the end of thesixties started to extend beyond the cloistered limits of the physicscommunity. Newspaper articles and TV documentaries about blackholes started to appear, and Stephen Hawking began to be seen asthe man to talk to. 
It was not only the media that were beginning to register what
was going on. Hawking’s achievements had been noticed by the sci-entific establishment. In March 1974, within weeks of theannouncement of Hawking Radiation, he received one of the great-est honors in any scientist’s career. At the tender age of thirty-two,he was invited to become a fellow of the Royal Society, one of theyoungest scientists in the society’s long history to be given such anhonor. 
The investiture took place at the headquarters of the Royal
Society, at 6 Carlton House Terrace, a white-colonnaded mansionoverlooking St. James’s Park in the West End of London. It is tradi-tional for new fellows of the society to walk to the podium in thelarge meeting room that dominates the building in order to sign theroll of honor and shake the president’s hand. However, inHawking’s case, the president at the time, Nobel Prize-winning bio-physicist Sir Alan Hodgkin, brought the membership book down tothe front row for him to sign. It took an age for Hawking to signhis own name. The letters were slowly and agonizingly formed onthe page alongside the others invested at the same ceremony. As hewrote, the room was completely silent. Then, as he finished the lastletter and Hodgkin lifted the book from his lap, the gathered scien-tists burst into thunderous applause. 
The local newspaper, the Cambridge Evening News, reported the
great event on the day of Hawking’s investiture, and a party wasthrown at the DAMTP after the ceremony in London. Friends,family, and colleagues in the department were all invited to cele-The Breakthrough Years 133Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlbrate his achievement. As one of the senior members of the gather-
ing and Hawking’s old supervisor, Dennis Sciama was invited togive an impromptu toast to his most successful student, in which hepaid tribute to Hawking’s achievements and raised his glass tofuture successes. 
As his friends and family joined Sciama in the toast, Hawking
surveyed the room. He had come a long way, he knew that, but thiswas just the beginning. Although he would always believe hisinvestiture into the Royal Society to be the proudest moment of hiscareer, there were plenty more rungs to climb on the career ladder.And, despite the adversities—or perhaps, as some have suggested,because of them—he would continue to climb. Where his feet couldnot go, his mind would soar. STEPHEN HAWKING 134Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.html