15
The End of Physics?
252Stephen Hawking is fond of suggesting that the end may
be in sight for theoretical physics. Hearing Hawking tellyou that physics may be coming to an end became some-
thing of a cliche in the trade in the 1980s, as at the beginning of thatdecade he used his inaugural lecture as Lucasian Professor to posethat question. Ten years on, the end doesn’t look any closer than itdid then, but he is still optimistically proclaiming it. But even iftheoretical physics really did reach the “end” Hawking so eagerlypredicts, there would still be plenty of work left for physicists to do. 
In an interview in Newsweek in 1988, Hawking said that after
discovering a theory of everything “there would still be lots to do,”but physics would then be “like mountaineering after Everest.”
1
Other cosmologists, including Martin Rees, prefer a slightly differ-ent analogy. They point out that learning the rules of chess is onlythe first step on a long and fascinating path to becoming a grandmaster. The long-sought-after theory of everything, they say, wouldbe no more than the physics equivalent of the rules of chess, withgrand-master status still far away over the horizon. Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlThe immediate goal of physics—the Holy Grail that Hawking
and a few other researchers believe lies just around the corner—is acomplete, consistent, unified theory in which all physical inter-actions are described by one set of equations. To see what thismeans and how daunting the search for such a theory must be, weshall look at the modern understanding of the way the Universeworks, which requires four separate theories to explain differentfeatures of the world. 
Back in the nineteenth century, only two theories were needed (so
in a way physics has gotten more complicated in the past hundredyears). Newton’s theory of gravity described the force which holdsplanets in their orbits around the Sun or makes an apple fall from atree; Maxwell’s equations of electromagnetism described the behav-ior of radiation, including light, and the forces that operate betweenelectrically charged particles or between magnets. 
As we explained in Chapter 2, though, these two theories were
incompatible. Maxwell’s equations set a speed for light that is thesame for all observers, while Newtonian mechanics said that thespeed measured for light would depend on the motion of theobserver. This dichotomy was one of the principal reasons whyEinstein developed first the special theory of relativity and then thegeneral theory—an improved theory of gravity that is compatiblewith Maxwell’s equations. Both the general theory and Maxwell’stheory are, however, “classical” theories in the strict sense of theterm. That is, they treat the Universe as a continuum. Space, in theclassical view, can be subdivided and measured in units as small asyou wish, while electromagnetic energy can come in a quantity assmall as you wish. 
The quantum revolution changed the way physicists view the
world. They now regard the Universe as discontinuous, with an ulti-mate limit on how small a “piece” of electromagnetic energy can be,and even on how small a unit of time or a measure of distance canThe End of Physics? 253Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlbe. It was discoveries concerning the nature of light that led to the
quantum revolution, and electromagnetism was eventually super-seded by a new theory, quantum electrodynamics (QED), thatincorporates the best of Maxwell’s theory with the new quantumrules. 
But QED did not become established until the 1940s, by which
time two “new” forces were on the agenda. Both these forces haveonly very short range and operate only within the nucleus of anatom (which is why they were unknown in the nineteenth centurybefore the nucleus was discovered). One is called the strong forceand acts as the glue that holds the particles in the nucleus together;the other is known as the weak force (because, logically enough, itis weaker than the strong force), and it is responsible for radioactivedecay. 
In many ways, however, the weak force resembles the electro-
magnetic force. Building from the success of QED, in the 1950s and1960s physicists developed a mathematical theory that coulddescribe both the weak force and electromagnetism with one set ofequations. It was called the “electroweak” theory, and it made onekey prediction: with the weak force there should be associated threetypes of particles which, between them, play much the same rolethat the photon (the particle of light) does in QED. Unlike thephoton, however, these particles (known as W
+, W–, and Z0)
should, according to the new theory, have mass. Not just any oldmass, either, but very well determined masses—about nine times themass of a proton for the two W particles and eight times the massof the proton for the Z
0. In 1983 the particle accelerator team at
CERN in Geneva found traces of particles with exactly the rightproperties. The electroweak theory was a proven success, and physi-cists were back to just three theories needed to explain the workingsof the Universe. STEPHEN HAWKING 254Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlWith this success under their belts, theorists have developed a
theory similar to QED to describe the strong force. We now knowthat nuclear particles (protons and neutrons) are actually made offundamental entities known as quarks. Quarks come in differentvarieties, and physicists whimsically give these the names ofcolors—red, green, and blue. This doesn’t mean that quarks reallyare red, green, or blue any more than the fact that a drink is calleda rusty nail means that it really does contain oxidized iron. They arejust names. But, extending the whimsy, physicists call the quantumtheory that describes how quarks interact and which is responsiblefor the strong force, “quantum chromodynamics” (from the Greekword for color) or QCD. There are several promising ways nowbeing investigated that might lead to a single theory that encom-passes both QCD and the electroweak theory. Such sets of equa-tions are known, rather pretentiously, as Grand Unified Theories, orGUTs. But QCD is not yet as well established as the electroweaktheory, and the GUTs themselves are only indicative of the form afuture definitive theory might take. 
Even worse, the pretentiousness of calling these Grand Unified
Theories is highlighted by the fact that none of this progress towardunification takes any account of gravity at all! The first force ofnature to be investigated, and at least partially understood, it hasproved the most intractable when it comes to trying to fit it into thequantum mold. Without gravity included in their mesh, it seems fairto say that—paraphrasing Hawking’s famous comment about blackholes—Grand Unified Theories ain’t so grand after all. In spite ofHawking’s success in using a partial unification of quantum theoryand general relativity in his investigations of black holes and thebeginning of time, gravity is still best described by the generaltheory of relativity—a classical continuum theory. The End of Physics? 255Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlThe prospect of incorporating gravity into what, we suppose, would
have to be called a “super-unified theory” has been “just around thecorner” for well over a decade. Logically, we might guess that firstwe need to develop a quantum theory of gravity and then buildfrom this to a unification with the other three forces. One feature ofany such quantum theory of gravity is that it, too, must incorporateparticles that are associated with the gravitational force, again rem-iniscent of the way photons are associated with electromagnetism.(In case you are wondering, yes, there are similar particles involvedin QCD, the theory of the strong force; they are called “gluons,”but nobody has yet detected one.) Physicists even have a name forthese hypothetical particles of gravity—“gravitons.” But just as call-ing a quark “red” does not mean that it is actually colored red, sogiving the quantum gravity particle a name does not mean that any-body has yet found one or even that anybody has come up with asatisfactory quantum theory of gravity. 
At the time of Hawking’s inaugural lecture in 1980, researchers
were getting excited about a family of possible quantum gravity the-ories that together go by the name of supergravity. One version ofsupergravity is called “ N = 8” because as well as predicting the exis-
tence of one type of graviton it also requires an additional eightvarieties of particles known as gravitinos (together with a further154 varieties of other as yet undiscovered particles). The plethora ofparticles associated with this favored version of supergravity mayseem unwieldy and it is, but it does represent a considerableadvance on previous attempts to find a quantum theory of gravity,which seemed to require an infinite number of “new” particles.Indeed, out of all the variations on the supergravity theme, N = 8 is
the only one that operates naturally in four dimensions (three ofspace plus one of time) and contains a finite number of particles. Itcertainly got Hawking’s vote as the theory most likely to succeed in1980. STEPHEN HAWKING 256Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlIn the next few years, everything changed. By the mid-1980s,
enthusiasm for supergravity had been swept away in a rising tide ofsupport for a completely different kind of idea, known as string the-ory. The central idea of string theory is that entities that we are usedto thinking of as points (such as electrons and quarks) are actuallylinear—tiny “strings.” Such strings would be very small indeed: itwould take 10
20of them, laid end to end, to stretch across the
diameter of a proton. Such strings might be open, with their endswaving free, or closed into little loops. Either way, some theoristsbelieve, the way they vibrate and interact with one another couldexplain many features of the physical world. 
String theory actually dates back to the late 1960s, when it was
invoked to describe the strong force. The success of QCD left thisearly version of string theory by the wayside, although a few math-ematicians dabbled with it out of interest in the equations, ratherthan in any expectation of making a major breakthrough in unify-ing our understanding of the forces of nature. In the mid-1970s twoof those researchers, Joël Scherk in Paris and John Schwarz atCaltech, actually found a way to describe gravity using string the-ory. But the response of their colleagues was, essentially, “Whoneeds it?” At that time, most gravity researchers were more inter-ested in supergravity. String theory wasn’t needed to explain thestrong force, supergravity looked promising, so why bother withstrings at all? 
Their attitude changed when it turned out to be horrendously dif-
ficult to do any calculations at all using the N = 8 supergravity
theory. Even if there were no infinities to worry about, 154 types ofparticles, in addition to the graviton and eight gravitinos, werealmost too much of a handful to keep mathematical tabs on.Hawking says that it was generally reckoned in the early 1980sthat, even using a computer, it would take four years to complete acalculation, checking that all the particles in the theory wereThe End of Physics? 257Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlaccounted for, with no infinities still hidden away somewhere, and
that it would be almost impossible to carry out the calculationwithout making a mistake. So nobody was prepared to give up hiscareer to do the calculation. 
The main reason for the revival of interest in string theory in the
mid-1980s, however, was the realization that in their most satisfac-tory form these theories automatically include the graviton. In other
attempts to build a quantum theory of gravity, researchers hadstarted out knowing the properties a graviton ought to have andtried to build a theory around it, even if that meant taking 162 otherparticles on board as well. With string theory, they were workingwith the quantum equations in a general way, playing mathematicalgames, and found that the closed loops of string described by someof the equations have just the properties required to provide adescription of gravity—they are, indeed, gravitons. Inevitably, thenew variation on the string theme was dubbed “superstring theory.”By 1988, with the publication of A Brief History of Time , it was this
road toward superunification that Hawking was enthusiasticallyendorsing. 
But there are still snags. One is that people are still unsure what
all the equations mean. As the example of the graviton illustrates,the equations have come first, with physical insight into their sig-nificance lagging, and there are still plenty of equations for which,as yet, there is no physical insight. This is quite different from theway the great developments in physics were made earlier in thetwentieth century and, indeed, in the centuries back to Newton’stime. For example, Einstein used to tell how he was sitting in hisoffice in Berne one day when he was suddenly struck by the thoughtthat a man falling from a roof would not feel the force of gravitywhile he was falling. That insight into the nature of gravity leddirectly to the general theory of relativity—physical insight first andthen the equations. Exactly the same process was at work whenSTEPHEN HAWKING 258Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlNewton watched the apple fall from a tree and went on to develop
his theory of gravity. 
But it seems that science, or at least physics, no longer works like
that. One of the pioneers of superstring theory is Michael Green, ofQueen Mary College, in London. In an article in Scientific
American in 1986, he pointed out that with string theory 
details have come first; we are still groping for a unifying insight into the logic of
the theory. For example, the occurrence of the massless graviton . . . appears acci-dental and somewhat mysterious; one would like them to emerge naturally in atheory after the unifying principles are well established.
2
Another oddity of superstring theory does not seem to trouble the
mathematicians but demonstrates all too clearly to lesser mortalshow far these ideas have strayed from everyday reality. Whatappeared to be the best versions of superstring theories, the ones inwhich gravitons seem to emerge naturally (if mysteriously) from theequations, only work in a little matter of twenty-six dimensions. Soif superstrings really do describe the workings of the Universe,where are all the extra dimensions hidden? 
Mathematicians, in fact, have little difficulty in disposing of “extra”
dimensions of space. They use a trick they call “compactification,”which can be understood by looking at the appearance of objectsviewed from different distances in the everyday world. The standardimage that they ask us to conjure up is that of a hosepipe. Viewedfrom close up, it is clear that a hosepipe consists of a two-dimensional sheet of material wrapped around a third dimension.But if we move back from the pipe and study it from far away, itlooks like a one-dimensional line. If we look at this one-dimensionalline end on, it even looks like a point, with zero dimensions. The End of Physics? 259Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlTaking a slightly different example, we all know from everyday
experience that the surface of the Earth is far from smooth—it haswrinkles and bumps that we call valleys and mountains, so extremethat in some places it is impossible to walk across the surface. Yetto an astronaut far out in space, the surface seems to be very smoothand regular. 
This may be why we do not perceive the other twenty-two dimen-
sions of space. They may be curled up, or “compactified” into themultidimensional equivalent of cylinders and spheres. Each point ofspace that we perceive must really be a 22-dimensional knot ofspace, curled up very tightly so that we cannot see the bumps. Howtightly? Roughly speaking, the complex structure of space wouldonly be apparent on a scale of less than 10
–30of a centimeter. (For
comparison, a typical atomic nucleus is about 10–13cm across. So a
nucleus is about a hundred million billion times bigger than theknots in the structure of space. In relation to a nucleus, the knotsare one hundred thousand times smaller than a nucleus is compared
with your thumb.) 
Although mathematicians have no trouble describing such phe-
nomenal compactification, it does raise the interesting question ofwhy twenty-two dimensions should have rolled up in this way,while the other three dimensions of space have been expanding eversince the Big Bang. Intriguingly, both the familiar law of gravity andthe equations of electromagnetism discovered by Maxwell only“work” in a universe where there are three dimensions of space plusone of time. If, for example, there were more spatial dimensions,there would be no stable orbits for planets to follow around a cen-tral star. The slightest disturbance and the planet would either fallinto the star and be burned or drift away into space and freeze. Infact, as Hawking points out, there wouldn’t even be any stablestars—any collection of gas and dust would either break apart orcollapse immediately into a black hole. STEPHEN HAWKING 260Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlSo the laws of physics may be telling us that, whatever number of
dimensions you start out with, all but three spatial dimensions andone time dimension must be unstable and will compactify. There iseven a hint, from some new research, that the collapse of the othertwenty-two dimensions might have provided the driving force thatstarted the other three dimensions expanding. And all of this, ofcourse, relates to the idea of anthropic cosmology, which wedescribed in Chapter 13. Perhaps there are other universes, otherbubbles in space-time, where the compactification worked outslightly differently, leaving, maybe, six or seven spatial dimensions(or only one). But since those universes will contain no suitablehome for life, there will be nobody in them trying to puzzle out thenature of physics. If life-forms like us can exist only in a universewith three spatial dimensions, it is no surprise to find that theUniverse we live in does indeed have only three spatial dimensions! 
So how close is the study of physics to answering the ultimate
questions of life and the Universe? Will there be no work left fortheoretical physicists to do in the twenty-first century? 
In 1980, in his Lucasian lecture, Hawking suggested that we might
see the end of physics “by the end of the century.” By this he meantthat physicists would have a complete, consistent, and unified the-ory of the physical interactions that describe all observable phe-nomena. Something along the lines of superstring theory, perhaps. 
As Hawking acknowledged, there have been previous occasions
on which physicists have thought they were on the brink of findingall the answers. Most famously, at the end of the nineteenth centurythere was a general feeling that, with Maxwell’s and Newton’sequations firmly established, everything else would be merely amatter of detail, a question of dotting the i’s and crossing the t’s ofscience. Hardly was this feeling firmly established when physics wasturned on its head by the twin revolutions of quantum theory andThe End of Physics? 261Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlrelativity theory. And yet by the late 1920s—just a generation
later—the pioneering quantum physicist Max Born was tellingpeople that there would be nothing significant left for theoreticalphysicists to do within six months. 
At that time, the only fundamental particles known were the elec-
tron and the proton, and it seemed to Born that they were wellunderstood. In the early 1930s, however, the neutron was dis-covered, and we now know that both the neutron and proton aremade of yet more basic particles, the quarks. 
Even taking Hawking’s optimism of 1980 at face value, though,
this would not mean that all physicists would be unemployed afterthe year 2000. As Hawking emphasized in that lecture, the laws ofphysics that Born was so proud of more than sixty years ago reallyare all that we need, in principle, to describe the behavior of chem-ical reactions. Biological processes, in turn, depend on the chemistryof complex molecules. Chemistry depends almost entirely on theproperties of electrons, and in the 1920s Paul Dirac found a quan-tum equation that exactly describes how electrons behave. The snagis that this equation is so fiendishly complex that nobody has beenable to solve it, except for the simplest possible atom (hydrogen),which has a single electron orbiting a single proton. In Hawking’swords, from that Lucasian lecture: 
[A]lthough in principle we know the equations that govern the whole of biology,
we have not been able to reduce the study of human behaviour to a branch ofapplied mathematics. 
Even if we had a genuine unified theory that contained all the
forces of nature, it would be far more difficult to use this to workout the behavior of the entire Universe than it is to work out yourbehavior using Dirac’s equation. So there is plenty of work left fortheoretical physicists to do. STEPHEN HAWKING 262Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlThe End of Physics? 263
By the time A Brief History of Time appeared in 1988, Hawking
was being more cautious about the end being in sight for theoreti-cal physics. He talked of “if” we discover a complete theory, not“when.” Indeed, although the millennial resonance of the possibil-ity of discovering a complete theory by the year 2000 obviouslyappealed in 1980, this is one of those prospects that keeps recedinginto the future. As we have said, physicists have been talking aboutsuch an end to physics being “just around the corner” for at leasttwenty years, and usually, if pressed, they would say that the cornerthey expect to turn lies about twenty years ahead—whenever youask them that question! As we enter the new century, even the mostoptimistic physicist now sets the date for finding a complete theoryno earlier than about 2020, and most refuse to be drawn into suchspeculations. 
Perhaps, though, they should regard the question of finding the
ultimate theory with some urgency. For at the end of his Lucasianlecture, Hawking made another forecast, one that has stood the testof time (so far). Commenting on the rapid developments beingmade with computers during the 1970s, he said that “it would seemquite possible that they will take over altogether in theoreticalphysics” in the near future. That hasn’t quite happened yet.Although progress with computers was even more dramatic in the1980s than in the 1970s (for example, we are writing these wordsusing computers more powerful than those available to a whole  fullof mathematicians in the 1970s), computers still have to be directedin their efforts by human scientists. But complex problems such ascalculations involving 26-dimensional strings would be inconceiv-able without the aid of computers. It is, perhaps, more likely thatcomputers will no longer need human direction in tackling theseproblems by the end of the present century than that humanphysicists will have found their long-sought ultimate theory. Themost prescient comment of all in Hawking’s inaugural lecture mayCopyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.htmlin fact have been his very last sentence, one that makes a suitable
ending for our own discussion of his contribution to science: 
Maybe the end is in sight for theoretical physicists, if not for theoretical physics. STEPHEN HAWKING 264Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen Hawking: A Life in ScienceSecond Edition
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10375.html