chapter 3Two Small EnlightenmentsSuccessful entrepreneurs tend  to be great students, for they  excel at observing and listen-ing. As a result, they are able to mold extraordinary accomplish-ments out of what others take to be impossible situations. Jack Ma was able to grab on to the lessons of two small satoris and follow them successfully through a kind of baptism of ﬁre. Sato-ris are, as Webster’s deﬁnes, “sudden enlightenments leading to a state of consciousness attained by intuitive illumination.” The failures in Ma’s early period had put him under great pressure. From the Haibo Translation House to the China Y ellow Pages to the Ministry of Foreign Economic Relations and Trade, Ma 46had been buffeted. Rather than be blinded and confused by it, however, he found that the adversity made him more focused , resilient, and determined.Like so man y others in C hina, he became one o f the ﬂoat-ing popu lation o f unemp loyed. Unlike others, he had no doubts about his future prospects since he and his team were already incubating a huge dream. T he ﬁrst of the two satoris t hat con -tributed to the dream came before Ma left Beijing, on t he day he and his team scaled the Great Wall. In places, the wall has been de -faced by grafﬁti—names an d dates carve d into t he stone. Ma felt that carving one’s name into an ancient cu ltural monument was a despicable practice, but at the same time it made him wonder why people felt they had to do it. T he satori came in reco gnizing that gra fﬁti on t he wall was an em bryonic form o f bulletin board systems, or BBS, on the Internet. People somehow needed to say, “I’m here too.” Ca pitalizing on this wou ld lead to a broad-based membership for his new business. Re lying on a natura l human instinct, the energies of the site would come from the peopl ethemselves. At an ear ly stage, Ma un derstoo d the com pounding networ k effect of interactions among different kinds of peop le on an Internet site.The secon d satori came in Fe bruary 1999, w hen Ma at -tended an e-commerce con ference held in Singapore. He hadmade something of a name for himself in Internet circles whileat MOFERT, and so he was favore d with an invitation to s peak at this event. “Favore d” is the appropriate wor d here; a lthoughthis was a so-called Asian Conference, held in Singapore, in fact more t han 80 percent o f atten dees were Euro peans an dAmericans. In 1999 e-commerce had hardly begun in Asia, yet organizers were sparing no expense in bringing together a group of Westerners w ho got up onsta ge to ta lk with convic -tion about somet hing the Westerners knew little about. Nat u-rally, these Westerners drew on their experience with WesternTwo Small Enlightenments 47e-commerce—eBay, Amazon—while Jack Ma sat in the audi-ence, quietly listening and thinking.When it came to his turn to speak, he started out, in ﬂu-ent English, by declaring, “Asian e-commerce is moving in the wrong direction. Asia is Asia. America is America. All e-commerce in the world today follows the American model, but Asia will require its own unique model.” Ma generally spoke after deep and prolonged thinking. He has said in the past, “I am absolutely not an impetuous man. I often spend a long time by myself, just thinking.” This time, however, his “crazy talk” sur-prised even himself. Behind the rush of words, however, were fully prepared ideas—in the Chinese phrase, he had the bamboo fully grown in his heart before it sprang forth. Ma’s conclusion was that “the revolutionary signiﬁcance of the Internet is that it will enable small enterprises to operate independently.” And Ma wanted to be a savior to China’s countless small and medium-sized enterprises.What exactly did Jack Ma mean by a “unique model” for Asia? Although he spoke for an hour, this is something he did not reveal. Known for being canny, he generally raised questions at conferences but kept his own thinking to himself. This model was something that Ma intended to build into his new business, to create a model that China lacked but that also could not be found in America.His profound understanding of the business difﬁculties con-fronting small enterprises in southern China led to this model. The insight began when he taught English to businessmen at night school and deepened after his exposure to international trade at MOFERT; thus, he approached the Internet business from the perspective of need and sales, not the perspective of technology. One investor dismissed Ma by saying, “The Internet is a high-tech ﬁeld. People have a lot more faith in a Chinese student who has returned with a Western MBA than they do in a 48mere En glish teacher, a graduate o f Hangzhou Norma l Univer-sity.” Ma knew that he was in many respects far more fortunate than those who had studied abroad, but this sounded like mere hubris, so he kept it to himself.Once he had succee ded with Alibaba, Ma cou ld explain in speeches, “China business is done here, not over there. So those students w ho return have to s pend a lot of time learnin g the cur-rent situation, w hereas I was born an d bred here an d staye d here, and I was therefore able to see a business opportunity that they all misse d.”Unlike many ot hers w ho engage d in Internet business in China, Ma did not grow up in elite circumstances. He did not graduate from a prestigious co llege, as Din g Lei had done; he did not go a broad for an e ducation, as Yang Z hiyan had done. He stayed close to the grassroots level in China, and it was for this reason t hat his e-commerce business mo del was so different. He decided not to focus on t he 15 percent o f business t hat was large corporations but rather the 85 percent that was small and medium-size d enter prises. “I’m going for the sma ll fry,” he said. He boiled it down to a very simp le equation: large enterprises have their own channels of information and tremendous advertis-ing budgets, w hile sma ll enter prises have none. Sma ll enter prises are most in nee d of the Internet—an d where there is a nee d, there is a market. “If you divide enterprises into rich people and poorpeople, the Internet is a rea lm for poor people,” Ma onceexplained. “The price for a We b page is basically the same. I want to enable poor people to use this tool to rise in a kind of revolu -tion.” Ma knew t hat he cou ld proﬁt by helping the nee dy rise. Jack Ma’s homeland province o f Zhejiang is one o f the hot-spots in China for private enterprise. One of the most acute analyses has been done by the journa list Wu Xiao bo, who spent years researc hing Wenz hou tra ding networ ks. Thousan ds of small Two Small Enlightenments 49enterprises contend for business in the region. Through exposure to the most basic levels of market making, Jack Ma was familiar with the difﬁculties these enterprises faced. “For example, take Wal-Mart. Wal-Mart can force a supplier to accept a low price because it is making orders in the tens of millions. A supplier has no way out but to accept. The next year, though, Wal-Mart has an auction among suppliers for the same product and somebody else gets the order. The ﬁrst guy is washed up. He has no fallback, he has no marketing arm. If he goes through the Internet, on the other hand, he can look all over the world on a global scale for customers and keep a customer base of his own. He also gets to keep far more of his margin.” The proletariat had been called to arise and liberate themselves in the past, but now Jack Ma wanted the countless small enterprises of his homeland to liberate them-selves.With his idealism came a good measure of business savvy. “Asia is the largest supplier base in the world for exports,” he said. “Among the great density of small companies here, most do not have channels to the large trading companies. Most have no way to reach a market. Simply by going through our Alibaba network, they can get access to all of America and Europe.” Again, Ma’s mantra: where there is a need, there is a market.In order to put some numbers to his business savvy, in 2008 there were about 32 million small and medium-sized enterprises in China. Of these, 2.6 million were regularly conducting import/export trading. In 2007 around 8.8 million of all small enterprises in China used online B2B services for domestic or international trade. Small enterprises spent an average of 11 percent of their marketing budget online. By providing this segment with online services that range from credit checks and banking facilities to advertising and marketing, Ma leveraged his small company into a major force.50Alibaba’s Founding DeclarationSmall and medium-size d enterprises are like grains o f sand on a beach. The Internet can glue them to gether. It can make them intoan invincible force that is able to go up against the big stones. Th e virtue o f the Internet is t hat it uses sma ll to com pete wit h big, it uses fast to com pete with slow.—Jack M aIn Fe bruary 1999, A libaba began its life quietly in the sma ll resi-dential area of Lakeside Garden, Hangzhou. There was no sign on the door, no indication of an y activit y. All was sim ple and un pre-tentious an d anon ymous, as Jack Ma wante d it to be. His reasons for choosing Hangzhou were simple. “Hangzhou was far from the IT centers in Bei jing and Shenzhen, and the cost of human talent was cheap.” In a ddition, Ma stuc k to his earliest principles, which were formed through an understanding, to the point of infatua -tion, with what is known in Chinese martial arts novels as “rivers and lakes,” the mythical equivalent o f Robin Hoo d’s Sherwoo d Forest. It is interesting to note how similar the legendary heroes were: Robin Hood and his Merr y Men are said to have lived in the thirteent h centur y, and many of the stories o f Ma’s favorite book, Outlaws of the Mars h, date from the twelfth and thirteenth centuries. The term is infused with the idea of a brotherhood of Robin Hoo d–style out laws: t hose w ho take from t he rich and give to the poor.As soon as Ma arrived in Han gzhou, he called a meetin g of his team to start t he new cam paign. He ma de sure t hat this ﬁrst comprehensive meeting of the company was recorded on vid -eotape because he ﬁrml y believed that it would be re garded as historic in t he future. T he tape is exce llent documentar y footage. Eighteen people sit and stand around in subdued lighting, looking very serious, while Jack Ma talks in a h yperanimated fashion. “It is Two Small Enlightenments 51darkest before dawn,” he declares. “So we grope together through the darkness. We call to each other. And when I say ‘Charge!’ we do it without fear or panic. We carry a big axe and we charge together, for if two dozen of us charge at the same time, what is there to be afraid of?” In this ﬁrst meeting, the company gathered together its ﬁrst ﬁnancial resources. Ma asked everyone to pitch in from their own coffers—he strictly forbade anyone to borrow money from family or friends. The possibility of failure was not insigniﬁcant. “If the winds of Taishan [Mountain] blow us over, though, I will just be getting up and starting the struggle again.”Everyone dug deep, and the result was some $60,000 (RMB 500,000) in initial investment. Ma laid down three rules: no one would have high compensation, no one would have a high posi-tion, and everybody would be in this together. “I was really talk-ing like a madman that day,” recalls Ma, his face breaking into a smile at the memory. “I told them all, ‘Put your money out here on the table.’ In the end, we pulled together $60,000, not too bad. That was our ﬁrst invested capital. I also made sure they realized there was only one path before them—there was no going back. If we failed, at least we would have been considered honorable.”Blessed with the gift of motivating people, Ma could not let this historic occasion pass without making a speech. “We aim to create an e-commerce company, and in doing this we have three speciﬁc goals. First, we want to set up a company that lasts for one hundred and two years. Second, we want to establish a company that provides e-commerce services to China’s small and medium-sized companies. Third, we want to set up the world’s largest e-commerce company, one that will enter the ranks of the top ten names among global Internet sites.”More than nine years have passed since then, during which time the Internet worldwide went through the end of the dot-com bubble (what is known in China as the “bitterly cold win-ter”) and then began to be accepted as a normal and necessary 52part of life. All eighteen founding mem bers reso lutely stayed in their positions at Alibaba throughout. What’s more, these “young upstarts” have become the core backbone of the company.During t he course o f the founding meeting at Ma’s apartment in Hangzhou, the walls suddenly began oozing water from a leak upstairs. He to ld everyone to hold tight as he went out to get “materia l.” Bac k in a minute, his arms were full of newspapers. A ll the founding members pitched in and helped plaster the news -papers against t he walls, then carrie d on wit h the meetin g as if nothing had happene d. It is sai d that later, in or der to keep the décor looking uniﬁed, Ma decorated the whole room with this newspaper “wa llpaper.”Alibaba Is BornTo the Chinese way of thinking, one always wants to keep one’s cuttin g edge out o f sight. In fact, one wants to ma ke sure it is deeply hidden. This philosophy exten ds to o fﬁcial presentation o f the news: the hard edge of tough editorials is softened by putting a human-interest stor y near by. Tools are manu facture d with an acute s harpness, an d one a lways wants to ﬁle that down a little be-fore using them. Being a man also has its sharpness, although the usual way of expressin g this in C hinese is to ca ll it a man’s “ line.” The ancient saying goes, “T he most accomp lished are those w ho keep their cutting edge concealed, for only then can a man reach the ideal state o f being.” This was an a dage well used in the early days by Jack Ma.During the preparatory period of Alibaba, the usually stri -Two Small Enlightenments 53dent Jack Ma was as silent as a rabbit. He kept his edge hidden. Soft, quiet, he disappeared from public view. He worked all day and night from his home, in rooms that sometimes had as many as thirty-ﬁve people working together. Resources were limited, but nobody cared. Ma continued motivating his team. “When you hear the sound of the starting gun,” he would tell them, “you don’t have time to look around and see how your opponent is doing. Y ou just have to run like hell.” Then he would warn them, “Y our greatest enemy is yourself; your greatest opponent is time. And your greatest failure is to give up.” The group worked hard—often sixteen to eighteen hours a day—designing and program-ming Web pages 24/7. Neighbors probably thought the hours of these young people somewhat strange, but they waited and watched to see what the result might be. In March 1999, the Alibaba Web site was ofﬁcially released. “When the naming is right,” as the Chinese saying goes, “words ﬂow properly. First one must get the title right.” Authors and journalists alike know that is half the battle, and Jack Ma showed considerable foresight in naming his company Alibaba. He knew that the company would eventually be international, and that it should have a name that was resonant in all languages and could be understood over the world. He thought for a long time about this name, testing it in various venues. For example, while eating dinner in the United States, he asked the waiter if he had heard of Ali Baba. “Sure, and the secret code for opening up the trea-sure trove is ‘Open Sesame.’” People all over the world seemed to know the name and the story. He decided that the company had to be called Alibaba.Unfortunately, the domain name had already been registered in Canada. Despite the paucity of funds, Ma spent $10,000 to buy back the domain name. Few could understand his extrava-gance at the time, and attributed it to a lifelong sense of idealism. Ma’s action was far better done then, however, than later: in April 542004, Goo gle spent over $1 mi llion to buy the domain names google.com.cn and google.cn. This was the highest price ever paid at that time for a .cn domain name transaction. The two do -main names had been snatc hed early on by the Beijing Nationa l Networ k Company. In or der to get t hem, Goog le appea led to the China International Economics and Trade Arbitration Commis -sion, but the suit was re jected; Goo gle then decided to spend the money an d purc hase the names. T he inci dent was highly effec-tive in raising investors’ awareness of the importance of domain names .Being Coy: Attracting the Media with Silenc eJack Ma is known as an outstanding businessman, but few rec -ognize t hat he is a lso highly adept at wor king the me dia: he is familiar wit h how the system wor ks. Conservative w hen it comes to promotion strategies, he does in fact have a highlydeveloped sense o f smell when it comes to news. A libaba’s un-common reticence was very e ffective in spurring t he media to great curiosity. In May 1999, a Hangzhou publication put out an artic le called “Alibaba Refuses Visitors, W hile Wantin g to Bea Global Trade Marketplace.” This coy attitude only whetted theappetite of the press. Soon overseas media began to show inter -est as we ll. The ﬁrst to come to Han gzhou was t he magazineBusiness Week. Shortly after that, the South China Morning Postcame calling .The journa list from BusinessWeek  ﬁnally found Alibaba’s of -ffﬁces in the small Lakeside residential district. When he walked in, he was reportedly shocked into silence. He later described the working conditions as being a tin y space holding some twent y people, with sheets and bedding strewn about the ﬂoor and an Two Small Enlightenments 55odor that was something akin to old shoes. Despite primitive conditions, the company’s work was impressive. It involved listing products of manufacturing and trading companies on a Web site.Soon Alibaba’s—and Jack Ma’s—reputation was growing by the day in Europe and America. The hit rate from overseas began to in-crease, and the number of members in what was called the Alibaba Club at that time rose explosively. Without spending one penny, Jack Ma had attracted the inter national media attention that others were trying so hard to get. Zhang Chaoyang at Sohu in the early days appeared on talk shows, which seemed to give some people a negative impression: if Zhang Chaoyang could spend so much time on television, how could he be effective in running a company? He explained his reasons in 2003: “Sohu is a portal. It needs trafﬁc. But since I didn’t have money back then, I had to go on the road myself. It’s not like today when we ask movie stars to be our spokesmen.” This lament had some logic to it, but Ma’s ability to play the media worked better. He attributed it to his early years in setting up the China Y ellow Pages and then the time he spent fraternizing with media and journalists in Beijing.FinancingCompetition is like mobile warfare. Winning and losing are determined by the speed of your reactions both to the future market and to the need for capital.—Jack Welch, former CEO, General  ElectricNo matter how attractive to the media the proselytizer Jack Ma might have become, venture capitalists still knew that Alibaba had not in fact made any money. They knew, moreover, that it sorely 56lacked funds. Dot-com com panies were famous ly good at burn-ing money, and Alibaba was no exception. Large operating ex -penses ate up capital, making it hard for Ma to catch his breath. Fortunate ly, his global speaking appearances serve d two purposes: they drew in customers, an d they drew in venture capita l.In opening up the virgin territory of e-commerce, the fact that one nee ded both a mar ket and also capital was brutally appar-ent: on ly by occupying a mar ket and also having su fﬁcient fund-ing could Ma and Alibaba hope to succeed. By the end of 1999, money had become t he com pany’s greatest problem. Since t he scalable effect of the Internet is greater t han any ot her economic form, its thirst for capital is also greatest. By July 1999, Alibaba’s straine d circumstances were a lready forcing Ma to “ borrow” by deducting money from emp loyee sa laries.Strangely enough, the Russian AK-47 assault riﬂe inadver -tently came to A libaba’s rescue. T he AK-47s in question a ppeared on Alibaba’s We b site, apparent ly unbeknownst to t he company. Someone had put in an offer to sell them on the site, which at -tracted the attention o f BusinessWee k. This news was a great shock to Jack Ma. His sta ff searc hed the Web site but cou ld ﬁnd no mention of the item. As Ma remembers, “It really was hardly pos -sible. I knew t hat the most im portant issue on t he Internet was credibility an d trust, so from t he beginning I esta blished the rule that every bit of information put on our Web site had to be moni -tored and approved by a staff mem ber. We have followed that rule from t he time we had free mem bership all the way down to to -day. Because of that, I believe this kind of information could not have appeared on A libaba. For t he news to a ppear in BusinessWee kscared me, however, since t hat is a pu blication t hat is not care less about what it says.” The story affected Alibaba negatively to a minute degree, but it a lso brought with it consi derable interna -tional attention. Trotting a long wit h the media attention came t he attention of foreign investors .Two Small Enlightenments 57No BeggingSoon Ma was faced with an army of venture capitalists. Although in need of funding, he claims he was not seduced by their money. Most of them were domestic companies or individuals, want-ing terms that he considered extortionist. Others did not bring enough lateral resources to the table. A well-known journalist forCaijing Magazine, Zheng Zuoshi, notes the following story in his record of a meeting with Alibaba’s former deputy CFO, Peng Lei:Ma received a phone call while he was at his house at Lakeside Garden one day in July 1999. He looked over the people in the company who were there at the time, and then said to Peng Lei, “Would you come out with me for a while?”Peng Lei went down with him, only to learn that they would be attending a meeting with a potential investor. She had not pre-pared and had brought along nothing but a notepad: no statistics, no documentation. Jack, for his part, had brought nothing at all.Peng Lei does not remember the name of the venture capital-ist by now. All she remembers is that they met with the manager of the Shanghai ofﬁce of an international investment ﬁrm. Three people had come from Shanghai and were staying at the World Trade Hotel in Hangzhou. They had already visited Alibaba’s of-ﬁces at Lakeside, and they knew what Alibaba did. They had the power in their own hands to make a decision within the scope of a certain level of investment. This negotiation with Jack Ma was therefore quite concrete. If they came to an agreement, the money would be forthcoming.Five people attended. Peng Lei and a man from the venture capital ﬁrm sat on the sofa. Ma sat on a bed, but as usual he soon got up and strode back and forth. One of the others sat on an-other bed; the ﬁrst sat on a stool at the small writing table. After 58introductor y formalities the talk moved into s peciﬁcs. The investo r raised a ﬁgure and a speciﬁc ownership percentage. He reiteratedthat if Ma agree d, they cou ld make the decision t hemselves. Madid not seem ha ppy with the share percenta ge, however; the dolla r amount being discussed was in the range of $1 million. The neg o-tiations sta lled when Ma in dicated that the money being o fferedwas insufﬁcient to justify the percenta ge of shares bein g requested. Ma recommended a short break and said that he and Peng Leiwere going outsi de.The two left and walked out into the sunn y street. After a lon g period of silence, Ma suddenly asked, “What do you think?” Peng Lei later con fessed that she knew t his question was r hetorica l; infact, “Ma was not askin g for m y opinion. He had his own ideas . The question was just to soften the atmosphere of grim silence aswe walked along. But at t he same time, I knew t hat Alibaba had nomone y, since I was in char ge of that as pect of the com pany. I reall y wanted him to give a little in the negotiation. So I said, ‘Ma Y un , there’s no money in our account.’ ”He didn’t make a sound. He walked a little farther , and thensaid, “Okay, let’s go back.” Back in the room, Ma told the venture capitalist, “We feel that the tota l valuation o f Alibaba is higher thanyou feel it is. The distance between us is too great. I’m afraid thereis no way we can cooperate.” And that concluded the negotiation . Peng Lei sti ll remem bers that one o f the investors accompanie dthem down in the elevator. “Y ou are makin g a big mistake,” he told them, “Y ou’re passing up a great opportunity.”Why was Alibaba so fastidious with re gard to venture ca pital? Ma ex plains it by saying that he wante d Alibaba’s ﬁrst infusion o f capital to bring with it more than just money. He needed non -ﬁnancial elements, such as access to overseas resources, as much as he nee ded raw funds. Because o f this, it is sai d that Jack Ma turned away thirty-eight potential investors in the early years. Two Small Enlightenments 59Money continued to be scarce. The hard days were not altogether a bad thing, though, for Ma believes it helped in forming a kind of corporate culture, a consciousness of “who we are,” and a sense of values that kept the company intact as a team after Alibaba had become powerful. This cohesive corporate culture may increas-ingly be a nostalgic memory. As Morgan Stanley and others have noted in 2008, “Rapid expansion [of the company] may lead to culture dilution.”Angel Funding from Goldman SachsThe superheated atmosphere of the Chinese Internet in 1999 attracted the attention of many international investment banks and venture capital companies. They invested serious amounts of money in the Chinese Internet market. Goldman Sachs, Morgan Stanley, and Softbank were three of the primary leads, buying into portals and also into e-commerce.Sina and Sohu were two main beneﬁciaries of this invest-ment. Sina is said to have received $16 million in one round of ﬁnancing in 1999. Sohu took in two rounds of investment, one for $6 million and the other for $30 million. Less than two years later, the three large Internet portals of China were listed on Nas-daq, and investors were able to reap their rewards.Ma did not let this hot environment go to his head. T ogether with Cai Chongxin, who had previously served as a senior man-ager in the venture capital business, he looked carefully for the right investor. In August 1999, Cai became reacquainted with an old friend, and their serendipitous meeting brought Alibaba its ﬁrst “angel funding.” That old friend, a Ms. Lin, had met Cai Chongxin when Cai was still studying at Harvard. By chance, they took the same ﬂight from the United States to Taiwan, and 60after that initia l meetin g Cai maintaine d contact wit h her due to their common profession. By 1999 Lin was working at Gold -man Sachs in the Hong Kong territory as an investment manager. When they met a gain in 1999, Cai learne d that Go ldman was looking into Internet funding in C hina an d indeed was p lanning to take some major action.Goldman Sac hs had previous ly looked only at tra ditiona l in-dustries in C hina an d had little experience in high-tech invest -ing there, so Cai did not harbor great hopes. As a result of Lin’s recommen dation, however, Go ldman Sac hs sent a man to A libaba to look it over. T he resu lts were re latively satis factory, an d both Ma and Cai began to feel heavy weights drop from their shoul -ders. They had rejected suitors t hey felt were not a ppropriate, but Goldman Sac hs was a different story.“T o tell the truth, Alibaba had little room to maneuver at the time,” Cai C hongxin sai d. “The Internet was hot, but not hav-ing any money at a ll was a huge pro blem. We had no leeway in haggling over price. Later, when we went for a second round of funding, the situation was different: we cou ld bargain. Go ldman’s early deman ds were even more stringent t han those o f other in-vestors, but after Ma Y un and I talked it over, we decided to take Goldman’s mone y. On t he one hand, this was a famous American investment bank and could be useful in opening t he American market in the future. On the other hand, Goldman was a sizable company and able to look much farther down t he road [in terms of when they nee ded a return on t he investment]. We pro bably talked it over for ten minutes. Then the thing was decided.”Cai’s description s hows how hard up Alibaba was at t he time, but it a lso shows how Ma va lued the Goldman Sachs brand name. Ma was focused on the rainmaking ability of Goldman Sachs and its ability to attract a mar ket. These were key consi derations later when Ma went for more ﬁnancing. Ma had failed math twice in his youth, but with regard to ﬁnancing his mind was sharp. He Two Small Enlightenments 61understood the consequences of losing controlling interest, and he knew the potential problems behind his own ownership of control shares. Ma’s attitude with regard to money was indeed calculating; he had total respect for the importance of the issue. He did not want large numbers of shares in the hands of any single investor, for who knew what unacceptable situation that investor might force Ma into in the future? At the same time, Ma felt that being the controlling shareholder himself was not as ef-fective as having employees derive beneﬁt from shareholding. All of Alibaba’s employees were Ma’s friends and had been through hard times together. He believed the saying about “sharing good times as well as bad times, beneﬁts as well as troubles.”As lead investor in a group of investment banks, Goldman in-vested $5 million in Alibaba in October 1999, becoming not just the ﬁrst in the initial round of angel investors but also stirring up a tremendous amount of publicity for the small company. A crisis had been averted, and now the company was in good shape and ready to implement its grand plan for the future.Masayoshi Son Takes a Liking to AlibabaAfter this infusion of capital, Alibaba found a new home. Its new ofﬁce address was 47 China Star Science and T echnology Build-ing, third ﬂoor, on Wensan Road in Hangzhou. Jack Ma had led Alibaba silently through 1999, but now, with the nourishment of the Goldman Sachs funding, the company grew quickly. By mid-2000, the company was maintaining an excellent growth curve and was well prepared to meet the demands of additional investment. Alibaba had sought a second round of ﬁnancing im-mediately after the ﬁrst, and this time Ma was more at ease in the process.62The prospective investor was t he legendary IT kingpin, Masayoshi Son. In the Asian investment world, Son’s name is con -sidered to be as famous as that of the NBA’s Michael Jordan. Son and Ma are both short in stature, an d both have an instinctive in -telligence a bout business. Ma likes to do business wit h intelligent people; he says that you don’t need to say much to be quickly understoo d. Masa yoshi Son was t he right kind of person.Masayos hi Son is o f Korean cu ltural heritage but was born and raised in Japan. It is said that his family originally came to Korea from C hina an d that his genealogy from generations past includes high ofﬁcials in C hina’s diplomatic ser vice. Fami ly cir-cumstances declined, however, and Son’s grandfather immigrated to Japan to wor k as a laborer in t he coa l mines on t he sout hern island of Kyus hu. Son’s persona l experiences in c hildhood were harsh; there are stories about riﬂing through trash with his grand -mother to get food, and the experience is sai d to have seare d into him a ﬁerce determination. His father encourage d him at every stage with the ﬁrm belief that he was a genius. He attributed his phenomena l success primari ly to se lf-conﬁdence.Son did well in school, and in 1973 his parents sent him for a brief course in English in San Francisco. The courses were taught through a religious institution, an d he stayed with relatives in southern San Francisco. At one point on t his ﬁrst visit, he visite d the University of California at Berkeley, where he was exposed to free thinkers an d optimists, w ho were legion there at t he time. This met hod of thinking was a bsent in regimente d, discrimina -tory Japan, and Son determined to return to Berkeley as soon as he cou ld as a co llege student.Son had already decided to focus on computers as his core in-terest. When he got to Berkeley, he took economics and computer courses, an d he began to develop his entre preneuria l instincts. He even patente d a device t hat eventua lly sold to Sharp E lectronics for $1 million. With this investment, he imported video arcade Two Small Enlightenments 63games to Berkeley and placed them around the campus, which generated excellent cash ﬂow.He had made his ﬁrst million U.S. dollars by the time he was twenty. He graduated from college at the age of twenty-one, sold his company, and returned to Japan. By the age of forty-three, before the dot-com bubble burst, Son was considered the richest man in Asia. He could single-handedly move shares on the Japa-nese market. Any meeting between Jack Ma and this legendary ﬁgure was bound to be a historic event. The early bond between these two may well have come from recognizing that both had been social outcasts as children.This ﬁrst meeting in late November 1999 was orchestrated by Morgan Stanley, under the guidance of a man named Sunil Gupta. Gupta had called Ma in early autumn 1999 to ask him about Alibaba’s general ﬁnancial situation. Four weeks later, Ma received an e-mail from Gupta, telling him that “a person wants to have a conﬁdential meeting with you, and I believe he will be an extremely useful person for you to know.”Goldman Sachs’ ﬁrst round of ﬁnancing had just been com-pleted on November 30, 1999, so on the next day Jack Ma, in high spirits and with a lofty degree of conﬁdence, headed to this so-called conﬁdential meeting with an unknown person. The meet-ing turned out to be quite different from what Ma expected. First, he had not expected to be meeting Softbank’s legendary founder Masayoshi Son. Second, he had not expected that the meeting would be open to many others, including such heavy hitters in China’s Internet world as Wang Zhidong, Zhang Chaoyang, and Ding Lei. Ma was a relatively small ﬁgure in such company.Since so many people had shown up to present investment opportunities to him, Masayoshi Son could only meet with each for twenty minutes. When Jack Ma’s turn came, he stood up and spent a few minutes explaining his company—what it did and what it planned to do. “Son was extremely smart,” Ma later 64recalled. “He un derstoo d ever ything after I’d said only a few words. He had a keen intuitive sense and a quick understanding. Moreover, his character was pretty similar to mine—we both said things like ‘I want t his, I want t hat.’” Ma s poke for a mere sixminutes before being stoppe d by Son, w ho indicated that he had a strong interest in investing. He asked Ma how much money he needed. Ma’s res ponse to t his legendary investor was s hocking: he told Son he didn’t nee d money. “I f you don’t nee d money, w hy did you come looking for me?” Son asked. Ma responded some -what like a petulant child: he not come looking but had been asked to come by others.The conversation seems comic now, but the truly funny thing was what came later. A lthough Ma had just receive d $5 mi llion in investment, in t hose wi ld days of Internet investing, $5 mi llion was nothing. Ma now says he really did feel that he was not in need of mone y. Nobody knows i f he was just saying this to draw attention to his uniqueness among a ll the hungry ot hers or i f he really meant it. One thing is certain: Jack Ma knew how to handle investors. He believed that all investors were basically the same: i f you ma ke money, t hey try to give you more. I f you don’t ma ke money and have to go begging for it, they turn and run. A chased investor can run like a rabbit. Now, Ma’s avowe d lack of any need for money stimu lated Son’s interest. Just before leaving, he invite d Jack to come to Japan for detailed discussions.T went y days after this ﬁrst meetin g, Jack Ma visite d Masa-yoshi Son in T o kyo along wit h his ﬁnance director, Cai C hongxin. The ﬁrst thing out of Son’s mouth was, “We want to invest in you, and we want to hold 30 percent o f shares.” T he mac hine-gun style did not faze Ma at a ll, nor did the lightning- fast decisions. Ma considered this offer of a $30 million investment in return for 30 percent o f shares for ﬁve or six minutes before beginning to nod. Cai C hongxin held a different view, however, an d said no. This was later to become a rather famous no in In ternet circles.Two Small Enlightenments 65Cai described the scene as follows. “First, you have to have courage to say no to Masayoshi Son. He is the kind of person who doesn’t take no for an answer. In the Internet world at the time, his investment in Yahoo! Japan was already famous, it was talked about so much it was, as they say, putting calluses on people’s ears. I said no to him three times, probably because our funding was relatively adequate at the time. The ﬁrst time was when he named a price. I said no immediately without even thinking about it. Moreover, I said it quite ﬁrmly. I told him that we could reject the offer without going through the board of directors. We simply could not accept it.”A large calculator sat in front of Masayoshi Son. After this ﬁrst refusal, he calculated for a minute on this machine and then announced another price. Cai said that he, Jack Ma, and Alibaba could not accept this price either for the number of shares. So Son again addressed his calculator. After a moment, he came up with another price, which was also refused. Finally Son’s terms came within a range that both Ma and Cai Chongxin could ac-cept. The two sides came to an agreement: the sum of ﬁnancing would remain at $30 million with share percentages that were acceptable to both sides.In details that were later divulged by Cai Chongxin, we learn that the negotiation was tough. And yet when Ma came back to China, he began to have second thoughts. Never greedy, he now felt that the money was not too little but rather too much. Ma called Son’s assistant and told him, “We only want as much money as we need, and that is $20 million. T oo much money is a bad thing.” Son’s assistant could hardly believe this desire to turn away money—nobody had ever told Son that he was investing too much.Ma sent Son an e-mail to clarify the situation. “I hope to join hands with Mr. Masayoshi Son and enter the Internet together . . . [but] if our cooperation was not meant to be, then we should still 66be good friends.” Five minutes later, Jack Ma receive d a response from Son. “Thank you for giving me a business opportunity. We will deﬁnitely help to put Alibaba’s name out in the world, help it become an Internet site on t he level of Yahoo!” Son a greed to Ma’s suggestion: a So ftbank investment o f $20 mi llion, wit h Alibaba’s management team still holding a controlling number of shares. Cai C hongxin later note d that forgoing a large percenta ge of shares was t he biggest concession Son had ever ma de in his whole history of investing.Why not ta ke mone y that was o ffered to him? Ma has said, looking back, “Y es, I was gam bling, but I on ly gam ble on t hings over which I have control. Our team was still less than sixty people—I had at most $20 mi llion to s pend, but I cou ld have done it wit h $2 mi llion. More t han $20 mi llion was super ﬂuous. It lost its value. It would be detrimental to the enterprise, so I had to go back on m y word and refuse it.”Outstan ding entrepreneurs appear to ma ke investment deci-sions in the millions without batting an eye, while at the same time they save ever y penny they can. On ly if one has respect for the value of money can any investment ac hieve its highest va lue. Many ask if this strange story is really true. Jack Ma has publicly stated as muc h on a CCTV program. He a dded, “No matter w hat you are doing, materia l gain s hould not be your main motivation. When all a person is thinking about is money, all he has in his mind are RMB, HK dollars, U.S. dollars, it invo luntari ly comes out in his speec h. Then no body is wi lling to cooperate wit h him. People hear it, and they shun the person.”Ma felt that he and Masa yoshi Son were simi lar kinds of people. “Son hides his inte lligence un der seeming ignorance. He has an impassive face. He speaks garbled English, but there is not one superﬂuous wor d in what he says. He is like a kind of martia l arts master. In t hose six minutes in w hich we initia lly met, we un-derstood what kind of person the other was. First, we are peopl eTwo Small Enlightenments 67who are fast at making decisions. Second, we are men who want to accomplish major things. Third, we want to realize our own way of thinking.” He later added, “I believe that investors like me, and Masayoshi Son likes me, simply because I tell them quite honestly what I am going to accomplish and how much money it is going to make. Son saw my spirit. There are many people in the world who have a lot of money, but there aren’t many who can make something out of Alibaba. I think that this is where our self-conﬁdence comes from. If investors don’t give us money, we can get it elsewhere. I only go to those who are willing and happy to participate. There are many investors in the world, but there is only one Jack Ma. That’s the way it is.”Injecting an additional $20 million into the company at that time was not necessarily the wisest course of action. Alibaba had just received an infusion from the Goldman Sachs team, and its reputation was soon to increase mightily as a result. Waiting a little for another round of ﬁnancing would have allowed the company to value itself more highly and would have allowed it to relin-quish fewer shares. Nonetheless, as events later proved, the timing could not have been better. In April 2000, the Nasdaq began a prolonged two-year decline. After April, no China Internet com-pany could ﬁnd any funding at all. On the other hand, Alibaba and Jack Ma had plenty of grass to eat through this lean period and never had to worry about a roof over their heads.The Largest Private Offering in the History of China’s InternetBy 2004 Alibaba was considered to be the world’s largest B2B e-commerce Web site. On February 17, 2004, Alibaba announced in Beijing that it would be raising the large sum of $82 million 68in strate gic investment. T his was t he largest private o ffering up to that time in the history of China’s Internet. The investors in -cluded Softbank, Fidelity Fund Investment Group, Granite Global Ventures (GGV), an d the venture ca pital ﬁrm TDF .Softbank, Fidelity, an d TDF had already investe d in Alibaba over the past four years. GGV , headquartered in Silicon Valley, was a newcomer. So ftbank led this private o ffering, after w hich it continue d to be the secon d-largest s hareholder of Alibaba. Ali-baba’s largest block of shareholders continued to be the manage -ment team o f the com pany and employees. At t he time o f the investment, Son declared, “We are delighted to have drawn inves-tors in to help Alibaba consolidate its position in this ﬁeld. The investment is in line wit h Softbank’s strate gic policy of ﬁnding companies t hat can occupy leading positions in t heir mar kets.” Ma accepted the ﬁnancing in part because he felt that the Inter -net in C hina wou ld soon be going through a structura l change. He foresaw a new group o f Internet users, name ly “Net busi-nesses,” taking over the dominant role from user groups that were typically called “Net people” (those w ho accesse d the Internet for the main purpose o f sending e-mai ls, reading news, an d looking up information) and “Net friends” (those who used the Internet mostly for short messa ges, instant messa ging, game playing, and dating). Ma felt that information gat hering, socia l networ king, and e-mailing functions were going to give way to “Net business” as the dominant use o f the Internet, an d he wante d to be posi-tioned to beneﬁt from t his change. A cartoon at t he time s howed him thin and gaunt as ever, dressed in Arab attire, with his mouth wide open in a naive an d innocent smi le. One hand grasped a huge bag while the other stu ffed ﬁstfuls of money into it.In fact, this cartoon was not far from reality. Alibaba’s business had been growin g steadily in the B2B rea lm. At t he end of 2000, so-called Alibaba Club mem bers were increasing at t he rate o f one thousand to two thousand per day. Every day, some thirty-ﬁve Two Small Enlightenments 69hundred lines of product information were being received from suppliers and buyers. More than seven hundred types of product information were by now categorized by type of product and national origin. An American who wanted to buy, say, a thousand badminton rackets could ﬁnd at least a dozen Chinese suppliers on Alibaba. He could view their pricing and their contractual terms. A supplier based in Tibet and a buyer based in Ghana could come together on Alibaba’s Web site to do a deal.By December 27, 2001, the number of members in Alibaba’s China Supplier Club had topped one million, making Alibaba the largest B2B Web site in the world in terms of membership. The company showed a proﬁt for the ﬁrst time that same month. This was a critical moment for Jack Ma, for it began to lend credence to his idea that B2B e-commerce could indeed be proﬁtable.A tremendous wave of imitators and competitors soon sprang up in China. Some used direct copies of the Alibaba Web site, down to the line about “getting in touch with Alibaba”—the competitor had forgotten to delete or change the name and contact informa-tion. The imitators became the source of much merriment as well as distress in the company. Jack Ma had struggled six years for this day. His abiding mantras had included the maxim about being able to bend like bamboo: “If you are too rigid, you are easily broken. Those who know how to bend cannot be defeated.” Knowing when to bend and when to ﬁght was the question.Despite competitors, things began to get easier after this break-even turning point in 2001. Ma began to go on global campaigns, visiting dozens of countries, proselytizing for e-com-merce. He also began to put together ideas for what was now an expanded vision of the role of Alibaba. “When businessmen open up their computers today, they see Windows. Everything is Windows. In the future, what we hope you will see is a full-ser-vice window of Alibaba. Alibaba will become synonymous with trade.”70TrustPassThe company now undertook an initiative called TrustPass in or -der to facilitate its ex panded vision. A wa y for businesses to ran k the trustwort hiness o f partners, t he TrustPass service aut henticates and veriﬁes documentation on an enterprise; it requires registra -tion an d various t ypes of vettin g. This service was mar ked by a little sym bol that ﬁrst appeare d on the Alibaba Web site in Marc h 2002. The TrustPass certiﬁcate was an important step in publiciz -ing the value-added services provided by Alibaba.By 2003, A libaba was putting out tra de software for sma ll and medium-sized enterprises as well, speciﬁcally for use in com -merce. Bot h TrustPass an d the software ca lled TradePass greatly enhanced the likelihood of success fully comp leting an on line business deal. Most features of the system were aimed at internal trade within China. T hey used third-party corro boration to give objective eva luations o f mem bers. T hey tallied up the actua l re-cord of transactions accomplished on the Alibaba system, helping members un derstan d the business vo lume an d reliability of any given supp lier.Alibaba recognized that a full package of value-added ser -vices was t he way to prosper from its e-commerce B2B We b site. As a resu lt, it began to o ffer a range o f online an d ofﬂine ser vices. Online se rvices included third-party veriﬁcation and authenti -cation, provision o f the TrustPass certi ﬁcate, browsin g functions that offered information on hundreds of thousan ds of buyers, an d promot ion services for suppliers (including inclusion in keyword searches, mana gement in formation, imme diate buyer feedback, and the ability to be ﬁrst in line w hen information on a particu -lar product was requested). Finally, one key beneﬁt in the process was the ability to use A libaba’s uni que payment s ystem, known as Alipay. Launc hed in Octo ber 2003, A lipay provi ded a secure pay -ment platform for both parties in any transaction. Ofﬂine serv icesTwo Small Enlightenments 71included all kinds of things that might help an enterprise deal with the outside world, particularly an enterprise that was not familiar with international trade. These included training sessions, purchasing negotiations, meetings and conferences at trade shows, and all manner of consulting and professional services.As part of its initiative to provide value-added services that would turn the Internet into a trade tool, Alibaba began heav-ily promoting the TradePass software. TradePass was developed as a custom tool to increase the ease of doing business, and it was constantly upgraded to make it more user-friendly and to accom-modate suggestions made by businessmen. It combined trade ser-vices with online English translation and consolidated customer-management software that allowed businesses to keep track of information on their clients. On June 6, 2006, the software was selected as one of China’s top ten software programs due primar-ily to its usefulness to small and medium-sized enterprises inside China.In presenting the award for TradePass, the organizers of the event noted, “TradePass has provided us with a bridge for com-municating, in all spheres including government, trade, and busi-ness. This award is the result of the hard work of those who de-veloped the software. We hope it will encourage others in the software industry in China to put their efforts into developing the growth of China-made software.” The very fact of the award made it clear that China-made software was receiving strong sup-port from the government and was uniquely suited to China’s needs in the ofﬁcial view. Alibaba appears to be well positioned to grow in this direction.International TrustPass membership was launched to serve exporters outside China in August 2001. China TrustPass mem-bership was launched to serve small and medium-sized enter-prises engaging in domestic trade inside China in March 2002. Both soon generated a new wave of activity on Alibaba. Among 72its beneﬁts to t hose wantin g to do e-commerce: (1) TrustPass gave buyers a place in which to ﬁnd sellers. TrustPass members could post photographs of products and information on products, en -suring visibility in Alibaba’s vast mar ketplace. TrustPass mem bers could receive pre ferentia l information a bout buyers’ inquiries, could contact customers for free via the service, and could usecustomer mana gement too ls. (2) TrustPass provided authentica -tion o f customer in formation. T his allowed buyers to purc hase with greater security. (3) Members of TrustPass were able to make use of the Alipay online payment s ystem, w hich serve d as a kind of escrow account or guarantor for ﬁnancia l exchanges.A New Age of E-Commerce: Net Busines sJack Ma has long believed the Internet is transitioning from being an information gatherin g and social networkin g tool to becomin g ﬁrst an d foremost a venue for on line business. Concurrent wit h this development has been the growth of a new group of Internet users. In order to service this group, Ma proposed back in 2000 that Alibaba create a su bset of mem bers, wit h special privileges, to be called China Suppliers. The term was ﬁrst presented in such a quiet and unassumin g way that man y later mixed it u p with the TrustPass program.The term “China Suppliers” refers to a speciﬁc project initi -ated b y Ma, namel y, the Gold Su pplier membershi p launched to serve C hina ex porters in Octo ber 2000. At t he same time, t he term indicates something broader, something that could be called a general movement in China’s Internet usa ge. Since the conce pt started in A libaba’s ear ly years, t he ever-cautious Ma was care -ful not to publicize it. His strategy, as in the old days of guerrilla warfare, was to “stealthil y enter the villa ge, without an y gunﬁre.” Two Small Enlightenments 73China Suppliers were, in a sense, both customers and the founda-tion of the so-called Alibaba ecosystem. Ma realized that an entire system had to be created to help those who most needed the Internet. He called this an ecosystem because it was the soil and sustenance for small and medium-sized enterprises that would al-low them to grow into being global suppliers.In recent years, China has become the world’s production center. The country has indisputably become the leading supplier of products to the world. The Alibaba system has both enhanced this growth and been a beneﬁciary of it. Part of this is due to its geographic location in Zhejiang province. Within China, the most vibrant part of the private economy, as represented espe-cially by small and medium-sized enterprises, has centered around the southern provinces, most particularly Zhejiang and Jiangsu.As more multinationals source their goods from China, “made in China” has become a kind of global event. And yet for smaller producers in Zhejiang and elsewhere in China, reaching foreign buyers remains problematic. Information does not com-municate well across the language barrier. Small companies lack the resources to attend the trade fairs in Canton or elsewhere. From the beginning, Ma’s China Suppliers program hoped to resolve information ﬂow problems and procedures and thus give small ﬁrms more opportunities to reach a marketplace. The con-tent of the China Suppliers program speciﬁcally included helping suppliers display their products and company information on the Internet. It included ﬁrst still images and later video display, creat-ing a uniﬁed search channel for customers to ﬁnd Alibaba’s sup-pliers, and providing suppliers with advice and guidance on basic rules and etiquette in dealing with foreign buyers. There are now more than twenty-two thousand China Suppliers on the Alibaba site. The fee for being a member of the China Suppliers Club is between $5,120 and $15,400 (RMB 40,000–120,000). The num-bers bring in revenue: 20,000 suppliers at $5,120 (the minimum 74fee) is e qual to over $100 mi llion. At t he maximum fee, the ﬁgure is three times higher.This has vindicated Jack Ma’s belief not only that the In -ternet is a via ble too l for business but also that focusin g on the small supp liers that ma ke up 85 percent o f business is a pro ﬁtable business model. It has furthermore reinforced his belief that the Internet in genera l is movin g into a new era. As mentione d ear-lier, the use o f Internet has changed over t he years in C hina, wit h the predominant users of the Internet being classiﬁed ﬁrst as “Net people,” then “Net friends,” and ﬁnally now “Net business.” Dur -ing the “Net peop le” and “Net friends” phases, pro ﬁts were ma de mainly by ISPs ; people who accessed the Internet were basically playing the role of consumers, an d the proﬁts for Internet com -panies came from a dvertising an d short messaging. Unti l 2004 t he Internet was still a passive tool with regard to doing business. That has all changed, and now t he Internet in C hina has increasin gly been use d as an active too l for business. A new business mo del has arisen that in China is known as “Net business,” using the tool of Internet- based e-commerce to con duct commercia l activities.“Net business” a lso inc ludes a new group o f Internet users who are using business applications on the Internet. Ma believes that as t his conce pt becomes more familiar, it wi ll gradually re-place the older concepts o f “Net peop le” an d “Net friends” in China. Using business applications on the Internet will become an indispensable part of business. In C hina, as e lsewhere ,this is genera lly known as “c loud access” to so ftware: you reac h up an d use an application “on a cloud” when you need it; when you don’t nee d it, it sta ys on t he cloud. As e-commerce an d business tools on t he Internet become wi desprea d, it wi ll lead the entire Internet into a new “Net business” age.The precon dition for all of this to happen is a fertile ecos ys-tem on t he Internet t hat allows for wi desprea d commercia l use. In China, such an ecosystem has beneﬁted in recent years from Two Small Enlightenments 75several developments, including government policies and regula-tions. The Law on Electronic Signatures has been one among many new rules that enhance trustworthiness and safety. Other developments include expanded Internet resources that allow for a wide range of applications on the Internet, and, ﬁnally, the sheer number of people using the Internet. The number of us-ers in China broke through 90 million in the year 2004, which represented some 7 percent of China’s overall population at the time, and the ﬁgure went over 230 million in 2008. The Inter-net has come to the concerted attention of a large percentage of the Chinese population, who are beginning to use it on a daily basis. Ma feels that the numbers are indicative of a shift in Inter-net functions inside China that is not only quantitative but also qualitative. The birth of the “Net business” group exposes, at a deeper level, the future direction of e-commerce in China. The growth ﬁgures for Alibaba and its C2C sister company Taobao show that businesspeople in China are well aware of the potential of B2B and B2C business, even as the great majority of Internet users are happily wandering in the realm of C2C. “Net business” is growing very quickly, in part spurred on by the proselytizing activities of Jack Ma, but e-commerce is not a simple proposition. Ma emphasizes that it requires an entire infrastructure of support systems, including secure payment, delivery logistics, cooperation with banks, and, of course, government regulations.T o educate policy makers and to bring a critical mass of Internet entrepreneurs together in a kind of lobbying force, Jack Ma created a series of different kinds of conferences. On June 12, 2004, more than a thousand China “Net business” rep-resentatives gathered in Hangzhou for the ﬁrst annual meeting of the Entrepreneurs Summit, also known as the Alifest. The E-Commerce Association and Alibaba hosted the meeting. The gathering of so many senior businesspeople was one indica-tion of the gradual maturing of an interactive Internet business 76model. Sessions provided an o pportunit y for Alibaba to displaye-commerce methods to China’s traditional industries and en -terprises. Yahoo!’s co-founder Jerry Yang attended the meeting , expressin g surprise at t he num bers of people atten ding. “This is the ﬁrst time I have even heardpeople talking about ‘Net busi-ness,’” he noted. “America doesn’t really have this. I myself had not appreciate d the usefulness o f the Internet as a too l for sma ll and medium-size d enterprises to transact business. Our mo del is generally just revenue from ads.” Ad revenue on the Internetis now aroun d $40 billion, ma king Jerry Yang’s focus on a d rev-enue un derstan dable.At the conference, Ma pointed out that the volume of B2B business was a consi derable force in C hina’s business wor ld. Four-ﬁfths of China’s companies are sma ll and medium-size d enter -prises, which in turn produce more than four-ﬁfths of the volume of China’s business. T heir activities to a large extent in ﬂuence t he entire C hinese economy. Ma went on to say t hat e-commerce functions on Alibaba are designed with small and medium-sized enterprises in min d. The beneﬁts are a pparent: t hey reduce the number and cost o f middleman links, and they prevent sma ll com-panies from being squeezed and exploited by large ones. Since large buyers purchase in quantit y, and since sma ll sellers lack their own sa les channels, sma ll companies are genera lly forced to sell at low prices to the giants. B2B e-commerce Web sites such as Ali -baba are now a llowing small companies to reso lve suc h problems. In suc h places as Wenz hou in Z hejiang an d Ningpo in Jiangsu, sales transacted on the Internet already constitute a large percent -age of total business.Since 2004, foreign giants have been ta king note o f this phenomenon, including eBay, Amazon, and other internationalInternet companies, as we ll as internationa l investment ﬁrms. Wal-Mart atten ded the con ference, as did Ingerso ll Ran d, Le-novo, and Mitsubishi Heavy Industries. Other traditional indu s-Two Small Enlightenments 77tries were there: Japan’s Itohchu, Korea’s LG Electronics, Korea’s Samsung, Sears from the United States, NEC from Japan, and General Motors. A number of these initiated steps to go through Alibaba in purchasing Chinese products. Grassroots-level pro-ducers in China were the star of the show, as media began to pay attention to this vital part not just of China’s economy but of the global economy. As a result, the conference was also signiﬁcant at the more profound level of social and cultural exchange.The vice president of Alibaba, Jin Jianhang, noted, “This gives business back to businessmen. It returns the control of business to those who are actually producing the products.”Hangzhou’s RoleHow big is the Internet, and how big is e-commerce on the Inter-net? According to estimates of China’s E-Commerce Association, Alibaba, and others, China’s e-commerce market will likely ex-ceed $100 billion by the year 2010. Recognizing the groundswell in this business, far more international representatives attended a third Alifest held in Hangzhou in 2006. The opening ceremony on September 9, 2006, was attended by Wal-Mart, Procter & Gam-ble, Home Depot, and others. They also included Niu Gensheng, chairman of the board of China’s Mengniu Group. Niu Gensh-eng’s appearance on the scene was signiﬁcant, since he is one of the leading businessmen in China. He is now also on the board of the publicly listed company Alibaba.com, which makes it perhaps interesting for the Western investor to know a little about him. Niu is from Inner Mongolia, where he grew up in poverty, but he went on to found the largest milk-products company in China. Legend has it that Niu’s father died when he was young, and he was “sold into the city” by relatives in the countryside for a price that is said 78to have been aroun d $10 at t he time (RMB 50). Since t he boy did not even know his own surname, he was given the name Niu, “cow,” by the father of the family who took him in. This man hadstarted raisin g cows twent y-eight years ear lier when he returne d to Inner Mongo lia from t he Korean War, an d so Niu grew up among a herd of cows. When this man died, Niu just kept on raising the cows. Five years later, he was hired by the local milk products fac-tory an d was set to wor k scrubbing bottles. He staye d there sixteenyears before starting his own Meng-niu Group (in Chinese, Mengmeans “Mon golia”). T he ﬁrm later became t he largest mi lk prod-ucts company in C hina; now t he Mengniu Dairy Company, w hich is traded on the Hong Kong stock exchange, has a market capita l-ization o f aroun d $6.725 billion.T wo tren ds had become evi dent over t he years since t he ﬁrst e-commerce conference in 1999. One was the dominance of the city of Hangzhou in C hina’s in formation in dustries. Han gzhou is at the forefront o f e-commerce an d is recognize d by many to be the Silicon Valley of China. It lies at the center of the core region of entre preneuria l activit y in Z hejiang and is already known as the “capita l of Chinese e-commerce.” T he city’s regu latory in fra-structure has intentionally incubated a vibrant private economy. In addition, Han gzhou has success fully nurture d human resources with its wea lth of scienti ﬁc and researc h institutes , IT in dustries , and Zhejiang University.A secon d trend was seen in t he depth of the “China shock-wave,” t he degree to w hich China has become t he primary sup-plier to the world. That wave has owed a certain amount to the use of e-commerce an d the ability of China’s sma ll companies to access wor ld markets directly.For both of these reasons, Alibaba considers itself to be a kind of calling card for the city of Hangzhou. Han gzhou in turn serves as a critica l home base of government support for Alibaba. Ac-cording to plan, the information industries in Hangzhou will have Two Small Enlightenments 79increased to 25 percent of Hangzhou’s GDP by the year 2010. IT will have become the leading industry in the regional economy, with Alibaba serving as one of its primary contributors.Alibaba’s GoalsUp to now, Alibaba has consistently been able to achieve the goals set by its founder. These were generally regarded with dismay and disbelief, however, when ﬁrst announced. In 2003, Ma set the goal of an average daily income of $120,000 (RMB 1 million). The previous year, daily income had been only RMB 130,000, so many expressed doubts. Senior managers made a bet against Ma’s optimism but were glad, at the end of the year, to have lost. In 2004 Ma set the goal of a daily proﬁt of $120,000 (RMB 1 mil-lion) and achieved that as well. In 2005 he set the goal of a daily tax contribution of the same ﬁgure and made that. Under Ma’s constant pressure and his motivational management, Alibaba’s goals have been met.Ma himself feels that success is dependent on the ability to implement a high degree of efﬁciency. He regards Alibaba as a team of doers, not a team of thinkers; he says repeatedly that it is better to execute a mistaken decision than it is to muddle around without any decision—what you learn in the course of implementation often gives you the opportunity to move ahead to a higher stage. He agrees with the CEO of Focus Media, Ji-ang Nanchun, who says, “There are plenty of people with bright ideas, but there are very few who can implement bright ideas.” Masayoshi Son and Jack Ma have often debated this question: “Is it better to have a third-rate idea and ﬁrst-rate execution, or is it better to have a ﬁrst-rate idea and third-rate execution?” and both men have concluded that execution, performance, is key.80What were Ma’s goals in 2006? T hey were less quantiﬁed but no less am bitious: to lea d the worl d’s “Net people” into the age of “Net business” by executing a global strategy and taking Ali -baba into t he wor ld. This initia l stride out into t he wor ld echoed nationa l Chinese po licy, w hich in recent years has been to ta ke China out into the world. It also, however, reinforced Ma’s incli -nations from t he beginning of his business career, due in no sma ll part to his relations hip wit h the Austra lian coup le who serve d as surrogate parents to Ma and taught him many of the customs of Western cu lture.The coup le’s greatest gi ft to Ma was to incu lcate in him an understanding of Western thinking, which is very different from Chinese t hinking, and this was to serve him we ll in his later ca -reer. It was not mere ly a question o f studying language, but rather understanding how Westerners perceive the world and how they interact with people. Socia l interaction is a key element in busi-ness. In t he 1980s C hina was just beginning to emerge from a period of severe isolation. The way people interacted with one another in C hina during the Communist period, and particu -larly during t he Cu ltural Revo lution, was quite different from the social norms of Americans during the same period. Ma was fortunate to be coac hed in Western cu ltural practices w hile still accessing t he local systems o f his Chinese life.Hangzhou was on the periphery of opening up to the West as C hina began its extraor dinary emer gence from iso la-tion. T his meant t hat government contro l over private enter -prise in Hangzhou was considerably more lax than it was in urban centers a long the coast. In t he Zhejiang and Jiangsu re-gions, state-owne d enterprises were not t he critica l employers that they were, for example, in Shanghai. Zhejiang and Jiangsuwere allowed to grow s pontaneous ly, and their rate o f growth outstrippe d that of the rest o f China. Jac k Ma’s exposure toa Western mind-set, through acquaintance with the Austra -Two Small Enlightenments 81lian couple based in Hangzhou, happily coincided with fertile conditions for business.Unlike many Chinese students who headed overseas to study, Jack Ma was able to absorb the lessons at home. When students who had gone overseas began to return, they found a China that was radically changed. It had moved around them while they were gone, and they had to readapt to new conditions. Jack Ma was al-ready immersed in the new conditions and ahead of his cohort when it came to dealing with the West. Western business had long been yearning to get into the mysterious “Oriental” market and had generally hired the returned Chinese students to help them. In their time abroad, they had undeniably absorbed Western lingo and cultural practices that helped them serve as bridges in cross-cultural business. Nonetheless, they often now lacked a thorough understanding of their homeland. Due to Ma’s interaction with a foreign couple, he was equal to any competition, East or West, and this was to be a lifelong beneﬁt to him in business. Because Ma remained at home, rooted in the soil of entrepreneurial southern China and connected to its local leaders, he was able to see op-portunities that the returned students missed. When he decided to set up the Alibaba e-commerce Web site in 1999, he saw very clearly that the value chain of this opportunity had two sides to it: overseas buyers and Chinese suppliers. At the time, most business models focused only on the overseas buyers. Returned students focused on these in particular, since that is where their salaries came from. In contrast, Ma focused on the suppliers in China for his revenue.“At the beginning, I scarcely dared to tell people that we were a Chinese company,” Ma says about those days, “because Chinese companies were not highly regarded. Nobody believed that China could produce a good Internet company. That’s partly the reason I chose the name Alibaba—it was neither East nor West.” At the time, the core IT technology and the subsequent 82enterprises were a ll in the West, as were a ll of the main fund-ing sources. Ma recognized that, even as he remained a Chinese company, he had to use any opportunity to try to get the atten -tion—an d support—o f foreigners. He reco gnized that his entire approac h needed to be global. If Alibaba were mere ly Sinocentric, it would be a seller without a buyer. Moreover, Alibaba had to scale up to becomin g global very quickly or it wou ld lose its ﬁrst-to-mar ket advantage in t his arena. Ma had no ot her choice but to make Alibaba a global Web site. As a result, he moved overseas, perhaps too a bruptly, but the global impetus was a necessar y pre-condition for later success. He lost a large amount o f money, but in the process also built a substantial business base.In 1999 Jack Ma c hose Hon g Kong to be the headquarters o f the company. Hong Kong’s strong internationa l ﬂavor was con ducive to expansion abroad, but at the same time Hong Kong was also now part of China, having been returne d to China on July 1, 1997. In aceremony at Hong Kong harbor, the Prince o f Wales rea d a speec hon behalf of Queen Elizabeth, boarded the royal yacht, the Britannia ,and then sailed off into t he Sout h China Sea.Ma had always felt strong ly that Alibaba should be thoroug hly Chinese, that in the end it would prove to the world that a Chi -nese com pany could be a premier mu ltinationa l in the IT wor ld. In order to attract g lobal human ta lent, he set up a tec hnology base in America and a branch in London, and then began the ar -duous process o f ﬁnding global buyers by making himself into a kind of global sales mac hine.The Astronau tIn 1999 an d 2000 Ma trave led to some twent y countries, atten d-ing business forums, making speeches, and using his silver tongue Two Small Enlightenments 83to promote his B2B thinking and to promote Alibaba. In one month, Ma might go to Europe three times; within a week, he might visit seven countries. He spoke on the BBC, at MIT, at the Wharton School, at Harvard; he spoke at the World Economic Forum, and at the Asian Business Association. Waving his bony hands, he would shout to the audience, “The B2B model will ul-timately change the way the globe’s millions of businesspeople do business. It will thereby change the lives of billions of people on this earth.” The message echoed throughout empty halls at ﬁrst, but gradually, as the Internet itself changed, the audience for the message increased. “The ﬁrst time I gave a speech in Germany,” Ma recalls, “was when Alibaba already had more than forty thou-sand members, but in a hall for a thousand people there were exactly three people sitting in the audience. The second time I went to Germany, the hall was full. And some people had ﬂown over from England as well.”Ma’s efforts led to an explosive rise in club membership back in China, and revenues of Alibaba quickly rose. Such publications asForbes and Fortune took note of Alibaba, and the company be-gan to gain traction as a respectable enterprise. Some of this fame came about despite Ma’s speechmaking, because his style has of-ten been self-avowedly “slightly crazy.” At Harvard, before giving a speech, he was asked by the host to introduce things about him-self that had not been covered in the prepared handout. Stumped for a moment, Ma then responded with an anecdote, “T en years ago, I applied to come to Harvard. I applied three times and was rejected three times. Y ou all didn’t even look at my application, I believe—you just turned me down!” Students were so taken with his candor that thirty-ﬁve MBAs lined up after the speech to try to get a job with him.Other speeches received a less than friendly reception. Chi-nese companies were beginning to fear the results of entry into the World Trade Organization (WTO), while Western compa-84nies were actua lly becomin g afraid of Chinese com panies. Ma attended one conference called “ China Is a Threat.” This seemed ludicrous to those enterprises back home that were saying to themselves, “W hen we enter t he WTO, w hat are we going to do? Management o f overseas ﬁrms is better t han ours, t hey have more resources—how can we possibly beat them?” The mutual fear—or, perhaps, lack of understan ding—exten ded to Ma’s rece ption at a BBC interview in Lon don. Ma was as ked to prepare for the interview by reading questions on the ﬁve subjects that would be covere d. He had been to ld that the interview wou ld be a vi deo-cast, not a direct broadcast, so he did not spen d any time review -ing the questions. When the camera started rolling, he heard the host intro duce him by saying, “This is BBC headquarters, broad-casting live to t he wor ld.” The camera turne d to him an d he was suddenly on the spot, in front of millions of people. Instead of the canne d questions, however, he found that the interviewer as ked him, in ﬁve different ways, w hether he really felt he cou ld be suc-cessful as a Chinese company and get rich. Ma later was to com -ment on t his experience: “At ﬁrst, I was s hocked into si lence. But I kept a smi le on my face. My ﬁnal statement was, ‘We wi ll prove that we can survive, and in fact that we can survive pretty well.’ ”To  do that, Ma reco gnized that the com pany had to be inter -nationa l at the same time it developed inside China. T he slogan at Alibaba became “Avoid the race inside China; go directly to the global circuit.” Ma held on to t he dream t hat one day e-commerce would be a reigning reality, saving costs and allowing global ef -ffﬁciencies in use of resources. At the same time, he believed that Alibaba wou ld become a common asset to t he wor ld.