chapter 8How Can You See the Rainbow if You Don’t Go Out in the Rain?Nobody goes out in the rain without getting a little bit wet. As Bill Gates always says of Microsoft, “We expect to get sued. That’s just part of the busi-ness.” Alibaba found the same thing to be true, and it has handled its legal issues with a fair degree of success.One of the ﬁrst lawsuits came in 2001 with regard to Ali-baba’s domain name. In the Alibaba legend, when a person incants the magic words “open sesame,” he opens up a treasure trove. In the real world of the Internet, however, the magic words opened 168up a lawsuit. T he plaintiff was t he Bei jing Zheng Pu Science &Technology Development Company, Ltd, which used the domainname 2688.com. In Chinese, the numbers 2688 are pronouncederliubaba , which sounds simi lar to “A libaba.” This com pany broughtsuit against A libaba for infringing its tra demark rights in t he Bei-jing Municipal People’s Intermediate Court. The suit was ﬁled on February 1, 2001.On Decem ber 10 o f the same year, t he court rejecte d the caseand conﬁrmed that Alibaba’s Chinese domain should remain law -fully under the registered owners hip of Alibaba (China) InternetTechnology Company, Lt d. Beijing Z heng Pu did not accept t his decision and on December 20 formally appealed to the Municipal Supreme Court. Yao Zen gqi, chairman o f the board of Zheng Pu, declared, “The court’s ju dgment was groun dless, a contra diction from start to end. We can’t ﬁgure out what the law is supposed to be protectin g if it arrives at judgments like this.” The vice presi-dent of Alibaba (China) in c harge o f the case, Jin Jian hang, stoo d his ground. “We will actively ﬁght the appeal, and we will guardthe interests o f our com pany and our man y users. We can’t a llow the brand of Alibaba to have any negative in ﬂuence.”Yao Zengqi disagreed. As he saw it, the company Alibaba had not yet been esta blished when his com pany registered its tra de-mark. How cou ld he have inten ded to “snatc h” the name o f a company that was not yet in existence? Alibaba refuted this with the statement t hat it had begun usin g the names on both Chinese and English Web sites t hat Jack Ma starte d unofﬁcially at the end of 1998 and ofﬁcially launched in March 1999. Zheng Pu reg -istered the domain name 2 688.com four mont hs after the name Alibaba had come into regu lar use. Z heng Pu was c learly aiming at Alibaba in registering this name—and the Beijing courts re -fused to legitimize t he subterfuge.Following is t he ofﬁcial text associate d with this case. T his should put to rest any doubts that the Chinese government is How Can Y ou See the Rainbow . . . 169serious about enforcing an international code with respect to In-ternet intellectual property rights:In November 2000, the China Internet Network Information Center (“CNNIC”), which manages China’s top-level domain name with the sufﬁx “.cn” and their Chinese equivalents, granted the Chinese “alibaba” domain name to Alibaba. CNNIC had re-served the “alibaba” domain name under the principle that it was a famous Internet name that should belong to Alibaba, the com-pany that operates the Web site, www.alibaba.com. CNNIC had implemented this reservation policy for a number of other well-known Internet companies in China including sina.com and sohu.com. However, Alibaba’s legal ownership of the name was chal-lenged by Beijing Zheng Pu T echnology Development Co., Ltd. (“Zheng Pu”), a Beijing-based software re-seller, who brought the lawsuit against CNNIC and Alibaba in Beijing in February 2001. Zheng Pu claimed that due to CNNIC’s reservation policy, it was not able to register the “alibaba” domain name in CNNIC’s on-line registration system, and it challenged the legality of Alibaba’s ownership of the domain name.In its ruling, the Court pointed out that Zheng Pu had no basis for its claim to the “alibaba” domain name because it provided no evidence of any rights to any intellectual property relating to the name. Although Zheng Pu had applied to register “alibaba” as its trademark, which application is contested by Alibaba as having been submitted in bad faith with the intent of unfair competition, the Court found that mere submission of a trademark application does not give rise to any legal rights to the name until it is regis-tered. The Court further stated that Alibaba should be the rightful owner of the domain name because Alibaba is the company that created the renowned alibaba brand based on the Internet web site www.alibaba.com and the commercial value associated with the brand.170The court a lso state d: “In t he circumstance w here the Ali-baba Web site is already well known among Internet users, reg-istration of the domain name by someone else could confuse Internet users and be detrimenta l to the rights of Alibaba, thereby constituting un fair competition.” In light of China’s entry into the WTO and its commitment to enforce protection of well-known global brand names a gainst un fair com petition, t he court’s opinion soun ds consistent wit h the spirit o f fairness in inte llectual property protect ion.“We a pplaud the Court’s decision,” sai d Alibaba CEO Jack Ma after the verdict was announce d. “This landmark case s hows that the court recognizes the national and international brand that Alibaba has built up in our business. We are pleased that the Chinese a dministrative an d legal systems are protecting t he inte l-lectual property rights of the rightful owners and preventing op -portunists from ta king advantage of other people’s hard work.”Another legal matter, t his time initiate d by Alibaba, con -cerned the company Taobao. On April 20, 2004, Taobao’s COO declared to the wor ld that the com pany had absolute proof that Yahoo! C hina was sip honing large quantities o f data from its serv-ers. Taobao raised an ofﬁcial protest against this behavior. COOSun Dan yu said that Tao bao had analyzed the problems an d, after ruling out interna l server pro blems, rea lized it was dealing wit h a very sophisticated hacker. Using high-powered software tools , this hacker was grabbing hold of Taobao’s commercia l statistics and proprietary data. On further investigation, Tao bao discov-ered that the IP of the hacker was owned by none other than . .. Yahoo! C hina.Yahoo! C hina denied the charge an d noted that since it was a Web site with search engine functions, it often took in large amounts of data in t he course o f automatic searc hes. The Tao bao Incident had arisen in t he course o f a norma l searc h and had simply caused a large amount of product data and seller informa -How Can Y ou See the Rainbow . . . 171tion to be downloaded from Taobao to Yahoo! The issue was not unique to Yahoo!: Taobao claimed that eBay-EachNet had also been using “improper competition” to hack into Taobao servers in the past. Such problems were referred to Chinese authorities and eventually resolved by superior competition of the stronger party, whether it was strictly legitimate or not. Meanwhile, in August 2005, Alibaba and Yahoo! China came to their agreement to merge forces.Y ahoo! China: Challenges After the AcquisitionThe combining of Alibaba and Yahoo! China forces confronted Jack Ma with several major dilemmas. First and foremost was how to keep to the e-commerce focus when Yahoo! was a portal with a wealth of other capabilities. Second was how to reallocate hu-man resources in a way that did not capsize the boat, and third was how to capitalize on the Yahoo! brand.Alibaba had single-mindedly focused on e-commerce. With Yahoo! its scope of business now extended to information con-tent, search, and such other Internet service functions as e-mail and instant messaging. Should Alibaba try to turn Yahoo! China into an e-commerce company? Or should Yahoo! China retain its portal functions but undergo “localization”? This question had to be resolved in tandem with the redeployment of human re-sources. At the ﬁrst meeting between all Yahoo! China employ-ees and Jack Ma, the former president of Yahoo! China, Zhou Hongwei, unexpectedly showed up and asked to be allowed to speak. He raised only one request in his speech, and that was that Alibaba deal squarely with Yahoo! China employees, ﬁnding them positions. This was seen to be somewhat draconian and made the whole process of merging forces even more difﬁcult.172Capitalizing on Ya hoo!’s brand name was e qually trouble-some. Google and Baidu dominate the search market in China, and it has not been clear whether Yahoo! can overcome such competitors, w hich have a stron g lead in habitual consumer use. Yahoo! is on ly the fourth largest porta l in China, yet it sti ll enjoys a brand name that is the envy of many. Wielding that brand name in the searc h market has been Ma’s primar y goal. Daily habits of search consumers are quite esta blished, however, an d it is not c lear whether Ma will succeed. Despite his efforts to bring technical experts to C hina w ho have been meetin g one-on-one wit h Chi-nese developers in a Hercu lean e ffort to develop the platform, there have been many doubters .Chinese en joy watc hing bloody battles between conten ders: many ﬁnd it amusing to see t he strong eat t he wea k in a ﬁght for the survival of the ﬁttest. There is no reason to believe at this stage that Jack Ma wi ll disappoint his audience. He has been known to pull unusua l moves in t he past, an d he doubtless wi ll again in t he future.The stakes in a ll these lawsuits an d competitive postures are increasing ly large. T he next section describes just how large, ac -cording to the most recent (January 2008) research on the Inter -net in C hina.Status of the Internet in ChinaOn Januar y 17, 2008, C hina’s aut horitative CNNIC issue d its twenty-ﬁrst annual report on the state of the Internet in China. The ﬁrst line of this report declares that the total number of “Netpeople” in C hina is 210 mi llion, 5 mi llion fewer t han in the United States. The numbers have already changed, however, and Chinese users now surpass the number in the United States. How Can Y ou See the Rainbow . . . 173From being a country that forbade mention of the Internet a dozen years ago, China now dominates Internet communications. How this affects the weiqi board of Internet players is unclear, but it is certain that any strategic moves by global players must take China into consideration.Since China is so crucial in global strategies for these com-panies, the following section gives a summary of CNNIC’s evalu-ation of the Internet in China in 2008. It is a translated and sum-marized version of the Chinese text available on the Internet.CNNIC Report SummaryCNNIC forecasts that in the early to middle part of 2008, China will become the country with the greatest number of Internet us-ers in the world. The rate of increase in number of users in China is 16 percent, which is still lower than the average worldwide rate of 19.1 percent.For the ﬁrst time, CNNIC has done a detailed analysis of the composition of new Internet users in China in this report. Among new users in 2007, the trends are clear: the increase is fastest among people under the age of eighteen and over the age of thirty. Al-though the greatest increases are among the young and the edu-cated, the statistics show that more and more lower-income peopleare now accessing the Internet.People in farming villages are becoming an important segment of new users. Forty percent of the 73 million new users in 2007 are in towns and villages, which means that 29.17 million new users are rural Chinese. By the end of December 2007, the num-ber of people in China’s farming villages that access the Internet had reached 52.62 million with a 127.7 percent annual rate of increase. This statistic indicates that villages in China hold huge potential for becoming Internet market consumers. Various gov-ernment policies have focused on connecting villages to national communications networks, whether via telephone or cable: the 174goal of such policies is to “informationize” these communities and broaden their Internet access. Rates of current usage and increa s-ing tren ds show that the mar ket potentia l, now being rea lized invillages, is absolutel y vast.Surveys taken for the report indicate that Internet use has evolved in C hina an d entertainment has become t he most im -portant a pplication. The percenta ges of people who conﬁrm the y use the Internet for speciﬁc purposes include the following sevencategories: music (86.6 percent), instant messaging (81.4 percent), videos (76.9 percent), news (73.6 percent), search en gines (72.4percent), games (59.3 percent), and e-mail (56.5 percent) .In contrast to many parts o f the wor ld, muc h of Internet access in China is via hi gh-speed broadband connections. Over 163 mi l-lionpeople now access the Internet via broadband connections inChina; 50.4 mi llion peop le access t hrough handheld devices. Bot hof these t ypes of access are ra pidly increasin g.In terms of geographic distribution, access to the Internet in Beijing an d Shanghai is highest, wit h 46.6 percent o f the popu la-tion of Bei jing and 45.8 percent of the population in Shan ghaiaccessing the Internet. The greatest rate of increase, however, is inGuang dong province, due to t he inﬂuence o f handheld devices . Within this past year, usa ge in that province alone has increased b y15 million people .At present, 140 mi llion people access t he Internet from t heir homes in China. This is an increase of 35.7 percent over last year. Home access through computer is via 78 million computers, meaning roughly two people access per eac h home computer. T hegreatest concentration of access via com puter is in Guan gdong province, Beijing, and Shanghai. The average cost per home fo r home access is $10.26 per mont h (74.9 RMB), or an annua l totalaccess fee of $123 (900 RMB) per household; 67.3 percent of allInternet users access the Internet from home. In addition, 33.9percent o f all users access from Internet ca fes, an d 24.3 percentHow Can Y ou See the Rainbow . . . 175access from their workplace. The average cost of accessing the In-ternet from Internet cafes is $7.07 per month (51.6 RMB). Access from home is rising rapidly, while access at the workplace is level with only a slight increase.At present, China has 50.4 million people accessing the Internet via handheld devices. Around two-thirds (66.5 percent) of all those accessing via handheld devices are male, and most of these are between the ages of eighteen and twenty-four. Some 94 percent of people who access the Internet use desktop computers; 26.7 percent use laptops, and 24.0 percent use handheld devices. Clearly there is overlap among these three user groups, with some access-ing in more than one way.Of people with a high school education in China, 83.35 million have not yet accessed the Internet, while 437 million people who have a middle-school education have not yet accessed the Internet. The most important reasons given are that these people do not understand computers or the Internet itself, they do not have time, and they do not have the equipment.T o those who do access the Internet, the practice has become a necessary function in daily life. The average length of time spent on the Internet per week, by users overall, is 16.2 hours. People who use the Internet give it high marks in terms of its useful-ness to them: 93.1 percent say it is extremely useful to work and study; 38.3 percent say they feel they have missed something if they haven’t been on the Internet at least once a day.In terms of media on the Internet: 73.6 percent of people in-terviewed have used the Internet to read news in the past half year. The percentage of people ﬁnding Internet news “believable” or “true” is 51.3 percent. The entertainment value of the Inter-net is rated somewhat higher. Use of the Net for gaming totals 59.3 percent among all users; on average an Internet user playing games on the Internet accesses the Internet for 7.3 hours per week for this purpose. Of all Internet users surveyed, 71.2 percent 176have downloaded music within the past half year, 76.9 percent have watched online videos, and 40.5 percent have downloaded videos.Purchasin g of goods on the Internet is increasin g: 22.1 per-cent of all users have bought goods via the Internet this past year. The higher the level of education, t he higher the amount o f Webpurchases. On avera ge, in the past half year an Internet bu yer has purchased $64 (RMB 466) worth of goods on the Internet.China-based domain names now tota l 11.93 mi llion, an increaseof 190.4 percent over last year. The main increase has come in theuse of the domain name .cn, which now totals some 9 million re g-istered sites, a fourfold increase over t he num ber in 2006. T here are now 135 million IP addresses in China, an increase of 38 percentover the previous year. At present there are 1,029 IP addresses fo r every ten t housan dpeople; there are 6,442 IP a ddresses for everyten thousand Internet users.There are 1.5 million Web sites in China. Among these, slightlyover one mi llion have a .cn domain a ddress an d .cn domain namesconstitute 66.9 percent of all Web sites in China .As for problems with the Internet, viruses are rampant. 35.8percent o f Internet users have experience d viruses on more t han ﬁve occasions in the past year. Onl y 3.6 percent of users re port not having contracted viruses. Stealing of accounts and passwordsis also rampant, an d the worst o ffenses are experience d in Internetcafes: 56.5 percent o f people whose accounts or passwords were stolen had them stolen in Internet cafes. 37.1 percent experiencedthis at home, eit her their own or t he home o f a friend. 24.7 pe r-cent ex perienced it at work, 17.5 percent at school, and 15.5 per-cent in public places such as libraries .