chapter 6Alipay: A New Milestone in  E-CommerceWall Street has predicted that whoever holds the initia-tive in online payment sys-tems will control China’s e-commerce markets. That entity may well be Alipay, an afﬁliate of the umbrella Alibaba Group. Alipay is currently the largest online payment platform in China and is similar in most respects to PayPal in the United States. It has more than ﬁfty-eight million active users and over three hundred thousand merchants accepting the ser vice. It has close contractual relations with China’s largest banks. It is owned and controlled 138by the Alibaba Grou p. The com pany is in t hat new an d nebulous region of Internet banking and ﬁnance that is witness to the rapid convergence of ﬁnancial and information industries.The original idea behind Alipay was t hat it s hould serve as an escrow service for buyer an d seller: it wou ld serve as guarantor between parties to a transaction, by holding funds until products were actua lly receive d. Now ex panding that limited role, Alipay is beginning to o ffer loans to customers on t he basis of their cre dit rating, which in turn is partly based on their volume of online transactions. It has ties wit h Visa, so overseas customers can pay or be paid online easi ly. It is morp hing into a very power ful entity, one that is not under the scrutiny of the Alibaba.com stock mar -ket listing. E-commerce re quires coo peration wit h large com -mercia l banks, in addition to very su bstantia l back-ofﬁce tec hnical support. In the present environment in China, Alipay’s ability to resolve the payment securit y issues is a si gniﬁcant breakthrough in China’s e-commerce business.Monetizing transactions via Alipay is one of Alibaba’s best opportunities for evo lving its business. Dai ly transactions in re -cent mont hs are in t he neig hborhood of 1 million to 1.2 mi llion, with peak daily payment volume of over $4 million (RMB 250 million). A libaba.com earns a revenue s hare of between 60 per-cent an d 85 percent o f the transaction amount for cross-se lling services. The parent group owns Alipay, but if registered users of Alibaba.com pay each other wit h Alipay, then Alibaba.com re -ceives 60 percent to 85 percent of the consequent fees. This ef -fffectively monetizes transactions.The banking ﬁeld estimates t hat Alipay facilitated more t han $4.5 billion (RMB 35 billion) o f transactions invo lving in dividual consumers in 2007. Payment between parties at a distance from each other is a rea dy source o f income to t he com pany; pay-ment systems invo lving c loser parties are more intracta ble, since competition includes all the conventional modes of payment. In Alipay: A New Milestone in E-Commerce 139the online arena, competitors are PayPal China, Chinapay, T enpay (owned by T encent), and UMpay (owned by TOM Online). One excellent asset of Alipay is its good relationship with ﬁnancial reg-ulators and commercial banks. The company works closely with these to ensure its systems are timely, hassle free, government-facilitated in the sense of approved licenses, and inexpensive.As a system, Taobao is enabled by Alipay. A number of surveys have shown that users know the beneﬁts of purchasing on the In-ternet but remain concerned about the security of payment. The effectiveness of security systems in the course of transactions is key. Jack Ma agrees that there can be no true e-commerce in China without resolving payment security problems, and he also knows that resolving customer concerns will lead to an explosion of China’s e-commerce. When customers are fully comfortable, Taobao will begin to make serious money. T o guarantee transaction security, Ma has established several layers of security on top of the Taobao system. Any seller ﬁrst has to receive a certiﬁcate of authentication and veriﬁca-tion from the Public Security Bureau of China. Every seller is ranked in a trustworthiness ranking system, which includes volume of busi-ness done through the system and other safeguards.Statistics indicate that one in ten thousand transactions on Taobao leads to problems, a ratio that approaches the level in Europe and the United States. In America, the average amount of money lost to swindlers in an Internet transaction is said to be $293; in China, it is less but the overall problem is worse, given the many links in the chain of any transaction and the less so-phisticated state of the infrastructure. Recognizing that security and trustworthiness are key, Ma has long since cultivated a kind of Scotland Yard–like operation within his company, which inde-pendently investigates problems. The names of the employees are conﬁdential, for the safety of family members, but available mate-rial suggests they are highly trained professionals in the ﬁeld of investigation. In one known case, a person who swindled a buyer 140was apprehended less than ﬁfteen minutes a fter wit hdrawin g the transferre d funds from his bank account.At least three e-commerce companies have set up secure-payment platforms in recent years: Eac hNet was ﬁrst in launching its Easy Payment Pass service back in 2000. A fter that, Alibaba setup TrustPass, and Huicong set up Buyer’s Business Pass, although these did not inc lude all features o f safe payment. Tao bao ex peri-menta lly launched the Alipay service on Octo ber 18, 2003. In t he short space of one year it achieved fairly good results, and it has since become t he premier payment platform in C hina.The system continues to wor k as a kind of escrow account, in which banks hold a buyer’s funds until products have been receive d. The basic transaction process is as follows: (1) t he buyer selects the product, (2) t he buyer remits funds to A lipay, (3) A lipay notiﬁes the seller to issue goods, (4) the seller issues the goods to the buyer, (5) t he buyer receives t he goods and notiﬁes Alipay, (6) Alipay re leases t he funds to the seller, an d (7) the transaction is completed. As with any credit card used for a transaction, the buyer is ﬁrst eva luated in an aut hentication an d veriﬁcation pro-cess. Other value-added services inc lude the ability to trac k funds, manage inquiries, and handle accounts.Direct ly using a cre dit card for on line payment in C hina in -creases t he risk of losing contro l of one’s funds, but Alipay has basically resolved this security issue. Within a few seconds, pay -ment can be made in a sa fe and easy manner. In t his Internet era, an Alipay account is a kind of electronic purse.No Thieves on Earth: The Taobao Versio nIn 2004 an d 2005, Tao bao rode the wave o f a popular television show in China called No Thieves on Earth. The plot involved a Alipay: A New Milestone in E-Commerce 141male thief and his female accomplice, and two pickpockets called Wang Bao and Wang Li. On a train, the two meet up with a farmer, appropriately called Foolish Bumpkin. Bumpkin is just returning from the big city, where he has been able to make a pile of money. He is looking forward to building himself a home, ﬁnding a wife, and enjoying life. Bumpkin does not believe that there are any thieves on earth, and so he is easily befriended by the two Wangs. They are just about to relieve him of his money when they change their minds and decide to protect him instead: he is so naive and so appealing that they are moved by his simple goodness. They therefore live up to his illusion that there are no thieves on earth.Jack Ma felt that the role of this Bumpkin was tailor-made for promoting Alipay. He invested some $1.2 million (RMB 10 million) on a promotion campaign that linked the show’s ce-lebrities with Alipay: ads connecting the two in people’s minds were everywhere. Taobao’s symbol was well placed in the TV show; later every prop used by actors in the show was sold at auction on Taobao. There were spin-off products from the show, and other forms of partnering between its producers and Ali-baba. Ma then invited the Huayi brothers, giants in the Chinese ﬁlm world, to ﬁlm an ad speciﬁcally for Alipay. They brought together a number of the original actors and actresses. In the ad, however, Bumpkin is not really foolish; on the contrary, he cleverly goes through the new payment method called Alipay to transfer his money. He also avoids having to pay the large re-mittance fee that he might normally have had to pay at a bank, an amount with which he “could have bought a mule.” The message came across as “With Alipay, there can be no thieves on earth,” and the security and basic concepts of Alipay were driven home.142Castin g Off the Old Self WithoutChan ging the BonesAlipay helped launch Taobao and make it a success, but Alipay was never considered merel y an accessor y to that com pany, ac-cording to Tao bao’s COO, Sun Dan yu. “Alipay came out in Oc -tober 2003, and thinking back on it now we realize that China’s e-commerce market would be nothin g like as mature as it has become wit h that payment interme diary.” A senior executive o f Alipay conﬁrms that Jack Ma’s intention in launching Alipay was not to serve Taobao, but to beneﬁt the entire e-commerce indus -try. “He wante d to reso lve the payment problem o f the whole domestic Internet business, not merely to give Taobao a way to resolve its payment problems. As a result, Ali pay had to se parate out from Tao bao, become an in dependent entit y and a genuine third-party platform.”Alipay split off from Taobao in the s pring of 2005. Jack Ma had just returne d from Davos, Switzer land, where he atten ded the World Economic Forum, held there every year. As a proselytizer for China’s e-commerce, he had given a s peech called “2005, the Y ear o f Secure E-Commerce Pa yment in C hina.” T he idea of making Alipay an independent entity was implemented shortly afterward: the intent was to make it the online payment standard for the entire C hinese e-commerce in dustry. Ma reco gnized that for Alipay to become the gold standard, it had to differentiate itself and separate itself ﬁnanciall y from Alibaba and Taobao. Oth -erwise, com panies suc h as eBa y-EachNet wou ld be threatene d by it and not use it. If, on the other hand, Alipay could become a generall y used platform in the industr y, the beneﬁts that would bring to Alibaba in terms o f business revenue wou ld be huge.The Taobao Web site was launched in May 2003. On July 7, 2003, Alibaba announced that Taobao had been s pun off as a separate an d independently investe d C2C We b site. A lipay was Alipay: A New Milestone in E-Commerce 143put into use in October 2003. Now, after slightly more than one year, it too was spun off as a separate entity. Transactions on both Alibaba and Taobao were encouraged to use Alipay as their pay-ment platform. One incentive was the slogan “complete com-pensation,” which meant that if anyone bought anything on Ali-baba and paid through Alipay and later found that he had been cheated, Alibaba would make complete compensation for the loss. “We’re not just talking about a few hundred or a few thousand,” clariﬁed Jack Ma. “If the loss is one hundred million, we’ll pay.” Transactions for large sums did indeed start going through Alipay as conﬁdence in the system increased. One buyer in Shanghai used Alipay to purchase $62,500 (RMB 500,000) worth of pearls; another in Xiamen bought a Buick sedan worth $37,500 (RMB 300,000) through Alipay.Even as Alipay was aiming to be the technical standard inside China for payment, eBay-EachNet was developing its own prod-uct and intending to launch it soon. The news that eBay-EachNet was investing $100 million in its China company got attention: everyone wondered what this amount of money was going to be spent on. As rumors went around, the COO of eBay-EachNet, Zheng Xigui, announced that it would be used to strengthen the security of Internet transactions and especially to provide se-cure payment methods. At the same time, Zheng revealed that the company would be setting up a call center in order to improve the customer experience.There was a strong smell of gunpowder in eBay’s China pol-icy, meaning that the company was not merely rattling sabers but was setting off the big guns. Unfortunately for eBay, the regu-latory environment in China is not conducive to international companies entering the e-commerce payment system. PayPal, eBay’s previous platform, ran up against domestic policy restric-tions and was initially unable to enter China successfully, but eBay did not stop trying. It invited people with strong expertise in 144Internet payment in C hina’s banking circles to join its a lliance. It hinted that setting up an independent China-run company was not an impossibility; the resulting platform, called An-Fu-Bao, is very like a C hinese e dition o f PayPal. At present, Pa yPal is the global leader in e-commerce transactions. Its in formation ac-counts have replaced checks and credit cards as the main means of e-commerce accountin g and payment. For a re latively low pro-cedural fee, users can execute payment quic kly; PayPa l holds 90 percent of the American market and is considered to be dominant internationally as we ll.Other competitors eye d the mar ket in C hina, for the simp le reason that astonishingly large proﬁts can be made. Faced with these conten ders, an d with the deep pockets of eBay-EachNet, Jack Ma decided to play his trump car d. Again, it was ca lled “free.” Unlike other Web sites, both buyer and seller could use Alipay for their transaction wit hout paying any fee. Most e-commerce sites take a fee for eac h transaction ; Alibaba and Taobao use a different business model that relies on value-added  services for which they charge a fee. As a resu lt, they can ma ke a transaction “trans parent,” allowing buyer an d seller to ta lk to one anot her wit hout fear of losing control over the deal. Most sites do not allow this: only when the transaction is done can buyer and seller communicate directly. This strategy helped Jack Ma in his competition wit h the Chinese equivalent of PayPal. Another thing that contributed to Alipay’s success has been Pa yPal’s excessive re liance on cre dit cards. This has meant t he company is stymie d in C hina, w here credit card use is not as widespread. Turning the situation around to widespread use o f credit cards in C hina is going to ta ke some time.On February 2, 2005, Jack Ma announced an “elevation in grade” of the online payment too l Alipay. Whether in t he same city or in ot her regions o f the country, going t hrough Alipay for a transaction would not incur fees. Ma said that through strate -Alipay: A New Milestone in E-Commerce 145gic cooperative relations with Chinese banks, including the In-dustrial and Commercial Bank of China (ICBC), Construction Bank, Agricultural Bank, and Merchants Bank, Alipay was ex-tending its service to support enterprise users on Alibaba. Any users could voluntarily register to obtain an Alipay account and thus go through this credit intermediary to carry out free funds transfers.Trade accomplished through Alipay exploded after this an-nouncement. Cooperating with Alipay incurred costs for the banks, but Ma announced that Alibaba would be absorbing these for the time being. He had committed to three years of free ser-vice to Taobao users, “and so these intermediary fees naturally have to be borne by us.” This was an almost necessary conces-sion.In July 2005, news hit China that PayPal had ofﬁcially landed in China and established strategic partnerships with a banking consortium. As China faced the prospect of increased competition within its borders with full entry into the WTO, many different industries began to form groups for self-defense, various forms of alliances and partnerships. In Chinese parlance, such alliances were given a martial arts spin and called wu lin alliances, after the forest (lin) in which martial arts were practiced. The purpose of such alliances is to create an effective barrier to entry for foreign competitors. Chinese government regulations have served to but-tress certain industries that are exempt from full WTO compli-ance due to national security considerations: these include the Internet, banking, media, and publishing. As head of Alibaba, Jack Ma is considered to be “chief among the wu lin masters.” He is now contending with very signiﬁcant forces, however, since the Hong Kong tycoon Li Ka-shing has joined up with eBay in its assault on the China market.Which system will become the gold standard in payment platforms in China? Ma’s answer to this is perhaps most telling: 146“Any standard has to be decided by the mar ket. On ly when cus -tomers really feel you are best will you win their support. Then you get bigger, and then you become the standard. It is a very natural process.” T he fact that eBa y has now linked up with TOM Group, an insi der in C hina business wit h greater latitude in t he regulatory environment, will unavoidably present Alibaba with challenging duels in the future. At present, A lipay remains in t he lead in C hina, supporte d by suc h Web sites as So hu, Bai du, Ji-angmin, Jinshan, and others. The sparring of the two contenders continues, however, an d as Jack Ma sa ys, only time an d the mar ket will prove w ho wins in t he end.