chapter 2Darkest Before DawnJack Ma is the kind of man a mother has to worry about. He calls himself lazy. He quit a good job. Just when he seemed to settle into one stable ca-reer, he switched to another. When he makes a decision, he of-ten overturns it. According to friends and observers, his life has been an endless series of revisions. That he is now one of China’s wealthiest and most inﬂuential men may be a tribute to this rest-less roaming.The revisions began when he was a young man. In 1988, he graduated from Hangzhou Normal College and settled into teaching English at Hangzhou Electronics T echnology College. 16He was drawin g a respectable salary and enjoyed the wor k, then surprised everyone by abandoning this line of work and starting a translation company.In 1994 Jack Ma turne d thirty, the age at w hich a person in China is regar ded as having come o f age to t he degree t hat he should be set up on his own. This Confucian saying is known to all and genera lly observed. The dean o f the college in w hich he was teac hing had promise d Ma t hat some day he wou ld be ap-pointed head of its External Affairs Department. Rejecting this very promisin g future, Ma resi gned soon a fter an d set u p a com -pany ca lled Haibo. Its name was c hosen for its aura l similarity to the English word hope. In English, the company is now known asthe Han gzhou Ho pe Trans lation A gency.The Hai bo Trans lation Agency can be seen as t he ﬁrst evi-dence that Jack Ma, as many were to learn, “never gives in.” This mantra was calligraphed next to his photograph on the Haibo Web site. The site was primitive, but it starte d the trajectory t hat led to Ma’s fame today. The Web site text read: “The Hangzhou Haibo Translation A gency was esta blished in Januar y 1994, founded by Jack Ma. T he State A dministration for Industry an d Commerce granted the company permission to register as an organization specializing in trans lation. Hai bo is the ﬁrst suc h organization to be esta blished in Hangz hou.” It went on to note t hat principa l early customers included the Hangzhou municipal government and the judiciary of Zhejiang Province .Haibo still exists an d is run by a woman name d Zhang Hong . She recalls her entry into the company years ago. “Back then, n o-body else saw t he opportunit y in this business. Ma Y un saw it: he has phenomena l foresig ht. We didn’t ma ke muc h money at ﬁrst, but Ma persevered, and saw through to where he wanted to be. I respect him tremen dously, for he has a great a bility to motivatepeople, and he can invest t hings t hat seem hopeless wit h excitin g possibility. He can make those around him get excited about life. ”Darkest Before Dawn 17Ma himself says that he started the business because he wanted to be a better teacher. “Everything I taught was drawn from knowledge in books. I wanted to spend some time in actual practice, learning to distinguish between what was true, or real, and what wasn’t. I decided to put ten years into setting up a com-pany, and then I intended to come back to the school to teach, with a better understanding of what I was doing.”An Unremarkable Student Becomes an Outstanding BusinessmanMa realized that there was a need for translation when friends kept coming to him, asking him to translate things. With little free time of his own, he began to use others—what he calls “hired guns”—to do the work. The hired guns were mostly retired pro-fessors, who could make a modest living in this line of work. At ﬁrst, Ma felt he was doing a kind of public service, particularly since the company lost money—it was paying out in rent twice what it was bringing in. Employees began to waver in their deci-sion to work for the company, and for a time morale was dismal.T o shore up income, Ma personally went out on the street to peddle things, anything by which he could turn a proﬁt: ﬂowers, books, clothes, ﬂashlights. The trade helped supplement the in-come of the translation house during its early, rocky period. The determination of the core group of people who co-founded the company with Ma also helped revive the morale of employees. According to Ma, the company was breaking even by the end of 1994 and had begun to turn a proﬁt in 1995. Ma was generally considered a fool at the time. He himself acknowledges that he learned from his many mistakes. He did accomplish two things: he kept alive a translation house that provided a useful service, and 18he success fully organized Hangzhou’s ﬁrst En glish Corner, a place to congregate for practicing the language. T oday, Haibo is Hang-zhou’s largest translation house. Its ser vices have been indispens -able in the foreign-trade com ponent o f the com pany Alibaba.“I knew t hat there was a nee d, and so I rea lized that it should actually not be so hard to succeed,” says Ma today. That vague sense o f optimism was a bout the extent o f his strate gic plannin g in starting t he company. In t he early stages o f Haibo, he contin -ued teaching at the Electronics College in addition to teaching night classes. T hose classes were to play a crucia l role in his later founding of Alibaba, for his students were Hangz hou tra ders an d businesspeople of all kinds. The founding and management of Haibo also contri buted lessons to his later business: “T he process made me rea lize that those w ho succee d need two qua lities. One is a forward-looking personality that is fairly conﬁdent, not to say coura geous. T he other is a keen sense o f the mar ket.”Ma Goes to Americ aMa’s ﬁrst contact wit h the Internet was during his initia l mont h-long trip to the United States in 1995. This trip had qualities of gangster movies an d slapstick at the same time. Man y details re-main murky. In Ma’s own description, “It was really like a classic American-style Hollywood ﬁlm. I was taken hostage by a kind of Maﬁa, so t hat [when I esca ped] I just left my suitcase behind—it’s still back there somewhere.”This is how it all came about. The Hangzhou municipal government was in t he process o f building a highway between Hangzhou, in Zhejiang Province, and Fuyang, in Anhui Pro v-ince. An American investor had been talking to transportation department aut horities, ne gotiatin g a deal, but talks had stalled Darkest Before Dawn 19and no money had appeared. Both sides felt that there must be problems in communication, and Hangzhou authorities thought of the excellent English-language capabilities of Jack Ma. At the time, he was known as one of the best English-speakers around, and was marginally more familiar with things foreign than oth-ers in Hangzhou. Ma was chosen to serve as both interpreter and mediator in the business talks. As he became more familiar with the situation and delved more deeply into the considerations, he found that it was, as he states, “a particularly complex story.”The American investor was to receive compensation in the form of toll rights, which meant he could collect fees from the ﬁnished road. This method of paying back the cost of building a road was not uncommon; it was similar to the way the Hong Kong businessman Li Ka-shing had ﬁnanced the building of a road from Wutong to Shenzhen, near Hong Kong. The method was acceptable in terms of both theory and practice. The devil was, as usual, in the details.Problems began during the building of the highway. More than one thousand people were soon working on the road, but as time went on they found they had been working for a year without any pay. The Chinese began to realize that even Ameri-can bosses practiced unethical behavior, cheating construction crews of their pay. The Hangzhou municipal government there-fore authorized Jack Ma to serve as intermediary along with a representative from the American side, who described himself as having come “to serve as a communications channel to resolve the problem.” According to this American, the problem lay in the fact that the Hong Kong board of directors was balking—it would be necessary for Jack Ma to go to Hong Kong to talk to them. Hong Kong was still a British colony in the mid-1990s, and was the site of many headquarters and ofﬁces of companies doing business with China.Ma went to Hong Kong and discovered that all was not as 20the American had said. Back in Han gzhou, the American now said that it was the America ncompany’s board of directors who were creating the problem. With no other recourse, the Hang -zhou aut horities a greed to sen d Jack Ma to t he Unite d States to talk to those directly in c harge. He app lied for a visa an d to his surprise actually got one (at that time visas were not easy to get), an d off he went. T he next mont h was to be “inhuman in its tragedy,” as he described it. “Every strange an d bizarre t hing that could happen did happen. ” Ma soon discovere d that the American had been deceivin g Hangz hou all along, t hat he was a “ dyed-in-the-woo l cheat”— that, indeed, he was known in the States as an international swin -dler. He an d Jack Ma t hen trave led to America to gether, an d the swindler too k Ma to see “t he investors.” In t he short time t hat Ma spent with them, he heard somebody mention the Internet. He already had a vague im pression o f the Internet from an Austra lian teacher back in Hangz hou, so his min d was prepare d when the word crossed the screen again.The American boss now too k Ma to Las Ve gas to gamble. Since Ma was carrying out t he mission entruste d to him by the Hangzhou municipal government, he did not pay much attention to “other things that happened at the time.” One t hing about the gambling prove d signiﬁcant, however: Ma gam bled $25 at t he slot machines and won $600. Using these winnings, he was eventu -ally able to start on his path to the Internet. In t he meantime, he found he had been p laced under ruanjin, or “so ft detention ,” inhis room. It had become apparent to the American that Ma knew he was a swin dler, an d that defeat was loomin g: Jack Ma fully in-tended to return to Hangz hou to let the cat out o f the bag.The American began to work on Ma, trying to persuade him to come in wit h him as partner. He even tem pted him wit h an annua l salary of $100,000. Ma re fused. The American t hen con -tinued to keep Ma locked in his room, not bothering to have Darkest Before Dawn 21any further communication with him. Like any ordinary person, Ma was not going to agree to being locked up and hungry for too long. According to his rendition of the story, he called the American and negotiated. “If you want me to go back and work on your behalf, then your terms have to be improved. I want you to invest in another business of mine.” He then told the American he had plans to develop an Internet site. The American had little understanding of this high-tech concept, but he agreed to have Jack Ma “check it out” once he got back to China.Once released, Ma lit out for home. He left the hotel without even bothering to pick up his suitcase, taking only the six hun-dred dollars he had made in Las Vegas. Ma said of the swindler he left behind, “The man was rotten to the core. He was later found to be on the wanted list and was in the end arrested by Inter-pol.” No further information on this man or his relationship with Hangzhou has surfaced.First Personal Contact with the InternetEvery man has his own game plan. Yahoo!’s Jerry Yang has his; Soft-bank’s Masayoshi Son has his. Before 1995, Jack Ma’s game plan was to be a professor of the English language. After 1995, it was to go out in the world and meet up with the Internet. On escaping from the clutches of the American swindler, Ma took a plane from Los Angeles to Seattle instead of going straight back to Hangzhou. Once in Seattle, he went in search of a small Internet service pro-vider (ISP) named  VBN, whose young workers he had heard about. He found their ofﬁces: two small rooms, in which ﬁve people sat before computers, madly putting together Internet pages.Ma was uncomfortable even touching a computer back in 1995. The young people at VBN sat him down before one and 22coached him in how to access t he Internet. In t hose days, the in-formation technology associated with the Internet was primitive: the browser the young people used was something called Mosaic , while the largest searc h engine in t he States at t he time was We b-Craw ler. Mosaic had been re leased to the genera l public in 1993, after being developed by the National Center for Supercomput -ing Applications. It was funded by a bill put before Con gress by Al Gore, Jr. We bCraw ler was t he creation o f a man name d Brian Pinkerton at the University of Washington, who released it on April 20, 1994. It was t he ﬁrst searc h engine to in dex entire pages, and it became so popu lar that often it cou ld not be used during the day, only late at night. AOL eventually bought the company out. Meanw hile, also in A pril 1994, Davi d Filo and Jerry Yang had just create d their Ya hoo! Directory an d in the coming mont hs began offering it to others for a fee. For little Jack Ma, from way out in Han gzhou, C hina, it was in deed excitin g to be accessin g the cutting e dge of all this technology.As Ma remembers it, the VBN people asked him what hewanted to look up on the Internet. T hey said, “Type it here.” He typed in “beer.” T he resu lts came back with German beer, Amer i-can beer, Japanese beer . .. but no Chinese beer. Then he typedin “Chinese” an d the resu lts came back “no data.” He looked for other things C hinese—sti ll “no data.” T his intereste d him. Be fore, he had only heard about the Internet, since it was not available in China. Y et here he was, actua lly using it, touc hing it, ex periencin g it. He began to develop his idea of starting a company in C hina that was speciﬁcally related to the Internet and to things Chinese .Ma’s ﬁrst We b pages were ma de in t he Unite d States, not in China. T he ﬁrst page was t he extreme ly primitive page for Hai bo. On it were prices for translations and a telephone number. This was the start. Wit hout it, t here mi ght have been no Jack Ma ta lk-ing happily these days about g lobal e-commerce an d IPOs. Cre -ating a Web site in China at the time was hardly possible because Darkest Before Dawn 23China did not have a regular system for licensing ISPs in 1995. The Ministry of Information Industries, or MII, was established only in 1998 to serve as an impartial regulatory agency, under which was placed the former monopoly power of the Ministry of Posts and T elecommunications. The MII was authorized to re-view, approve, and grant licenses for ISPs later that year. In late 1999, its director at the time, Wu Jichuan, noted that regulation of ISPs would be under the MII while regulation of Internet content would be under other government agencies, those spe-ciﬁcally concerned with information ﬂow and propaganda. From the beginning of the Internet in China, any IT entrepreneur had to navigate multiple layers of authority.Ma remembers distinctly that the Haibo page was ﬁnished at 9:30a.m. one day when he was in the United States, and by eve-ning he had received ﬁve e-mails. He was tremendously excited. Three were from people in America, two of whom were overseas Chinese. This was the ﬁrst Web page they had ever seen about products in China. The other two were from Japan, and they asked about pricing. Ma was essentially illiterate when it came to the Internet, but his business sense told him that there was a play to be made here. He had a sense that the Internet would be changing the world, and he wanted to be in on it.He grasped the essentials of his mission early on: pull to-gether information on Chinese enterprises, put it on a Web site, and broadcast their products to the world. He decided to work together with his American friends at VBN on the technical side of the business. He mentally sketched out a global business-to-business (B2B) e-commerce model and began work.In China, full-function connection to the Internet started in 1994. Professor Qian Hualin at the Academy of Sciences in Bei-jing had spearheaded this effort and presided over the establish-ment of the Chinese domain name system. But that was in Bei-jing, at the heart of the scientiﬁc establishment and governmental 24support. Ma lived in Han gzhou, far from t he technology centers of Beijing and Shanghai. As an outsider, he was a particularly pre -cocious innovator in China’s Internet businesses.Now c lear on w hat he was doing, Ma returne d to America and met wit h potentia l partners. “Let’s cooperate,” he said. “Y ou be responsible for technology on the American side; I’ll go back to China, pull in customers, an d do promotion.” Ma had already chosen a name for the project: it was t he Chinese equiva lent o f “China Y ellow Pages,” while the English name for his Web site was Chinapage.The Haib o NetworkThe very night Ma returned to Hangzhou, he invited twenty-four friends to a meetin g. All were stu dents in t he night school where he taug ht; all worked in the ﬁeld of foreign tra de. Having taught them English, Ma understood their needs and knew how helpful a We b site for promotion o f their products cou ld be. His idea, however, met wit h little ent husiasm. O f the twenty- four, twenty-three said it was too early to get into this business. “It won’t wor k,” they told him.“I spoke for two hours,” Ma said later, “and they didn’t get it. I myself didn’t know what I was talking about. One person said he wou ld take a chance, but if it didn’t wor k he wou ld turn tai lright away. So I thought about it for one night. The next morn -ing, I decided to do it. Even if twenty-four had been opposed, I would have carrie d on.”One factor in his decision was a sense of giving it a try. Ma has always felt that one does not measure success just by the re -sults; instea d, he feels that the experience o f doing somet hing is in itself a kind of success. “Y ou go out and charge around . .. if it Darkest Before Dawn 25doesn’t work, you can always bow out. But if you just think over thousands of things at night and in the morning keep on walking the same old path, you never get anywhere. Y ou don’t grow. Y ou might as well try.” Ma has often commented on the fact that he is praised less for his acumen than for his courage.Most people in China had no idea of the Internet in 1995. Even in the United States, Nicholas Negroponte did not publish his famous book Being Digital until 1995. Jerry Yang and David Filo had created Yahoo! in 1994 while at the same time studying for graduate degrees at Stanford, but by 1995 they had received $1 million in investment and were devoting all their time to the Internet. In China, there was no way to dial up and reach the Internet from Hangzhou, and it was hard from most other places. Beijing had started a connection from the Academy of Sciences, but information was strictly controlled. It was not surprising that Ma’s friends opposed the idea of making an actual business out of this situation.In April 1995, Ma put $800 of his savings (RMB [renminbi] 7,000*) into a pot for the new company. He got his sister, his brother-in-law, his parents, and other relatives to pitch in too, and he came up with $2,380 (RMB 20,000). From this small beginning, the China Y ellow Pages became one of China’s earliest Internet companies.The “Trickster” and His Y ellow PagesMa was regarded as a kind of trickster as he went around to busi-nesses trying to get them to spend money promoting themselves on the Internet. He obviously was trying to pull the wool over *Conversions between RMB=USD are noted according to the exchange rate at the time.26their eyes, people thought. He went out ever y day to se ll his Y el-low Pages, to get people to agree to be advertised on the Internet . But what was the Internet? Nobody believed him. “What sort of nonsense is t his? Y ellow w hat?”Ma wou ld respon d, “China Y e llow Pages, on t he Internet. It’s that high-speed information highway. ”They wou ld say, “I see. Y ou’re looking for Mr. X. Over there.”“Which room? ”“The next one down, t he Com prehensive De partment.”So Ma wou ld go to t he man in t he Compre hensive Depart -ment, who would say to him, “I’m telling you, this is very com -plex. Things to do wit h these so-ca lled Yellow Pa ges, they’re not as simp le as you imagine. ”Complexity in China often has to do with government reg -ulations an d de facto socia l prohibitions. T he mar ket econom y itself was highly government-in ﬂuence d at the time, an d any-thing to do with information industries belonged wholly to the government. T he com plexities were mu ltilayered and would have smothered anyone less determine d to slice through red tape. In February 1996, for example, the State Council promulgated In -terim Re gulations on Mana gement o f Com puter In formation Networ ks—Internationa l Connections. T hese require d that all users, individuals and organizations, strictly follow the State Se -crecy System. T he State Secrec y Bureau followed up with a State Secrets Protection Regu lation in 2000. In August 2002, t he MII required ISPs to monitor more closely any use of the Internet: software was to be insta lled by ISPs t hat allowed recor ding of all messages. I f messages were suspect, t he ISP was to noti fy MII under penalty of law. All of these rules and regulations meant that the public was war y of anyone tr ying to deal with the political is-sues an d make money o ff somet hing as dangerous as t he Internet. They didn’t want to get involved.Darkest Before Dawn 27There was also criticism of Jack Ma’s selling style. When he talked, he seemed all hands and feet, no grace. Hangzhou people are known for their civility and their sophisticated suavity; Ma had none of that and indeed was often described as a country bumpkin. Way back in 1995, the whole business was a very hard sell.“It was pitiful. It was like trying to cheat someone, but not really. We’d tell everyone, ‘There is this thing, you see,’ and then we’d try to describe it, this and that. Later I came to understand that old saying about how a rabbit eats the grass nearest his burrow ﬁrst. At the beginning, therefore, I put up information for friends. They knew my credibility over the years was pretty good. Even-tually they would agree to come on board with some payment. The very ﬁrst to agree was the Lakeview Hotel in Hangzhou, a four-star hotel. Second was the Qianjiang Law Ofﬁces, and third was the Fourth Electrical Machinery Plant of Hangzhou.”Without direct access to the Internet, Ma used his contacts in America to do the uploading. “We came to the Lakeview Ho-tel and asked the staff for printed material on their business. We immediately sent that by courier to America, and the technical people there put it into the Web page. At the time, we had a basic standard price for putting up information: $2,380 [RMB 20,000] for a photograph and text up to three thousand words. After the American side ﬁnished work, they would print a hard copy of what the page looked like and they would courier it back to us in China. Before sending the material to America, we would have had it translated into English, which is where the Hope Translation House came into play. So we did all this and we took the hard-copy printout of the Web page to the Lakeview Hotel manager and told him his hotel was up on the Internet. He didn’t believe us. We said to him, ‘This is an American telephone num-ber on the Web page. Y ou can ask your friends in America to call this number and ﬁnd out if it’s really there or not. If it isn’t, come after me. If it is, then you have to pay the fee.”28Ma enjoys narratin g in detail the tribulations o f “playing a zither for a cow ,” as the Chinese have it , over the course of that year. He was preaching to the deaf, but one or two early believ -ers heard the messa ge. Slowly but sure ly, Ma create d a business. The Lakeview Hote l story turne d out we ll. In 1995, t he U.N. Fourth World Conference on Women was being held in Beijing; attendees from ot her countries went on t he Web before comin g to China to try to ﬁnd out a bout C hina’s hotels. The only one they could get any information on was the Lakeview—so they all came to t he Lakeview for a holiday after the convention.In July 1995, S hanghai set up a dedicated Internet line wit h a dial-up number. Ma decided to get online directly from Hang -zhou, in or der to prove to his customers t hat he had not c heated them. He got everyone in a room, wit h a 486 computer, an d he made a long-distance call to Shanghai. Then he began to down -load photos an d information on t he Lakeview Hote l from t he American site. It too k three an d one- half hours. (T hese days young people sometimes complain about the Internet being too slow. Bac k then, the maximum connection s peed was 24K—nobody who lived through that perio d comp lains very muc h to-day.) When a photo from the hotel ﬁnally began to appear on the screen, Jack Ma burst out cr ying. He was so happy and so excite d that he simp ly cou ldn’t help it.Ma’s second customer was the Qianjiang Law Ofﬁce. “I had a friend there w ho was one o f my students. We ma de a We b site for him, but he still didn’t believe it was up t here,” Ma reca lled. “So he put his own home telephone number on the Web page. His phone soon began rin ging off the hook. Some foreigner was trying to ta lk to him in Eng lish. My friend was amaze d, and he bought into the Y ellow Pages.”By August 1995, C hina T e lecom starte d an Internet ser -vice in S hanghai. Ma followed up wit h a Y ellow Pages t here too. His registration number was 7. “In those days, you’d have to use Darkest Before Dawn 29something called PPT to make a long-distance call via computer, which I didn’t understand at all. Y ou had to write down a whole long list of things.” The service is easier today: China T elecom, one of China’s two main providers, is by now the world’s largest wireline telecommunications and broadband services provider. Its shares are listed both on the Hong Kong and the New Y ork stock exchanges.China Y ellow Pages began to make money. Soon it was set up in twenty-seven cities throughout China. Ma would initially be regarded as a swindler by people in any city that had no direct access to the Internet, but he kept at it. “I would remind myself every day that the Internet right now is like a hundred-meter dash that is going to be inﬂuencing people’s lives for the next thirty years. So I have to run like a rabbit. But at the same time I have to have the patience of a tortoise.”The China Y ellow Pages gained a measure of fame after set-ting up Web pages for places such as the Little Goose Pagoda in Wuxi and the Guo-an Football Stadium in Beijing, sites in which the general Chinese public had great interest. By the end of 1997, operating income from the Web site reached the unimaginable ﬁgure of $830,000 (RMB 7 million). Looking back, one can see the embryonic form of Alibaba in the learning curve associated with the China Y ellow Pages.Going to BeijingAs the Internet developed in China, Jack Ma found that competi-tion was quickly entering the business. Several major competing Internet initiatives were launched just as his own China Y ellow Pages was ﬁnally reaching respectable levels of income.One was a company called Edison, launched with an invest-30ment o f $20,000 from Nic holas Ne groponte at t he Massac husetts Institute of T echnology (MIT). Zhang Chaoyang had earned his Ph.D. from MIT and returned to China to start that company with Negroponte’s help. Charles Zhang, as he is also known, was the same age as Ma but followed a very different pat h in life. He was born in 1964 in Xi’an, Shaanxi Province, but passed his exams wit h ﬂying colors an d took his B.A. from Qin ghua Uni -versity in Beijing. T he recipient o f an internationa l scholarship in 1986, he joined a privileged group of students at MIT. There he receive d a Ph.D. in ex perimenta l physics. Z hang returne d to China in 1995, starte d a company t hat was later rename d Sohu, and launched the sohu.com Web site in February 1998. It went public on Nas daq in the year 2000, before the collapse of the dot-com bubble torpe doed everyone e lse. As CEO o f Sohu, Charles Zhang has gone on to be named a Global Leader of T omorrow by the Wor ld Economic Forum an d achieve reco gnition as a fellow architect o f the future— from suc h people as Jac k Ma, w ho was tocooperate closely with Sohu in later years.Another man, Wan g Zhidong, had developed a com pany called Star o f China. Wang was one o f those precocious so ftware developers who could develop a marketable product in a matter of weeks. He is famed for writin g the ﬁrst Chinese- language soft-ware for PCs. In late 1998, he merge d his company wit h a Silicon Valley–based portal set up by three Taiwanese students from Stan -ford. This was t he start o f the portal sina.com.Yet anot her developer, C hen Tianqiao, had taken the Lujiazui Group public by listing on the Shanghai Stock Exchange. His company allowed people to peruse news on t he Internet. C henlater developed Shanda Interactive Entertainment an d by 2005 was regarded as one of the ten richest men in China. He owed this transient re putation in part to t he listing of his interactive online gaming company on t he Nas daq exc hange.Ma looked on all these developments with great interest, then Darkest Before Dawn 31decided to enter the major leagues by taking his company to Bei-jing. Shanghai had opened a dedicated line for the Internet in July 1995. Nevertheless, Ma had continued to rely on the American side for development work in creating Web pages and the overall site. One day, by chance, he received a CV in the mail along with corporate information that was to go on the Internet. Ma read the CV , invited the man over, and soon engaged him to create a Web site design. Within a week, the man had made a passable Web site. The man’s name was Li Qi, and he was to ﬁgure prominently in the success of Alibaba. Li Qi is now chief operating ofﬁcer of the company Alibaba.com. “This site was in fact ugly as could be,” Jack Ma was later to say, “but we were overjoyed since we knew that now we could create our own. We soon severed relations with the partners in the United States.”The reason was expense. The American side had been want-ing 60 percent of the money, and it was far more economical to do the work inside China. People were beginning to notice the promise of the Internet: the company Ying Hai Wei (“1+Net”), known as the front-runner in China’s Internet world, was soon followed by a company called Wan-wang, and then by China T elecom and ChinaNet. Jack Ma’s comment about these com-petitors was: “We couldn’t kill them, and they couldn’t kill us. We all just had to carry on.”Ma’s early appreciation for publicity garnered results. In 1995, he hired one agency to do all the publicity for the launching of the Web page created for Zhejiang Province, spending $238,000 (RMB 2 million) of his client’s money. This was China’s ﬁrst government-involved project, and it drew attention from as far away as W ashington, D.C., and the U.S. Congress, which sent congratulatory telegrams. Yang Jianxin, head of the Taiwan Ofﬁce in the Zhejiang Provincial Government, was of considerable help in this project, not by extending funds but by giving recognition to Jack Ma.32Ma began to face harder times w hen he got to Bei jing later in 1995. He and his general manager for sales, He Yibing, paid visits to the leading Internet ﬁgures of the day including, most important ly, Zhang Shuxin, a woman w ho had founded China’s ﬁrst ISP a full two years before C hina T e lecom an d ChinaNet. She was a pioneer in the early development of the industry.While 1+Net serve d as an im portant ste pping-stone in t he development o f the Internet in C hina, Ma’s eva luation o f the company was that it was focusing unrealistically on a “people’s networ k,” whereas he was tr ying to ma ke an “enter prise net -work.” Zhang S huxin ta lked about theoretica l things, w hereas Ma was more pragmatic. Ma met with her for little more than thirty minutes. A fter leaving, Ma to ld He Yi bing, “If anyone is going to be killed on the Internet Hig hway, s he will certain ly be a casua lty before I will.” Ma has never been known to mince his words, and he had it right. Ying Hai Wei was purchased in 1996; it had tremen dous losses in 1997; Z hang S huxin resigne d in 1998; an d the company itself closed in 2004. These days her area of Zhong -guancun has com pletely changed. From being ﬁelds back then, it is a ll skyscrapers now. Once a synonym for China’s Internet, Zhang Shuxin’s company is a thing of the past, simply one of the many shards of China’s history.Navigating government policies was one of the trickiest aspects of growin g an Internet com pany in the early days. By mid-1995, it is estimate d that only forty t housan dpeople were accessing t he Net in China. This number came to the attention of the authori -ties, however, an d by early 1996 re gulations restrictin g use were being passe d. In Marc h 1996, t he Ministry o f Public Security re-leased a circular notifyin g people that all users had to go througha procedure o f registerin g with authorities wit hin thirty days of Darkest Before Dawn 33establishing an Internet link. Those who had already been using the Internet had thirty days to do the same. They had to register through their local Public Security Bureau. This had both positive and negative connotations, but many at the time regarded the “le-gitimization of Internet use” as positive. Any rule allowing use of the Internet was a step forward. Many knew that the government would unavoidably put stringent controls on the Internet. At the same time, all knew that if China wanted to develop high-tech industries, its government had to ﬁgure out a way of accommo-dating this new technology.Media PromotionAfter meeting with Zhang Shuxin, Jack Ma returned to Hang-zhou. In December, he resumed his “attack” on Beijing by at-tempting to mobilize a media campaign. He believed that win-ning support and recognition of the general public was going to be critical to success. He and his sales director took various mate-rials up to Beijing and began asking friends and acquaintances to help spread the word.At that time, it was not easy to get publicity for private pur-poses in China. All media is still ofﬁcially state-owned or state-controlled. Newspapers are restricted in what they can print, and in 1995 the controls were far more stringent. Advertising was just beginning in the mid-1990s; advertising on television began only in 1993. Getting publicity meant getting out what was known as “soft news,” articles in papers that publicized a company but were not strictly news. One of China’s larger-circulation papers at the time was the Beijing Youth News. Ma found out that a friend of his knew a car-service driver for the Beijing Youth News, and he used this tenuous connection to pull his way into the limelight. 34It should be understoo d that cor porate drivers in C hina were in a privileged position at the time, and still are to a degree. Driv -ers have daily access to senior people; they are trusted, and in state-owne d organizations t hey are not insi gniﬁcant in in ﬂuenc-ing minor t hings. Ma met wit h the driver an d, with great hopes and expectations, handed all the material on his company over to him, to gether wit h $60 (RMB 500). He to ld the man, “It doesn’t matter w hat form t he publicity ta kes. All we want is to get C hina Y ellow Pages out in the public eye. Details are up to you.” The driver was success ful: not long afterwar d, the China Trade Newspublished an artic le on Ma’s company an d the Internet. Mention of the Internet was not generally allowed in Chinese media at the time; Ma was im pressed by the driver’s success an d amaze d at the courage o f the paper’s e ditor. He decided he had to meet this person.When the two starte d talking, and they kept on ta lking for three days an d three nig hts. Like Jack Ma, t he editor un derstoo d the signiﬁcance of the Internet; although he knew next to noth -ing about it, he was aware it wou ld be important. He to ld Ma, “I am going to help you out.” He t hen invite d a num ber of peop lein the media to come hear Ma speak.Ma put out $3,500 (RMB 30,000) to host thirty journa lists and editors at a dinner at t he club associate d with the Minis -try of Foreign Trade and Economics (MOFTEC, also known in reorganized form as MOFERT, Ministr y of Forei gn Economic Relations an d Trade). He had prepare d two computers wit h in-formation on their hard disks. The slow speed of transmission in Beijing at the time ma de direct access to t he Internet im possible, so he had copie d two We b pages onto t hese hard disks.The experience proved to be an exhilarating success. Ma had never seen so man y journa lists in one place to gether at one time. He spo ke for two hours an d the journa lists, though barely under-standing, were wildly enthusiastic. They responded with a prom -Darkest Before Dawn 35ise to publicize his company. All parted with good feelings, but the next day the leaders in the state ofﬁces governing media sent down a document forbidding any mention of the Internet in any way. This was at the end of 1995. It was rumored that members of an institute had put the kibosh on the initiative, advising the government that the prospects for the Internet were not good, and the technology was in any event too advanced for conditions in China. So much for the Internet.Ma felt this was nonsense. Furious, not least because of the time and money he had put into his efforts, he asked some of the journalists what could be done. They said that if he could get the state’s main propaganda organ, the People’s Daily, to put a Web page up on the Internet, then they could report on that. This now became his goal.Getting the People’s Daily on the InternetMa went from exhilaration to despair to steely determination. He told He Yibing, the sales director, “One day I will march into Beijing.” He Yibing told him that he personally was, on the con-trary, ready to throw in the towel. He’d had enough. Then he told Ma that only by following the journalists’ suggestion of getting thePeople’s Daily on the Internet would Ma be able to rectify the situation and, at the same time, advertise himself. Getting the People’s Daily to do a Web page was an illusion back then, a wild pipe dream. The chances of succeeding in the mission were near zero, but He Yibing had hit Ma’s competitive nerve, and now Ma decided to make it happen. Starting at the end of 1995, he traveled repeatedly to Beijing to meet with various people. One time he took along Li Qi, the technology man from Shenzhen who had made that ﬁrst Web page for him. Li Qi remembers the 36conviction wit h which Ma re peated that he was going to marc h into Be ijing.Finally a friend introduced Ma to an administrator in the Genera l Ofﬁce of thePeople’s Dail y in ear ly 1996. T hey met atthe paper an d talked until late at nig ht. Aroun d 10:00 p.m.some. -one poked his head in the door and asked what the two of them were ta lking about. “T he Internet,” sai d Ma, an d the man came in to join t hem. On ly later did Ma ﬁnd out t his was Gu Jiawang, soon to become head of the Future Development Departmentof the paper. Gu had studied abroad and knew a bit about the Internet, so he and Ma hit it o ff right away. He soon recom-mended that Ma give a lecture to colleagues at the paper .Based on this lucky chance, Ma was a ble to lecture twice at thePeople’s Dai ly. He spo ke of how C hina was a latecomer to t he Internet, the last train in the station. He spoke of how the best defense was an o ffense, t hat China had better get itse lf prepared. By the end, he was ex hausted, not so muc h worrie d he had failed as because he had whipped himself up so much in the course of the speech. On his conc lusion, one o f the leaders came over an d shook his hand. “Y ou spo ke well,” he said. “T omorrow I am going to send a report up to Central. I’m going to recommend that the People’s Daily put a We b page on t he Internet. ”The commotion t hat atten ded this new development in China’s media can only be imagined. Thiswas news. Jack Ma rode the wave: he was interviewe d on CCTV’s famous program East-ern Times. He was in t he headlines, and so was t he Internet , which was now gradually becoming hot in China. By 1997 Beijing was sproutin g Internet ca fes in ever y alley.Ma had been success ful in getting t he People’s Dai ly on t he Internet and he had done it within six months of ﬁrst trying. By the day that We b page went u p, however, Ma knew t hat hischances for business success in Beijing were nonexistent. A large group of foreign-invested companies had surged into the market. Darkest Before Dawn 37With no ﬁnancial or political backing himself, he could not begin to compete in the country’s capital. Never at a loss for ideas, he decided to return to Hangzhou and implement a new stage in his development strategy.Failure, Success, and the China Y ellow PagesJack Ma has developed a healthy attitude about failure: he re-deﬁnes it as success. “Success lies not in how much you have accomplished, but in the fact that you have done something, ex-perienced the process, and begun to learn something.”Ma was to experience this process with his company, the China Y ellow Pages. He returned to Hangzhou to ﬁnd the company in a perilous situation. As the Internet became the focus of acceptable media attention, it spawned dozens of new companies, several of which targeted the space that the Y ellow Pages had taken. One of these was the company Yaxin, started by a man named Tian Nining. Yaxin came close to killing off the China Y ellow Pages. Ma’s ﬁercest competitor at the time, however, was Hangzhou T elecom, a company with registered capital of almost $36 million (RMB 300 million). Jack Ma, on the other hand, had registered capital of only $2,380 (RMB 20,000). Going up against Hangzhou T elecom was going to be a ﬁght to the ﬁnish, and it was quite apparent who was going to win. This was a case of “one mountain cannot have two tigers.” In addition to Hangzhou T elecom, Yaxin was biting at Ma’s heels. Hangzhou T elecom had extremely strong civic and government backing, while Jack Ma was regarded as a kind of renegade, a guerrilla ﬁghter. He had little credibility, and this diminished even more when the Hangzhou T elecom simply used Chinesepage for its English name, very similar to Ma’s 38Chinapage. In doing this, it blithely carve d away a large partof Ma’s market.In order to save his China Y ellow Pages from certain death , Ma decided to “draw c lose to a large mountain,” as t he saying goes in C hinese. Everyone knows t hat when you are attac ked, it is best to have a large presence right behind you. Ma decided to wor k together wit h Hangzhou T e lecom. In Marc h 1996, t he assets o f China Y e llow Pages were converte d into $71,500 (RMB 600,000), which constituted 30 percent of shares. Hangzhou Telecom investe d $167,000 (RMB 1.4 mi llion), constitutin g 70 percent o f shares. Ma had his mountain, but in t he process herelinquished his own company .The decision to coo perate wit h Han gzhou T e lecom wasunavoi dable, but before long t he partners hip ran into pro blems. The new owner wanted to grow the company fast and alsomake mone y fast. Ma’s a pproach was to grow t he com pany slowly and carefully. He felt that you cou ldn’t ask a three-year-old child to go out and make a living. The difference in opin -ion quickly led to a s plit, and the partner wit h the most ca pital and authority natura lly had the most say. T he con ﬂict spar kedthe attention of the People’s Dai ly, as well as other media, andthe parting of the ways was not com fortable. Ma was as ked to stay on by Hangz hou T e lecom, but he felt wronge d and be-lieved his presence would not be positive. Many staff wanted to leave wit h Ma, but he insiste d that a core group stay on to keep the company going. He trans ferred his own s hares, 21 percent of the company, over to employees and asked them to carry on their good work.The year 1997 mar ked Ma’s ﬁrst failure in business. T o t his day there are many rumors about why he left the company, and he himself is not a bsolutely certain w hy he did so. The most likely reason is his strong sense o f individuality an d individual achieve-ment. He was ready to reach for the next stage.Darkest Before Dawn 39“Let’s Go Home Together”Since founding the China Y ellow Pages, Ma had been forced to deal with countless closed doors. He had grown accustomed to handling negative responses. “Y ou just had to be able to carry on, and in fact each setback made you stronger. I generally assume that something terrible is going to happen tomorrow, and so I prepare for it mentally. When it happens, it doesn’t seem so bad. I’m able to deal with it. I begin to say, ‘Come on, what else can you do to me?’ It gives you self-conﬁdence.”Ma is known for his appreciation of Winston Churchill. He particularly likes Churchill’s famous words in his address of 1941: “Never give in—never, never, never, in nothing great or small, large or petty.” This became one of Jack Ma’s abiding mantras. Another was “Move forward with conﬁdence; surpass your own goals.” When he slipped, though, Jack Ma picked himself up and simply started hiking down the road again. After he left China Y ellow Pages in 1997, the Ministry of Foreign Economic Rela-tions and Trade (MOFERT) asked him to come join them as an afﬁliated company in Beijing. He accepted and, together with a core team of his founding members, he began to work on de-veloping trade Web sites for MOFERT in Beijing. From 1998 to 1999 he headed an information technology company established by China International Electronic Commerce Center (CIECC), a department of the Ministry of Foreign Trade and Economic Cooperation (MOFTEC). He rented a twenty-square-meter ofﬁce where the team worked night and day. The results became the ﬁrst ministerial-level Web site in China. Ma held 30 percent of shares in this company; the ministry held 70 percent. This meant that Ma drew $300 or $400 dollars a month in salary (a few thou-sand RMB) and that was about it. The chances of making any money off the shares were nil; meanwhile, the realities of work-ing for the government were unpleasant. Developing a plan and 40executin g it invo lved too man y people and far too man y unclear and undeﬁned things. T o a man who was not accustomed to be -ing told what to do by others, Ma’s role was increasingly awkward. He eva luated his options, w hich were eit her to sta y in Bei jing or to leave. I f he staye d, he cou ld join Sina or Ya hoo! (both of which were growing in China), but he felt that the Internet activity in Beijing was too hastily done, too im petuous. He knew it wou ld be hard to ma ke anyt hing come o f it in t he end. Moreover, he was fed up with the halting, erratic nature of progress in the gov -ernment an d the over ly cautious a pproach that ma de ever ything fearsome an d hard. Ma’s intuition to ld him that the high tide of the Internet around the world was coming fast, and he would miss it i f he stayed within the government. He did not want to lose the opportunity o f a lifetime, an d after long deliberation, he decided to return to Hangzhou.He ca lled together all the people in his team. T hey had ac-companie d him from Hangz hou to Beijing, an d they had worked well together. When Ma announced his decision, they were speechless. He t hen sai d, “I am giving you three choices. First, you can go to wor k with Yahoo! I’ ll recommen d you an d I know that the company will not only welcome you but the salaries will be high. Secon d, you can go to wor k for Sina or So hu: they’ll similarly welcome you an d the salaries won’t be too bad. Or third, you can come home with me. However, you’ll get just $95 [RMB 800] in sa lary per mont h, you’ll have to rent your own ﬂat and live wit hin a ﬁve-minute ra dius of where I live, since in or der to save money I won’t allow you to take taxis, and moreover you’ll have to wor k in my home. Y ou ma ke your own decision.” He gave them three days to decide.Everyone in the room ﬁled out. Within three minutes, they ﬁled back in again. Ever y single person on t he team had decided to “come home” wit h him. Ma had held himself back until that moment, but on hearing this he started to cry. He later described Darkest Before Dawn 41how a hot wave coursed through his body and in that moment he resolved never to let these people down. “All right,” he said to himself, “we are going back, starting from zero. And we are going to build a company that we will never have any regrets about for our whole lives.”In the fourteen months that Ma had worked with this team in Beijing, he had never gone on an outing to the countryside with them. They worked all the time. He decided that before leaving the north, they should make an excursion to the Great Wall. Walking along that wall, however, the team felt more of a heavy apprehension about what was to come than any kind of exultation. It was unclear what might be in store for them. Here they had spent more than a year of their lives working like mad-men and they had nothing to show for it: they had no savings, no foothold in Beijing, no lasting results.On the evening before leaving Beijing, the group came to-gether for a ﬁnal celebratory meal. The wine ﬂowed, the food was excellent, Jack Ma spoke, and eventually somebody started to sing traditional Chinese songs. The ﬁrst song was “True Blue,” and then came others. They avoided a song called “Parting,” which was simply too sad to bear. The next day, few could remember what Ma had said, and they had little idea of what they were fac-ing next, but all remembered the song they had ﬁrst sung together. They remembered that the Shaoxing wine was hot, the emotions were hot, and “True Blue” had been sung with real feeling. Since then, that song has enabled the company team to ride over many rough patches. For example, during the ﬁrst Internet slump in 2000 and 2001 or during the epidemic of severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) in 2003, team members would start to sing and would indeed feel better. The moment an “Ali person” heard the tune, he would remember the old spirit. The song came to repre-sent a belief in the company; it gave people hope.The departure from Beijing was in 1999, and it marked the 42second time t hat Jack Ma had encountere d what he consi dered a failure. Never one to look backward, he moved on. On the very day that another well-known Internet founder, Ding Lei, brought his com pany, NetEase, nort h to Bei jing, Jack Ma move d his com -pany an d his team sout h to Hangz hou.SetbacksMa had been throu gh two failures, and he saw no need to be reticent a bout them. W hen he spoke of them, however, he was not lighthearted. They had taught him serious lessons. He be -lieved that success is an attitude, a state of mind, and that attitude is a function o f individual choice. Wit h your back to the sun, t he world is cast in shadows. Ma generally kept his face to the sun.Lessons learned while in Bei jing were to be im portant to his success wit h Alibaba. “Be fore I went to Bei jing, I was a sma ll tradesman from Hangzhou,” Ma later candidly confessed. “Work -ing for the national government, I learned about the direction of China’s future development. I learne d to eva luate t hings from a macro perspective. I was no longer the proverbial frog at the bottom of the well, able to see only a small circle of sk y directl y above.” Ma had participated in the construction o f MOFERT’s ofﬁcial Web site, and later also China’s Web-based product mar -ketplace. He had set u p a number of other national-level sites re -lating to tra de. He had learne d speciﬁc things about how to create sites and how to do business.His ex perience with the China Y ellow Pa ges and his de par-ture from Han gzhou T e lecom ma de him rea lize that if you wantto make money on the Internet, you have to be very concrete . Fourteen months in Bei jing had given him a sense of China’s mac -roeconomic policy. Wor king at this level, at the forefront o f the Darkest Before Dawn 43Internet in China, had also allowed him to evaluate the coming wave of the Internet throughout China. He saw that the challenges ahead included, most of all, how to restrain himself and stick to a plan. Jack Ma had been through sufﬁcient ups and downs to look further ahead and see where the next wave would be coming from, how to ride it, how to see the direction of the Internet’s greatest potential and hold on long enough to realize it.By the end of 1998, Ma’s thinking about B2B models had matured. His research indicated that the volume of such enter-prises on the Internet would be far greater than the volume be-tween businesses and consumers (B2C). The past ﬁve years of experience had familiarized him with international trade markets, Chinese domestic producers, and import and export companies, and he saw that the greatest need for e-commerce services and support lay among the thirty million or so small and medium-sized enterprises in China. Ma has said that he believes strategic business decisions rely 60 percent on instinct and 40 percent on statistical analysis and rational evaluation of facts. “What do I want to do?” is often a more important consideration to businessmen than “What can I do?”In selecting the business of servicing small and medium-sized enterprises, Ma told his team, “I have heard of those who get rich by raising lots of shrimp. I’ve never heard of those who get rich by catching whales. In the world economy today,” he con-tinued, “large corporations are whales. They rely on the smaller fry for their livelihood. Smaller shrimp rely currently on eating the leftovers of the whales, and they also depend on one another. In an Internet-based world, though, we are entering a new busi-ness model, where small enterprises can, via the Internet, be inde-pendent. A greater diversity of products will be more available to a broader range of customers. Humans are going to be organizing themselves in wholly new ways; the revolutionary nature of the Internet lies in this structural change.”