chapter 4ManagementNobody doubted Jack Ma’s ability to talk, but his man-agement decisions leading to the company’s wild expansion in 2000 brought Alibaba close to disaster. After the infusions of investment from Goldman Sachs and Softbank—$25 million with which to grow the company—Ma decided to go big. He began to ﬂirt with catastrophe as a re-sult. Alibaba had been established for less than two years and had lost money over the course of that time. In the next brief period, it did worse.In 2000 Alibaba went to Silicon Valley; it was already set up in Korea, and it rapidly expanded in London and Hong Kong. 86Ma soon began to feel that he was losing contro l. His em ployees directly under him were world-class professionals, but each felt that his management decisions were correct. The people running Silicon Va lley’s development center felt that tec hnology was most important to t he company. T he peop le running t he Hong Kon g operation felt that reaching capital markets was most important. Others had opinions as we ll, and while they fought it out, Ma was silent. T o w hom should he listen? In w hich direction s hould he turn? He didn’t know In one year, Alibaba had become a mul -tinationa l company, with employees from t hirteen countries an d little idea of how to manage t hem. “T he hardest thing in t he world is to have ﬁfty hypersmart people sitting together in one room, tr ying to get somet hing done,” as he later summe d up the situation.T o compound the problems, Ma had based Alibaba’s English-language Web site in Si licon Va lley. Only after this move did he discover t hat Silicon Va lley’s emp loyees were a ll “techies,” w hereas what the Web site really needed was people who understood busi -ness. A ll of thepeople who knew business, however, were basedin New Y or k. They now had to be trans ferred to Si licon Va lley, and those costs were extremely high. “It was an incredibly stupid thing to do,” reca lls Ma. “Ima gine tr ying to get ever yone aroun d the globe to come to Si licon Va lley to wor k.” At t he same time, Nasdaq was plunging and investors were running scared: as the Chinese sa ying goes, ever y bush and tree looked like an enem y. Extreme nervousness perva ded the mar ket; a large num ber of In-ternet companies closed down, and Alibaba’s Silicon Valley ofﬁce rode uncom fortably in the middle of all the storm y weat her.Ma realized that wit hout ta king deﬁnitive action, t he com -pany was going to go under. He announced a reduction in forces at the end of 2000, a strate gic contraction t hat he now ca lls “re-turning to C hina.” T his action brought about low mora le. Pes -simism swept the company, and only Ma’s extraordinary ability Management 87to motivate people with his ideas prevented key talented peoplefrom leaving. The most urgent thing facing the company after this return to China was an overall improvement in the quality of the enterprise. An experienced manager by the name of Guan Ming-sheng was brought in to do this. Guan became COO in January 2001, after sixteen years of experience at General Electric. With Guan’s assistance, Jack Ma was able to turn the company around.At the same time, Ma narrowed the focus of the company to its original goals and purposes. He told employees, “If you want to work at Alibaba, your daily work has to focus on our three main goals. If you feel we are crazy in doing this, then please leave. If you are just waiting for us to take the company public, then please leave. If you are bringing individual perspectives to the company that are not beneﬁcial to our overall goals, please leave. And if you are restless and dissatisﬁed, please leave.” The attitude of many employees improved after this direct approach.SARSSevere acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) is a highly contagious form of pneumonia. In the spring of 2003, this disease became a scare that swept throughout China. Few who lived through those days can forget them. Government ofﬁces and businesses shut down. If you had to go outside, you wore a mask. Cities were suddenly ghostly in their silence. People were afraid: nobody knew how bad the epidemic might become. Nurses and others in health-related professions were at risk; Beijing, Guangzhou, and other places were eventually quarantined, but not before an Ali-baba employee had contracted the virus at the Canton trade fair.The Canton Fair is held twice a year, once in the spring and once in the fall. It is a highly lucrative trade event, and 88government aut horities were re luctant to s hut down t he fair when uncertain news of an uncertain virus began to circulate. The spring fair in 2003 opened as usual, and an Alibaba em -ployee who atten ded on behalf of the com pany became in fected. A ﬁnancia l reporter name d Zheng Zuos hi, who was con ducting interviews at Alibaba at the time, wrote:Alibaba’s “C hina Supp lier Programs” inc lude a promise to helpcustomers at all kinds of trade fairs. Naturall y, this includes the country’s largest trade fair, at Canton. Canton (Guangzhou in Chi -nese) had clearly been recognize d as an in fected area by the timeof the o pening ceremon y of the fair, but the national governmentdid not take action and quarantine the event. As a result, Alibabafelt it was o bliged to carry t hrough on its promise an d accompany customers to the fair. The Alibaba em ployee who was res ponsible for this duly went to the fair and did her job, but soon after retur n-ing to Hangz hou she began to feel sick. She began to s how signs o f infection. Nevertheless, as a dili gent em ployee, she came to workand therefore had contact with many other employees. It was u n-known how many people she mig ht have in fected.When it was ﬁnall y realized that the em ployee had contractedSARS, Alibaba quickly became the focal point of tremendousconcern. T he entire wor king area o f the company was sea led off, and essentiall y all em ployees were quarantined at home. A smallgroup of employees had been secretly working offsite on the Tao -bao We b site, so t hey were outsi de the danger zone. T he mayor o f Hangzhou had visited Alibaba, however, so [he] was quarantined , as well as his entire entourage .Later, when all were off quarantine, Ma would walk along the streets o f Hangzhou an dpeople wou ld point at him an d say, “Look, there goes t he SARS man. ”SARS arrived just at a time when development work at Ali -Management 89baba was proceeding at a feverish pace, as the company faced deadlines for the Taobao and Alibaba Web sites. Quarantined em-ployees were able to work at home, but this in itself was a new experience, and they lacked logistical support and hands-on man-agement. Senior managers began arranging for broadband Inter-net connections, establishing communications links, and reorga-nizing the technical department in order to network computers. The atmosphere was one of extreme crisis: nobody had full con-ﬁdence in what might lie ahead. Then there were questions from families of employees: “Why did you allow an Alibaba employee to go into the heart of the SARS epidemic? What’s wrong with you? T o think only of business at a time like this!” Ma felt the criticism like proverbial spears pointing at his body. Faced with tremendous pressure, he had to respond. He felt somewhat re-sponsible and yet not totally so, since the Chinese government had refused to close down the fair. Still, he felt he had to give comfort to his staff. The night before the quarantine began, he sat down to compose a letter to his employees and their relatives. A condensed version follows.Dear Ali friends and relatives,My heart is heavy. I extend my profound apologies to you all. Since learning the results of the test [of our colleague], I can tell you that if there were anything I could do to transform our sick colleague into a healthy one, I would do it. I am putting every-thing I have into guaranteeing the health of everyone.Explanations are meaningless today. The thing has already hap-pened. I regret not taking all preventive measures in time. Our preparatory measures were perhaps the best in all of Hangzhou, but due to unforeseen factors, we were hit by SARS.It is true that inadequacies exist in Alibaba, and there are many questions we will address after the crisis. I take all responsibility, as 90the person in char ge. But reason tells me that now is not the time for recriminations and complaints. Right now, we have to joinhands in meeting t he challenges a head. Our young company, ma deup of young people, will be maturin g much faster, I believe, as aresult of this crisis.I have been move d in these past few days by the sight of allAlipeople choosin g an attitude of o ptimism and fortitude. We areconcerned about each other and we support each other. Sooner or later, t his crisis wi ll end and life will continue: t he calamity wi llnot sto p us from continuin g on our mission. I am ver y proud of our young people because of this. I am proud to be working in this kind of company. I hope that family and friends of Ali people will applaud young people like these, who dare to face challen ges. The ydid not panic nor did they retreat. This is a function of our sense o f values, which I believe a ll Ali people truly understan d.From toni ght, all Alibaba em ployees in Han gzhou will be com -pletely quarantined. On behalf of the safety of ourselves, our familiesand friends, and also on behalf of the future o f Alibaba, we wi ll all be passing the next few da ys locked u p. I understand ever yone’s feelin gsand I am truly sorry to have to inﬂuence the lives of everyone in this way. Ta king care o f our health is more important t han anyt hing. I ask ever yone to conform in a most conscientious manner to the rules. Please share this letter with your respected relatives and friends . Please express my pro found apologies to t hem as we ll.Let us wish our collea gue a s peedy recover y. I will be in touch with everyone via the Internet in the next days. As always, we will be objective an d transparent wit h any further information as t he situation develo ps.Good health to all,Ali-personJack M aManagement 91Later public management studies showed that the one criti-cal aspect that was lacking and that turned the SARS episode into a far worse crisis than it might have been was prompt and open communication. The crisis was a “sudden mass event,” and handling of such things is now known to require timely com-munication. This letter from Jack Ma not only helped calm things down in the company but also paciﬁed the emotions of relatives and helped win public support.Alibaba employees were quarantined for about eight or nine days, during which time they continued to work via computer and telephone. In the end, nobody other than the initial employee contracted SARS, and she quickly regained her health. In Beijing and other major cities, the disruption was more severe: many of-ﬁces closed for weeks, and the toll on the country’s economy as well as its reputation was heavy. Alibaba came through the expe-rience unscathed and with a sense of cohesiveness and esprit de corps that had been missing previously. Despite the SARS inter-ruption, Alibaba increased its revenue by over ﬁve times in 2003, and accomplished what to some was seen as a miracle of bringing average daily income to more than RMB 1 million.Maoist Management PracticesPrior to the SARS crisis, Ma had not only led the company through the “severe winter” of the dot-com bust but also through the consequences of his own inexperience in managing a rap-idly growing company. T o turn the company around, he now instituted stringent belt-tightening policies. These had a deﬁnite Maoist ﬂavor to them.The Internet had reached the bottom of its trough at the end of the year 2000, and as head of Alibaba, Jack Ma brought 92his team home to C hina. People began to have skeptical feelings about the Internet during this period, but Ma’s conﬁdence was unshaken. Unlike most, he was lucky to have enough funding to carry on the wor k of creatin g a solid com pany of consi derable depth. “Our s logan, in t he midst of this wintertime in t he business, is ‘just hanging on to life is a victory in itself.’ We believe that the Internet will ﬁre up again. A ll we have to do is survive. Not dying gives us hope.” In or der to rouse emp loyees to a simi lar optimism, Ma began to use old Communist Chinese phrases about the spirit of the Lon g Marc h, the strate gic retreat o f the Red Arm y dur-ing 1934–36 t hat led to the rise o f Mao Ze dong. Ma likened his staff to troops of the Red Army, and the vocabulary of the cor -poration’s cam paigns became im bued with revolutionar y fervor. This was in line wit h management practices in ot her Chinese corporations, which have absorbed the disciplining and inspira -tional methods of earlier Maoist days. Alibaba’s cam paigns too k their gui ding messages from recent history an d the tenacity o f the guerrilla ﬁghters during the Anti-Japanese War (1937–1945) and the Chinese Civi l War (w hich ended in 1949). A libaba ﬁrst had the “Yan’an Recti ﬁcation Movement,” harking back to the guer-rilla base in Shaanxi Province in northwest China, where Mao Zedong and others had holed up at the end of the Lon g Marc h. This was designe d to root out opposition to Mao’s leadership and thus align all energies in a uniﬁed direction. Back in 1942, more than 10,000 people were killed in the process, so t he conce pt of “recti ﬁcation” in C hina carries wit h it a fearsome sense o f culling the ranks.Next came t he “Mi litary and Politics Universit y of the Anti-Japanese Invasion.” Once an institute dedicated to the training o f military translators, again during the Yan’an period in Chinese Communist history, it invo lved regimente d intense trainin g dur-ing a nationa l crisis, appropriate for Alibaba after the Internet bubble burst and so many companies were failing. Finally came Management 93“Opening Up the Wastelands,” echoing the pioneering spirit that sent people to the western Chinese territories to begin the Sini-ﬁcation of those lands.From 2001 to 2003, the period in which Alibaba faced its most urgent crises, Ma promoted these Maoist management cam-paigns because he felt that they were effective ways to reform the company in this particular period. The ﬁrst campaign, Yan’an Rectiﬁcation, was intended to unify views and strengthen conﬁ-dence; the second, Military and Politics University, was intended to cultivate a professional cadre of team managers. “Through these campaigns, we purged ourselves of people who did not share common goals and a sense of mission,” Ma stated, but he was seen by many as harsh and heavy-handed.Alibaba had been functioning as a kind of guerrilla operation, Ma told his company, and now it was time to create a “proper army that could ﬁght tough battles.” At the same time, he inten-tionally kept a degree of ﬂexibility in the company, aware of the dangers of rigid authoritarianism. Somebody once asked him if it was more important to make money ﬁrst, or to train peopleﬁrst. He responded with what he called his “yes theory”: “Y es, it is important to make money and to train.” Do you want obedient employees or capable employees? “Y es. Y ou need both obedience and capability.” Do you go for the dream or for the reality? “Y es. Y ou go for both.” System or people: which is more important? “Y es: both are important. We move forward together.” His point in making this kind of argument was that Alibaba needed a diver-sity of viewpoints and talents. Ma did not want to direct every-one’s thinking down the same channel.The third and ﬁnal campaign was aimed at training sales-people in the concepts and attitudes they should use toward cus-tomers. This involved methods and concrete skills. “The most important thing is to help the customer make money. Most en-terprises are thinking of how they can take the ﬁve dollars in a 94customer’s pocket out o f there an d put it into t heir own pocket. What we want to do is help that customer turn his ﬁve dollars into ﬁfty dollars, and then from that ﬁfty take our ﬁve.” Ma spent a large amount o f mone y on this conce pt and on the Web func-tions to imp lement it. He believes his adherence to t his concept is the reason the company is successful today.In terms o f his mana gement st yle, man y have re garded Ma as a kind of madman—too puncti lious a bout details and too re liant on a long-term vision. Ma has always shrugged off the criticism. “I long ago stopped being concerne d about how people regarded me. If I care d, Alibaba wou ld not have survive d to to day. We have been so abused by others that our skin is tough as leather. Knives can’t get through, bullets eit her.” In t he end, Ma an d senior man -agement wrote up a constitution for the company t hat was in -tended to “enable Alibaba to continue to grow for 102 years,” and incor porated the highest principles of the com pany. Its ﬁrst item: “Everyt hing changes. T he only thing that does not c hange is change itself.” By understanding this fundamental principle, one could menta lly prepare for change and be able to ma ke use o f it. The secon d item: “A lways ma ke a reasona ble and fair pro ﬁt. Mak-ing outrageous amounts of money is not your ﬁrst priority.”After going through these three cam paigns and the exercise of drawing up princip les, Ma was surprise d to discover t hat the company was showing signs of real change. Employees were ma -turing, customers increasin g, and new mem bers piling in. T he company was both growing fast an d developing a sta ble founda-tion. Alibaba was changing from a pheasant into a phoenix. From being a guerrilla band of farmers wit h riﬂes, it had turne d into a regu lar army. Ma himself was becoming more com fortable at managing a business that was inventing new models as it moved into an unknown, c hanging world. Most im portant ly, the business model of Alibaba was becoming c learer. Investors were increas-ingly conﬁdent about it, as were employees, and this helped pro -Management 95pel the company in a uniﬁed direction. The model was based on making money from fees from China Suppliers rather than from a percentage of each Internet transaction or from advertising rev-enue. T o draw in China Suppliers who were willing to cough up membership fees, Alibaba had to create a tremendous platform, stock it with large quantities of information, and thereby attract the eyes of buyers and sellers. Overseas promotion drew in buy-ers, while the small and medium-sized enterprises within China provided the revenue.This model was increasingly effective as information ﬂow increased. The volume of information ﬂowing daily through Ali-baba was between ﬁve and eight times that of its closest competi-tor. By providing a real service to Chinese companies and thus serving a real need, Alibaba began to stand out ahead of the rest of the Internet pack. In a moment of braggadocio, Ma is quoted as saying, “Y ou couldn’t see the rest of the competition with a telescope.”Zhejiang Province is famous in China for having a high con-centration of successful businesspeople. These people are known especially for their frugality, their quick response in snapping up opportunities, and their tenacity in sheer survival. In the IT world, other successful Zhejiang entrepreneurs include Ding Lei, Qian Zhonghua, and Chen Tianqiao, whose wealth is measured in the billions of U.S. dollars. Like these men, Ma knows how to make money by properly husbanding it. One prime example: there is a piggy bank on the photocopy machine inside the door of the Alibaba ofﬁces. On the wall above it is a list of rules about using the machine. Anything over 150 copies has to be registered at the front desk, since the common practice in China is to copy your child’s textbooks at the company machine. Costs are care-fully controlled at Alibaba. Coming through that same door has been an endless stream of potential investors, and the two are closely related.96Internet com panies t hat survive d the burstin g of the dot-com bubble and that were good at allocating carefully tended resources were companies that invited more attention. In 2004, such companies became t he target of a kind of investin g frenzy. The 2004 p henomenon, as it is ca lled, relates to t he increase in money looking for good investments in China. In 2004, however, Jack Ma was not in favor o f adding to his investor commitments. He had analyzed Alibaba’s nee ds and decided that “we don’t want to list [on the stock market] just in order to list. Listing should be a means to rea lly growin g the com pany, not just to getting some fast money.” He note d the headaches of the three large porta ls in China, and the fact that they could think only of the next season, how to ma ke the num bers in t he next quarter. “Our funding right now a llows us to t hink three years down t he road in how to position ourselves. If you don’t go public, you have ﬁve inves -tors sittin g in front o f you wit h whom you have to deal. If you go public, you have ﬁve thousan d. I’m not a fraid of it; the time just hasn’t yet arrived.”Swordplay on the West Lak eOne of the primar y reality checks for Jack Ma in eva luating the di-rection o f the IT in dustry an d his own nee ds for funding has been a series of annual conferences called the Swordplay Conferences, initiate d by Ma an d held on the shores o f West La ke in Han g-zhou. The ﬁrst con ference convene d on Septem ber 10, 2000, an d since then the event has become a summit for China’s leaders in both Internet an d overa ll economic s pheres. T he con ferences use a unique format t hat has become a s howcase for China’s emerg-ing new-economy industries. In 2000, the ﬁve big bosses of the Internet in China gathered to test t heir “swor dplay” in discussin g Management 97Internet issues. These ﬁve included Sohu’s CEO, Zhang Chaoy-ang; Sina’s president, Wang Zhidong; NetEase’s chairman of the board, Ding Lei; the chairman of the board of 8848 (the company named for the height of Mt. Everest in meters), Wang Juntao; and Alibaba’s CEO, Jack Ma. A renowned author of martial arts nov-els, Jin Y ong, was persuaded to be master of ceremonies.Jin Y ong has played an important role in Jack Ma’s life and in his business philosophy. Relatively unknown in the West, his is a household name in China. Jin Y ong is the pen name; his real name is Louis Cha. The Cha family has been one of the great names in southern China, well known for commercial success but also for a sense of civic responsibility. The family originally hailed from Zhejiang province, but many members dispersed after the Communist takeover of China, and one branch continued in Hong Kong. That branch has included major ﬁgures in real estate, ﬁnance, and philanthropy, and it has also included the spectacu-larly successful author Louis Cha. Born in Zhejiang in 1924, Cha has lived most of his life in Hong Kong. Dozens of his novels have become the inspiration not only for movies and martial arts advocates but also for many of China’s senior businessmen. The novels incorporate Chinese history and philosophy. Their lessons, imbued with the spirit of “rivers and lakes,” that mystical realm of right-thinking brotherhood among outlaws, are often cited by Jack Ma in his management practices.The title of the Hangzhou conferences paid homage to this wu xia or martial arts tradition. When Ma ﬁrst began these con-ferences, he knew he had to attract the leaders in the Chinese IT ﬁeld, and he knew that the best way to do this was to draw them by using a famous personality as host. Nobody inside the IT in-dustry would do: they were not disinterested and they lacked the moral stature. Jack Ma had never met Louis Cha, but he had read all of his books.Jack Ma worshiped Cha, and since his early childhood, he 98had been a martia l arts fanatic. T oo, ver y fewpeople in C hinado not know the pen name Jin Y ong. His novels have sold more than one hundred million copies in China; senior business people, including Ding Lei an d others, are sim ply addicted to them. In 2000, CCTV s hot a forty-part series t hat was a dapted from one of Cha’s novels. Ma determined that he had to meet the man, and he procee ded to ﬁnd a way to be intro duced. When the two ﬁnally met for a mea l in Hong Kong, C ha calligraphed a coupletfor him, which Ma has hanging behind his desk at his ofﬁce to this day: Rather than stand idly by the pond, lon ging for ﬁsh, far better to go out an d make a net .In 2000 Louis Cha came to speak at the Zhejiang University Business Trainin g Center, an d Ma was a ble to have long talks with him about suc h things as martia l arts moves ( wugong), schools of ggthought in weiqi (or Go, a board game that requires great strategicithinking), taijiquan, and swor dplay. Most o f the talking was done by Ma, however. Louis C ha reporte dly sat t here smi ling an d nod-ding. Later, Ma was chagrined and embarrassed enough to say, “Y ou would have thought I had written a ll those nove ls myself!” Nonet heless, the two men hit it o ff, and Cha agree d to come to Hangzhou to talk about weiqi, drink a little Shaoxing wine, and continue t heir discussion. Bot h men loved the board game; both felt that “peop le are like weiqi pieces, and the world is like a hugeiweiqi board.” After this visit in Hangzhou, Ma felt comfortableienough to as k Louis C ha to serve as master o f ceremonies at t he Hangz hou con ference. Even t hough a few of Ma’s co lleagues had advised him against even trying, Ma simply called him on the phone an d posed the question, an d Cha agreed.Many e lements o f Louis C ha’s nove ls can be used to sym -bolize the catalyzing thrust of the Internet in today’s world. Ma feels stron gly that the “rea lm of rivers an d lakes” can be usefully compare d to the Internet itse lf, and that tec hniques use d by the brotherhood of outlaws can be adapted for modern-day busi -Management 99ness. For example, Ma believes that Internet enterprises have to develop a thick outer skin in order to grow and develop—they have to disregard criticism and hold fast to their own mission. At the same time, they have to practice qigong, or internal breathing techniques, particularly when cultivating management talent. He feels that all Internet companies have similar “internal breath” is-sues, issues that must be handled with great care. These include attracting top talent, keeping good employees, cultivating manag-ers, and building a culture with common core values.At the 2000 Swordplay conference, Ma addressed the ques-tion of what he felt the Internet would be like in ﬁve years. “Many people ask me what things will be like. I think that ﬁve years from now, no one will be talking about the Internet. T wenty years ago color television was the rage, but nobody even talks about color televisions today. They have been absorbed into daily life. The In-ternet will be the same. It will be so embedded in people’s lives that talking about it will be way behind the times.”Second Swordplay Conference: Alibaba’s Changing Battle ArrayThe soft light over the West Lake in Hangzhou on October 21, 2001, intoxicated all those strolling along its waters. They included some senior players. After a turbulent year, Internet “masters” were again meeting to test their swords at the second conference. Most of the previous attendees were there, plus two new ones. Louis Cha again attended, and Jack Ma again took center stage. In his opening speech, Ma emphasized the most signiﬁcant quality of the Internet: change. He noted that the quality of that change itself had shifted, however, and that guerrilla tactics were now less helpful in meeting challenges; instead, he personally was building 100a stan dard army that cou ld, as he said, “line up in a proper battle array.” In earlier years, one had to remain nimble and change fast. For the past two years, he felt it had been best to stay quiet, prac -ticingqigong  techniques. He said that what Alibaba needed nowgwas to forget a bout practicing “moves,” again a re ference to mar -tial arts training. Instead, it needed to focus on building a uniﬁed team. T he age of the lone ran ger in t he Internet was gone. T he age o f team spirit an d coordinated action had arrive d.When Alibaba was ﬁrst established, Ma conceded, they had felt like ancient warrior heroes. “I was proud of that. Now it is time to turn t hose heroes into a proper army. We sti ll need three more years before we can start making real money, and it won’t happen wit hout properly traine d forces. T hen, by the time I’m forty, I want to retire an d go back to teac hing in sc hool. I plan to teach everyone about Alibaba’s thousand and one mistakes!”Third Swordplay Conference: Giving BusinessBack to Business peopleThe third Swor dplay Con ference was held on Novem ber 3, 2002. Some of the old Internet masters were quietly gone, while oth -ers had taken their place. Atten ding were Ten gxun’s CEO, Ma Huateng; the president of 3721, Zhou Hongwei (the name comes from 3 × 7 = 21, which in Chinese means something akin to “just do it”); t he CEO o f Y ouc heng, Lian g Jianzhang; and the president of Lianzhong, Bao Qiuqiao. The host was the CCTV personal-ity Zhang Wei. This new aristocracy of the Internet was, in one way or anot her, in t he process o f using the Internet to c hange people’s daily lives. The generally loquacious Jack Ma stayed on the sidelines that year, listening. It had become apparent to all that a major restructurin g of human communications was un der wa y Management 101and that the ramiﬁcations were enormous. Many were not able to sit back and think through the consequences, to consider how the moving pieces on the weiqi board of our planet would be shifting like tectonic plates.The recovery of the Internet economy gave the sessions an unprecedented sense of conﬁdence. Gone were the questions of whether it was better to burn money or to make money, to make a proﬁt or not. Instead, the sessions discussed what beneﬁts the Internet would bring to society at large, and in particular the beneﬁts to China’s economy. How should Internet compa-nies plan for their own future after starting to make money? The overall topic of the meeting was therefore “After the bubble: The Internet Changing People’s Lives.” Jack Ma summarized three main differences of this conference from the previous ones. First of all, the primary topic was different. Second, the participants were different: the portals had dominated the ﬁrst conference, while lifestyle services companies had dominated the second. The third difference was that Alibaba, initiator and organizing unit of the conferences, was not attending in force this year since it was putting all its energies into setting up a new platform. Though quieter this time around, Ma was just as wiry and energetic as ever. His message was that the “crouching tiger, hidden dragon” of China’s Internet was still capable of delivering shocks to the industry every day. The 2003 conference recognized that more people must be allowed to appreciate the Internet’s beneﬁts, par-ticularly more small businesspeople.In April 2003, Jack Ma registered the name of the confer-ences as a company-owned trademark. “West Lake Swordplay Conference” was becoming a generally used term in China, even a kind of synonym for the Internet itself. The conferences were also helping deﬁne how China would participate in an Internet-linked world, how the country felt about the sociopolitical im-pact of this empowering technology.102Fourth Swordplay Conference: Walking on Two LegsThe fourth West Lake Swordplay Conference began behind closed doors on the banks of West Lake on November 3, 2003. Atten ding were So ftbank president Masa yoshi Son, T om.com In-ternet Group president Wang Leilei, T engxun CEO Ma Huateng, Shanda Internet CEO Chen Tian qiao, Y ouchen g CEO Lian g Ji-anzhang, Baidu president Li Yan hong, and Alibaba CEO Jack Ma. The topic for this year’s conference was “China: The Next Wave.” But could an yone reall y know what the future mi ght hold?This year was t he ﬁrst time t he con ference had closed its ses -sions to the media, which piqued the curiosity of all, especially the press. Su pposedly it was to p-secret and yet ever yone knew all about the fact that it was being held. Ma ex plained that man y of the companies attending were in the midst of preparations to list on the stock exchan ge, and so it would be inconvenient for them to revea l muc h to the press. One t hing that no body could avoid noticing, despite the secrecy, was the attendance of Softbank’s Masa yoshi Son. This brou ght together two crucial but very different groups at the con ference: Internet com panies an d venture capital ﬁrms.As mentioned earlier, Masa yoshi Son had become one of the richest men in Asia during the boom years in Japan. In 1981 he returned to Japan from Berkeley to start a company called Soft -bank Ca pital, with initial ca pital comin g primaril y from loans from banks. In 1995 he was success ful in buying Ziff-Davis Me -dia for $2.1 billion, after an earlier unsuccessful attempt. In 1995 he spent $100 million on 37 percent of Yahoo! at a time when it had only seventeen em ployees. Son t hen went on to ma ke other investments and acquisitions, turning Softbank into a primary investor in new technology. At its peak, Softbank was valued at Management 103around $140 billion, of which Son owned more than half. He sold some of the Yahoo! shares in order to ﬁnance other acquisitions, moving from 37 percent down to 7 percent. As of October 2006, the name by which Softbank is now known is Softbank T elecom Corp., of which Masayoshi Son is chairman and CEO.Alibaba had always been in the public eye during the Sword-play conferences, particularly as the originator of the event. Dur-ing 2003, the company had been particularly pressworthy because of its investment in the wholly new endeavor called Taobao. The name implies “searching for treasure,” which echoes the treasure theme of Alibaba and also makes the Internet seem a good place to prospect.Taobao was set up to be a C2C business, for consumer-to-consumer transactions. This was quite different from Alibaba’s for-merly steadfast emphasis on being a service company for enter-prises. The standard line had been that Alibaba intended to increase the wealth of its enterprise partners, whereby it would increase its own proﬁt. Taobao, on the other hand, was clearly for indi-vidual consumers. There was a plausible rationale, because Taobao aimed to make everyone a businessperson, a buyer or seller who could engage in transactions via the Internet. From being a ser-vice provider for enterprises to creating a transaction platform for individuals was a shift, however. Alibaba threw out an additional bombshell in summer 2003 when it declared it was investing $12 million (RMB 100 million) in the project, which later rose to $55 million (RMB 450 million). The B2B giant had now also become a C2C giant. Jack Ma was clearly moving in the direction of what the Chinese call “walking on two legs,” or relying on two differ-ent income streams. This was hedging his bets and making sure he occupied the space with the most potential for growth. Ma fully intended to ensure the success of his long-term objective of creat-ing a company that would last for 102 years.104Fifth Swordplay Conference: Cloud-Style TaijiquanJack Ma’s Chinese name is Ma Y un, which means “horse clouds.” In martial arts, cloud-st yletaijiquan  is a form of movement that simun -lates the softness yet invisi ble power o f clouds. Cyclical movementswith the hands turn back on themselves as the clouds (or ﬁsts —quanin Chinese) reach an extreme, or n taiji, and then fold back to -ward the center. A ll is containe d within the cycle, and the physicalor mental movement connecting extremes is a matter of balance. As a practitioner of taijiquan, Ma was glad to describe this movementone mornin g on Novem ber 4, 2004, to Presi dent Bi ll Clinton, w ho was attending a Swordplay Conference and also meeting with the six giants of China’s Internet world. The y included Yahoo!’s co-founder Yan g Zhiyuan (Jerry Yang); Alibaba’s CEO, Jack Ma; Din g Lei, chairman of the board of NetEase; the president and CEO o f Tengxun, Ma Huaten g; Sohu’s chairman of the board and CEO, Zhang Chaoyang; and Sina’s CEO an d president, Wan g Yan. T o-gether with Clinton, the seven were dubbed the “Seven Samurai ” by outsiders, after the characters in the well-known Akira Kur o-sawa ﬁlm. Furt hermore, t he famous economist Z hang Weiying, vice president of the Guanghua School of Management at Peking University, served as host for this session of the Han gzhou West Lake Swor dplay Con ference. T he future o f China’s Internet wasdiscussed in depth. Jerry Yang’s participation in this meeting ti t-illated those who wanted to ﬁ gure out how Yahoo! and Alibabamight com bine forces. Ma remaine d coy on that subject, choos-ing instead to talk about competition. Ding Lei had not taken the whole arena of e-commerce seriousl y, which was luck y for Alibaba. “Sometimes not being taken serious ly is a stro ke of good luck, for other people aren’t trying to kill you to get into your business. If [Ding Lei] had been more attentive, none of the good stuff would have been left over for me ,” state d Ma.Management 105Ma spoke at length about one of his favorite subjects, taiji-quan. “I practice taijiquan, which requires focus,” he told Clinton. “Don’t think it’s just waving your hands around this way and that. In fact, you have to keep your entire self ﬁxed on one spot, one focus. Y ou use your balance and the right sense of timing to know when to attack. So in Jin Y ong’s novels, I particularly appreciate it when the Y ellow Master appears. Nobody pays much attention to this old man. Nobody is on guard against him, till he suddenly makes a move and tosses the person that everyone thinks is most capable into the river. It is very important to choose the right moment to make your move.”Known for his loquaciousness, Ma appeared quite comfort-able comparing himself to the master of Jin Y ong’s novels. It is true that cloud-style taijiquan can serve as powerful mental train-ing; it was also true that Ma was clearly considering when to make his move. This was not lost on anyone at the conference. Less than one year later, Alibaba would announce its marriage to Yahoo! which would bring in a dowry in the neighborhood of $1 billion.Alibaba’s Use of Human Resources“If you can win people’s hearts, you can rule all under heaven,” and “Human talent is the greatest asset; success or failure depends on people,” are truisms that show up in a myriad of ways in Chi-nese philosophy and also in the most ancient classics. Various sages sum up how to manage chaos using the same concept of effec-tive management of people. For example, Journey to the West is a Chinese classic that has been mined for its pearls of wisdom and which Ma feels is relevant in this context. The book is about the journey of a Buddhist priest to India, accompanied by his loyal 106companions, inc luding a mon key and a pig. Man y people read Journey to t he West for entertainment; Jack Ma reads it for its gui d-ance in business.Stories from t his classic date from hundreds of years ear lier but were stitc hed toget her into a nove l in the 1590s, during t he late Ming dynasty. A man named Wu Cheng’en is credited with authorship. Ma i dentiﬁes not wit h Mon key, who is fantastic in his supernatura l powers, but rat her wit h the more prosaic leader, the Buddhist priest Tang Seng [Priest Tang]. Monkey, whose name is Sun Wukong, or “Sun w ho Com prehends the Great Voi d,” is enlightened but also unru ly and uncontro llable. He is master o f technology and magical powers. Ma regards himself as someone who is i gnorant o f technology, while Alibaba is positione d as a technology-based Internet company. As Tang Seng nee ded Mon -key for his skills on the journey westward, so Alibaba needs a core group of people who are attune d to com puters an d mathematics. Instea d of using tec hnical language to gui de these peop le, though, Ma uses old-fashioned inspiration. He uses intuition and emo -tionally based language and culture to mana ge and lead a group ofpeople whom he recognizes are hyperrationa l and cognitive ly inclined.“Intelligentpeople nee d a fool to lead them,” Ma sa ys about his application of the principles of Journey to the Westf . “When theteam’s all a bunch of scientists, it is best to have a peasant lead the way. His wa y of thinking is different. It’s easier to win i f you have people seeing t hings from different perspectives.”Ma has borrowed extensively from Journeyto the West in his conce pt of teamwor k amon g disparate kinds of people. He ca lls this idea “Priest Tang” teamwor k. “Priest Tang did not have suc h great native abilities; everyone knows that. But he had phenom -enal willpower. He was unwi lling to give up until he had gotten hold of the true sutras, or precepts. On t he other hand, Mon key, Sun Wukong, had abilities that were extraordinary. Y ou couldn’t Management 107do without him, but you absolutely did not want too many of him in your company.”Ma feels that the question of whether Alibaba can realize its mission depends entirely on the overall abilities of its team. The social technology of this team is paramount, the way it is orga-nized to work smoothly together. T o create this winning team, he does not want too many heroes—heroes are capable of turning on one another. He also does not want too much excellence, since you need common people to get things done. Ma’s “Priest Tang–style team” works well: Tang was a ﬁne leader because he kept his eye on the goal; Monkey (Sun Wukong) was the backbone of the enterprise because of his talents, but he also brought grief to the leaders with his foibles; the pig, Zhu Ba Jie, was limited in his abilities but he was loyal and protected his master at critical times. All of these types were necessary for success.At the same time, all team members have to adhere to the same values in order to accomplish a common mission. The ﬁrst rule Ma has tried to inculcate at Alibaba is to be happy in what one is doing. Only if employees are happy can customers be happy. Only if customers are happy can the enterprise be proﬁtable. This is another way of saying “customers ﬁrst.” There are beneﬁts of putting the message in this circuitous fashion because it brings a group of superior talent under ﬁrm command. Alibaba’s salaries have always been low compared to those in the general market-place. Many employees and managers come into the company with a base salary of less than half of what they had been earning elsewhere. Ma has not hidden the fact that in the early days this was different and a considerable amount of money was spent on senior management outside of China. “We discovered they did not come up to expectations,” Ma has explained tersely, “and so these people were the ﬁrst to be ﬁred.”As someone who has clear ideas of what he wants and what he does not want, Ma has made every effort to put these ideas 108into com panywide practice. He has rein forced the understan d-ing that “Jack Ma will only ﬁght together with people who have the same set of values as he does.” In order to clarify values, he has come u p with slogans an d sayings that keep people on tar get. “Internet companies survive on ly if everyone has the same pur -pose,” he has said. “In the Internet, you can’t have people working in their separate departments on disparate t hings. Ever ything has to be uniﬁed and for the same purpose. Internet companies have to harmonize, which means teamwork and common energies.” The dynamic nature o f teamwor k is key. This oft-state d emphasis is in part because departments in tra ditiona l industries in C hina have been allowed to work as separate ﬁefdoms. Indeed, the entire governmenta l structure o f pre-mar ket-econom y China rein forced the de facto practice o f competing loyalties an d hidden agen das. Ma battles that with his ideas of teamwork, and he is successful in part because o f the youth of the people he has attracte d.Using a “Happy Culture” to Attract TalentAlibaba is consi dered to be a stingy company. It has assets in t he hundreds of millions but puts very little money into advertis -ing or publicity, and its em ployee salaries are low. One reason is that its funding initially came from venture capital and had to be conserved. Another is that Alibaba is not interested in attracting people on t he basis of high promises; it wants to attract t hem on the basis of its corporate culture. Alibaba “never voluntarily takes actions that poach people from other companies,” but at the same time, man ypeople have been attracte d to A libaba precise ly be-cause of its spirit.A key part of the corporate culture that Ma tries to empha -size is a ﬂattenin g of hierarc hy, a lessenin g of the distance be-Management 109tween levels of command. “There is no distance between Jack Ma and the rest of us,” a young employee explained. “This surprises people, but in fact it’s true.” Another stated, “Alibaba is a company that doesn’t wear clothes. It doesn’t have layer upon layer of coats like other companies—you pull off one layer and there’s another. With us, what you see is what we are.”CCTV holds a contest called Best Employer of the Y ear ev-ery year, and Alibaba was selected one of China’s T en Best in 2005. Ma was pleased, since he had followed a policy of “happy work” corporate culture for years and felt that he was now reap-ing the rewards. “Employees can wear sandals to work at Alibaba,” he noted in his acceptance speech for this prize, “and they can come into my ofﬁce anytime. In brief, we want employees to be joyful.”A number of the senior management team at Alibaba have been with Ma for the whole length of Alibaba’s history. Li Qi is the current COO, Sun Danyu is general manager of Taobao, and Jin Jianhang is deputy vice president of Alibaba. They were among the original eighteen that founded the company. “Like me,” Ma has said, “they are not necessarily the most absolutely intelligent people, but we have all matured over these years.”Using Charisma to Attract TalentCharisma involves a kind of magnetic appeal, the indeﬁnable abil-ity of a leader to get people to do things for him. It takes charisma to make warriors charge into the breach, and also to get highly intelligent people to bow their backs to hard work for a common cause. Cai Chongxin’s entry into the company was undoubtedly evidence that there was something about Jack Ma that one could call charisma.110Originally from Taiwan, Cai has a law degree from Ya le and, before he joined Alibaba, was serving as Asian representative of the venture capital ﬁrm Invest AB. Prior to the 2007 reorganiza -tion, he serve d as head of ﬁnances o f the overa ll com pany; the CFO o f the listed company A libaba.com is now Maggie Wu.“Cai Chongxin is in charge of talking to investors,” explained Ma as preparations began for listing Alibaba.com on t he Hon g Kong mar ket. “W hen I have an i dea that mig ht have any kind of impact on shareholder interests, I ﬁrst talk it through with Cai Chongxin. W hen he understan d it, he is the one w ho then goes back to talk to investors unti l they un derstan d it too.” Cai’s ro le is critical in the eyes of Jack Ma and Alibaba. He joined the com -pany in A pril 1999, ta king a mere $60 (500 RMB) in mont hly salary. He had met Jac k Ma w hen discussing investment from a company called Invest AB. After talking to him for a while, Cai unexpectedly said, “Jack Ma, I want to sit on your si de. I want to join A libaba!” Ma was dubious a bout how this wou ld work, but Cai persuaded him and also persuaded his wife. She later noted that her husband wou ld never have forgiven her if she had not agreed to his joining A libaba. Cai came in as CFO.Mission, Values, Trustwort hinessIn 2001 Jack Ma had a fortuitous breakfast meeting with Bill and Hillary Clinton. He came awa y from this meetin g with a strong sense o f the importance o f mission, both to a countr y, as described by the Clintons, and to a corporation. Bill Clinton had told him that in leadin g a countr y forward and knowin g in which direction it s hould go, the critica l thing was a sense o f mission. A leader had to use the country’s own sense of mission as its mo -tivatin g force. This was hel pful to Ma, since at the time he knew Management 111that Internet companies in China were groping forward painfully, trying to copy Yahoo! as well as America Online and Amazon. They were trying to emulate someone else. This reinforced his belief that Alibaba needed to have its own direction. “We can only follow our own sense of mission” became his mantra after that breakfast meeting.He later commented on that breakfast and the importance of mission repeatedly in speeches that he made in China. “Some time ago,” he would say, “I attended the World Economic Fo-rum and I heard CEOs from the Fortune 500 talking mostly about ‘mission’ and ‘sense of values.’ Chinese enterprises rarely talk about these things. If you do, people think you are full of hot air and stop talking to you. But our enterprises lack these, and I believe that it will prevent them from developing into major companies as a consequence.”By the year 2000, Ma and his team had determined that the mission of Alibaba was to “make it easy to do business anywhere.” All of the services, systems, and software of the company were be-ing created in order for Alibaba to make business easy for custom-ers. Under this guiding mission, Alibaba began to form its own set of values, which it institutionalized into a list of nine items, then later condensed to six. The process of delineating these values began in 2001. At the time, Alibaba employees came from eleven different countries, and in his inaugural speech on values Ma de-clared that only with a “common sense of values” could such a disparate group of people be able to “unite and ﬁght toward tomorrow.” He then cited an example from the Song dynasty, a story well known to Chinese about the heroes at Mount Liang, the stronghold of the 108 legendary heroes of Outlaws of the Marsh.“The mission of the One Hundred and Eight was to implement thedao [the Way] on behalf of heaven. No matter what happened, they were brothers in that endeavor.” This reference was drawn from the historical bandit Song Jiang and his outlaw compan-112ions from me dieval times. (Son g Jiang surren dered to government troops in 1119; Robin Hood is said to have died in Y orkshire in around 1247, and the legends of both are similar.)A code of honor serve d as the primar y bond for both Song Jiang an d Robin Hoo d’s bandits. In e levating t he mora l mission of his employees, Jack Ma similarly wanted to create strong cohe -sion by getting employees to assimi late speciﬁc value conce pts. By now, A libaba’s Six Va lues are factore d into annua l employee eva lu-ations, so they form a rigorous part of each person’s thinking. Employees are not a llowed to think of them as va gue conce pts. These va lues have become t he criteria for measuring per for-mance, which to a large degree has molded the corporate culture of Alibaba; they are t he yardstick in ﬁguring out w hich peopleto hire, how to train t hem, how to test t hem, w ho moves up, an d who moves out.This conce pt was to be vita l as the com pany absorbed em-ployees from Ya hoo! C hina. In August 2005, Ya hoo! C hina an d Alibaba formed a strategic partnership that involved a transfer of $1 billion to A libaba as we ll as hundreds of employees. On Septem ber 21, 2005, t he Z9 train from Beijing to Hangz hou was turned into a private express for Alibaba. It brought some six hundred Yahoo! people down to Han gzhou to meet t he rest o f their new “ family” in a dvance o f the ofﬁcial forma lization o f the deal the next month. During the welcoming ceremonies, Ali -baba raise d a huge banner on w hich was written a messa ge about being “one family.” Merging corporate cu ltures is genera lly the hardest part of combining forces; Ma was determined to make this union wor k, and he gave a s peech that indicated his emphasis on corporate cu lture.I have been wor king in Beijing for muc h of August, part ly becauseI wante d to hear w hat colleagues had to sa y and partly to ma ke sure that the y heard what I had to sa y. So that the y could unde r-Management 113stand me. Understanding me is pretty easy, but it does not mean that you understand Alibaba. Alibaba is a team, not just me, and it has a strong culture. We have always been in Hangzhou, which means that the outside world does not understand us too well. I don’t mean just foreigners but also people in China. When peoplelook at Alibaba, therefore, they think it’s all Jack Ma. I feel badly about that. In fact, this company is the result of a lot of hard work of a whole team of superb people. I’m just the one who does all the talking, I’m the spokesman. When I went to Beijing, everyone could see and understand me, but what they really need to do is understand this company and its team, understand the corporate culture, and also understand Hangzhou. Alibaba’s future is insepa-rable from Hangzhou. So I wanted to have everyone come down here and see it for themselves. This is extremely important. We are talking about the environment in which the company has grown, and the linking of cultures and place. All of these are living, breath-ing things, not just things that Ma talks about. I brought you here to make sure you feel this company, experience this city, under-stand the climate in which we operate.Back in Beijing, Ma also spoke at the Great Hall of the People on September 23, addressing twenty-ﬁve hundred Alibaba employees, now joined by another seven hundred “relatives” from Yahoo! China.TrustIn addition to a focus on values in terms of employee behavior, Ma has placed a strong emphasis on trust as the only effective way to do business in the long term. This trust does not mean some kind of touchy-feely faith in human nature. Quite the op-114posite: Ma has institutiona lized trust by putting in place a series o f measures for authenticating and verifying the background of any enterprise on Alibaba. He began this process in March 2002, with what he called a Trust Zone for China Su ppliers. T his was done in cooperation wit h credit management companies in C hina. T his process of supplying credit ratings and veriﬁcation and authenti -cation services a llowed Alibaba to sur ge forwar d in its B2B busi-ness.Ma feels that what determines the success  or failure of B2B i s not funding or tec hnology but somet hing much more im portant: the simp le consi deration o f trustwort hiness. As a resu lt, he has fo-cused on systems that allow small and medium-sized enterprises to operate in a “sa fety zone.” Bot h sides in an y transaction have to be able to see t he credentials of the other side, whether these be corporate documentation, legal decisions, volume of business on Alibaba, or ran king by other mem bers. A libaba buys the service sof a num ber of credit-rating companies for its domestic supp li-ers. Foreign club members must pass through an evaluation by such professiona l institutions as Dun & Bra dstreet before being allowed entry.“Only trustworthy people are able to get rich,” is Ma’s slo -gan. A libaba began to c harge a fee for suc h services in Oct o-ber 2000. T he fee for club mem bership is current ly $385 (RMB 2,800) per year for China TrustPass members. For so-called Gold Suppliers on t he internationa l marketplace, the mem bership fee is $5,500 to $8,200 (RMB 40,000–60,000), depending on ser -vices provided. Gold Supplier members currently total twenty-two thousan d, while Internationa l TrustPass mem bers, a kind of incubator for the Gold Supp lier pro ducts, tota l eleven t housan d. Membership has risen, not declined, with the rise in prices, and this is because mem bers actua lly make mone y from t he service sthey are provi ded. Ma regar ds the num ber of mem bers an d the volume of business that they are able to do through Alibaba as his Management 115core asset. “This is the mountain at my back,” he says. “This is my security, my support.”T o reinforce the idea that Alibaba is a team with a strong cor-porate culture and that its strength is the bottom-line satisfaction it gives to customers, he has hung behind his desk a photograph of all employees above this statement: “We created Alibaba.” Near it is the couplet calligraphed by his friend Louis Cha. Ma adheres closely to the concept of taking very practical steps to achieve Al-ibaba aims. He takes it as the core of his management practices.Jack Ma (right) and Jerry Yang (co-founder of Yahoo!), photographed on the Great Wall together in 1998. Ma and his colleagues had not yet founded Alibaba at the time.Photographic Insert At the end of 1999, Jack Ma and the boss of Softbank, Masayoshi Son, signed an agreement giving Alibaba a much-needed initial investment. Son, ethnically Chinese but of Korean heritage and born in Japan, recognized a kindred spirit in the rebellious Ma.Jack Ma and colleagues on a rare outing to the Great Wall in 1999. Ma and his early core team were working for a subsidiary of the Ministry of Foreign Economic Relations and Trade at the time. This photo preceded their return to Hangzhou and was taken at a time when the future seemed bleak.The SARS crisis erupted in early spring 2003. This photo shows Ma and his Alibaba employees during a tough period. Company solidarity and high morale allowed business to carry on, even though Alibaba was under strict quarantine at the time.Young entrepreneurs at the Fourth Swordplay Conference, held in 2003. The backdrop reads, “China: The Next Wave.” From left to right, the people in the photo are Liang Jianzhang, CEO of Ctrip.com (an online travel company), Ma Yun (Jack Ma), Wang Leilei, president of the Tom.com Group, and Li Zhenhong, president of Baidu Company.President Bill Clinton attended the Fifth Swordplay Conference in China and was photographed with Jack Ma in Hangzhou on September 10, 2005.Jack Ma shakes the hand of the COO of Yahoo, Daniel Rosensweig, at a press conference in August, 2005, at which the merger between Alibaba and Yahoo! China was announced. Jack Ma is famous for waving his hands in the air as he speaks, perhaps the legacy of parents who were professional performers of “Ping Tan,” the Suzhou storytelling tradition. Ma grew up among dramatic communicators. His personal vigor and motivational speeches are part of what have propelled the company forward.In 2006, Ma was honored with an award called the Yangzi River Delta Award. It recognizes entrepreneurial achievement and speciﬁcally awards the leadership of innovative young people.Jack Ma giving a sign of conﬁdence as he sits under the Alibaba and Taobao banners, visual representations of the empire he has created.