chapter 7How Can You Catch a Tiger if You Don’t Go into His Lair?The word for “tiger” in Chi-nese is pronounced hoo. The founders of Yahoo! may not have thought of this when they chose the company name, but everyone in China thinks of Yahoo! as a tiger. Jack Ma was partic-ularly fond of this allusion when it came to bearding the Yahoo! lion (in this case tiger) in his lair. In August 2005, Alibaba and Yahoo! China set up a strategic cooperation valued at $1 billion that involved the transfer of all of Yahoo! China’s assets to Alibaba and the transfer of 40 percent of Alibaba shares to Yahoo!148In ear ly February 2008, Microso ft put in a hostile takeover bid to buy the global Yahoo! The amount Microsoft offered was $44.6 billion. Google tried to delay or derail the deal since it would threaten Goo gle’s dominance o f Internet a dvertisin g. Two dragons were in deed competing for a siza ble pear l: $40 billion is spent annually on online advertising, and this amount is expected to double in the next two years. How a Microso ft takeover o f Ya-hoo! wou ld affect the business o f Yahoo! China an d Alibaba is not known, but it would necessarily have ripple effects since Yahoo! owns 39 percent o f the Alibaba Grou p. The offer was o pposed by Yahoo! founder Jerry Yang as we ll as other mem bers of the board, and on July 25, 2008, Microsoft’s CEO, Steve Ballmer, announced that Microso ft was no longer in ne gotiations wit h Yahoo! but left the door open for future ta lks. There wi ll almost certain ly be fur-ther talks, and they will have an impact on Alibaba.As note d, Yahoo! was founded by Jerry Yang and Davi d Filo in the Unite d States in t he mid-1990s. Jerry Yang had come to the States from Taiwan and is known in China by his Chinese name, Yan g Zhiyuan. In Januar y 1994, t he two men create d “Jer-ry’s Gui de to t he Wor ld Wide Web” while studying e lectrica l en-gineering at Stanford University in California. As graduate stu -dents, t hey were in a privileged position, an d some o f the initia l $1 million funding for their venture came from t he university itself. In April the name of the how-to guide was changed to Yahoo! an d the extraor dinary story of this innovative com pany began. It had starte d as a way to link information sources t hat the two men most enjoyed. When the Web sites they collected became too numerous, t hey began to cate gorize t hem into t ypes, and they set up a num ber of menus, or contents, for ease o f use. Originally a system for their own use, the categorization turned out to be beneﬁcial for others. Ya hoo! was listed on the Nas daq exchange in 1996 an d move d quickly into Japan, w here it met with initial success. The dot-com crisis of 2000 and 2001 took How Can Y ou Catch a Tiger . . . 149the shares to an all-time low, but the company pulled out of the slump and continued to expand through strategic acquisitions. In March 2004 Yahoo! launched its own search engine technology. In 2005 it celebrated its tenth anniversary, and on August 11 of that year it completed a cross-ownership alliance with Alibaba.com in China.By 2007 Yahoo!’s revenues worldwide exceeded $6.7 billion, and employees totaled over 11,400. Co-founder Jerry Yang re-placed former CEO T erry Semel as head of the company in June 2007, however. Semel had been hired to help turn around the ﬂagging company, but his stewardship was not enough to raise the stock. Earnings continued to decline when Jerry Yang retook the helm.Y ahoo! in ChinaInside China, as the head of the combined local forces of Yahoo! and Alibaba, Jack Ma was widely regarded not only as the head of a colossus but as a courageous man for daring to hold on to a tiger. This tiger was known to be lean and hungry in China. It had spent seven years learning the ropes in a very difﬁcult environment. Although it was one of the earliest portals in the United States, Yahoo!’s experience in China began only in 1999. A man named Zhang Pinghe was president of the China entity at the time, and he recalls the times as exciting and challenging. Ya-hoo! enjoyed a clear ﬁrst-to-market advantage in China; the three large Chinese portals at the time, Sina, Sohu, and NetEase, had already burned through most of their money. Yahoo! in China soon encountered funding problems: not only was ﬁnancial sup-port from headquarters small but the company was ordered to turn a proﬁt as soon as possible. This was in line with Jerry Yang’s 150philosophy: in the Unite d States, t he com pany became proﬁtable within its ﬁrst ten months. In China , however , the model was hard to duplicate, and the company began to struggle. Yahoo! was not suite d to the local conditions, an d because o f that it founditself in aw kward circumstances. Its name recognition was muc hlower than that of the three main portals, and Yahoo!’s search e n-gine functions cou ld not com pete eit her wit h the locally devel-oped Baidu or wit h Goog le. In t he instant-messaging mar ket, it lost out to QQ and MSN. In the online auction market, it found itself outmaneuvere d by eBay’s child in China, Eac hNet.By ear ly 2001 Z hang Ping he had left the company, disil-lusioned. For the next several years a succession of professional managers were brought in from outsi de China to tr y to turn t he company aroun d. Low mora le set in, t he decision-ma king process back at headquarters was too slow, and it was generally acknowl -edged that Yahoo! in C hina was not wor king out.At the end of 2003, Jerry Yang found a person insi de China who understood search engines and who was eager to test himself at Yahoo! T his was a man name d Zhou Hon gwei, w ho had been leading his own team in C hina, known as 3721. Z hou brought his entire team at 3721 over to Yahoo! China. Although he only led the com pany for the next two years, he was a ble to ac hieve some success. Frustrate d that mar ket share did not rise, Z hou pose d a key question to Jerry Yang: “Do you want to grow the company, or do you nee d to see imme diate proﬁt?” After thinking it over for six mont hs, Yang decided that the primary goa l should be growth, not proﬁt. Unfortunately, the decision came too late for some. Z hou left the com pany, ten senior en gineers jumped over to Bai du and other searc h engine companies, an d a num ber of other employees left over the next ﬁve months. By the time Ali -baba began ex pressin g an interest in strate gic coo peration, mora le inside Yahoo! China was at an a ll-time low.Jerry Yang’s enthusiasm for the China market never wavered. How Can Y ou Catch a Tiger . . . 151He had put tremendous investment into the effort, including the early hiring of IT industry managers, the huge amount paid for 3721, and the costs of localization, however inadequate that was. Nothing had allowed the company to live up to its reputation for being a real tiger. In the end, Yang adopted the strategy of total localization: he decided to transfer assets to Alibaba, at the same time preserving the Yahoo! brand. He allowed Alibaba complete operating control in developing Yahoo! China.A Chinese proverb relates how to catch a monkey: you put something very sweet in a cage and let the monkey put his hand through the bars to try to get it. Once the monkey has the sweet-ness in its grasp, it tries to pull the prize out but ﬁnds that its clenched ﬁst can’t squeeze back through the bars. The monkey has caught himself—its own ﬁst prevents it from being free. The only way the monkey can save itself is by letting go, opening its hand and releasing what is holding it back. Jerry Yang was in-telligent enough to “open his hand,” thereby saving himself: he released Yahoo! in China, entrusting Jack Ma to “keep the tiger” and to make sure it lived.The cause of Yahoo! China’s seven-year itch—its malaise for that long stretch of time—was, in general, indecision. According to previous managers, the company couldn’t make up its mind: it vacillated between this and that, both worried about getting and worried about losing. These unfortunate years allowed Jerry Yang to reconsider the future direction of the company and to counte-nance the idea of its developing under a new identity.It is said that Jerry Yang and Jack Ma came together for a golf meeting in the United States to discuss possibilities on May 1, 2005. Then, on August 6, Baidu listed on the market and a whole series of actions by Google raised the ante. This sparked both men into action. Jerry Yang telephoned Ma and suggested a price. Ma came back with a proposal: $1 billion for 40 percent of shares but only 35 percent of voting rights. The deal was quickly made and 152announce d to the public on Au gust 11. “I like to look forwar d,” Jerry Yang commented as the deal became known in the news. “No matter whether it is decisions about  the market or the com-pany, Yahoo! hasn’t ma de any major mista kes.” Yan g feels that start -ing a company is a kin to a spurt o f adrenaline, w hereas running a company and growing a company is a marathon. His goal was to create a long-standing company and his investment in C hina was strategic: his plan for China had never c hanged. He sent an e-mai l message to all Yahoo! China employees that said, “This morning we have announce d the formation o f a strate gic coo peration wit h Alibaba. ... This is an exciting moment for Yahoo! peop le, and I hope that you will recognize the enormous opportunity ahead and become a mem ber of this success ful team.”Who Bou ght Whom?When the long-rumore d merger or “strate gic coo peration” be-tween t he two companies receive d public con ﬁrmation, t he on-going question of who had bought whom did not receive much clariﬁcation. A libaba acquired all of Yahoo! C hina’s assets an d at the same time received $1 billion from Yahoo! in investment in order to create China’s most powerful Internet search platform. Alibaba and Yahoo! ma de simu ltaneous announcements in C hina, the United States, and Japan. This was the largest merger to date in the histor y of China’s Internet.Jack Ma joked that Alibaba and Yahoo! had sweet-ta lked each other for seven years, and that on China’s equivalent of Valentine’s Day (August 11), they were getting married. More seriously, he noted that the new team inten ded to create t he stron gest Inter -net search platform in China and to remain a Chinese enterprise with global inﬂuence. The assets that Alibaba acquired include How Can Y ou Catch a Tiger . . . 153Yahoo!’s portal in China, its search technology, its information and advertising businesses, and its authentication and veriﬁcation service. Alibaba also received exclusive user rights within China to the Yahoo! brand for an unlimited period. At the same time, Ya-hoo! became Alibaba’s largest strategic investor, with 40 percent of economic beneﬁts (shares) and 35 percent of voting rights. Ma steadfastly declared to the outside world that this was a purchase of Yahoo! China by Alibaba, but the press was not convinced it was so. Many could not help but wonder who was in fact buying whom. In the face of all kinds of rumors, it would probably be hard to know for some time.Ma declared that he was “working every day at Yahoo! China,” but when he received members of the press, he did it only in his own ofﬁces at Alibaba, which indicated a sensitivity about image. As for doubts in the industry about whether Yahoo! had really invested $1 billion, Ma parried the thrusts of journal-ists. “All ﬁnancial details with regard to the acquisition will be announced within eighteen months,” he said. “At that time, you can make up your own minds.” As to what he might be intending to do with $1 billion, Ma noted, “It’s pretty hard to digest a huge amount of money. When you’ve just swallowed down something enormous, it is a challenge for your stomach. One billion may look good to people on the outside, but it is undeniably a huge challenge to us.”More precise information came with the SEC Form 8-K, ﬁled August 16, 2005. The transaction was described as a “strate-gic combination.” It involved many more transactions than just the principal one. These included purchase of Taobao shares from Softbank ($360 million, paid for by Yahoo!). They involved pur-chase of Alibaba shares from certain Alibaba shareholders for an aggregate ﬁgure of $570 million. After all the transactions, the result was that Yahoo! owned approximately 40 percent of out-standing shares of Alibaba on a fully diluted basis, including shares 154reserve d for issuance un der Alibaba’s em ployee stoc k plans an d upon exercise of outstanding options, warrants, and the convert-ible bond issued to Softbank. Alibaba, for its part, then owned 100 percent o f the outstan ding shares o f Taobao.Ma’s ofﬁcial statement a bout t he transaction was up beat: “T eaming up with Yahoo! will allow us to deliver an unmatched range of e-commerce services to businesses an d consumers in China. With the addition o f Yahoo! China to A libaba.com’s busi-ness, we are expanding our se rvices to provide a leading searchoffering to China’s Internet users. A libaba.com is winnin g in B2B in China, winning in C2C, winning in on line payments, an d now we’re going to win in search.”Masayoshi Son a lso had some comments, since his Softbank was a crucia l party to t he deal. He disagree d with some opinions that the $4 billion valuation of the new company was too high. “I think it’s too low,” he said. “That’s w hy we are not se lling our entire sta ke. It’s a signa l of our con ﬁdence t hat this company wi ll grow much more.” It was generally felt that the newly combined forces o f Alibaba and Yahoo! in C hina were a serious t hreat to eBay. Ya hoo! had beat out eBay in Japan as we ll as Taiwan. A combined Taobao and Yahoo! were now on the warpath to beat eBay in China.Who Runs the Show?In the face of questions from re porters, Jack Ma was c lear on t he subject of who was boss. Journalists wondered how he was going to manage what might be a sticky relationship with Yahoo! head -quarters in t he States. Ma did not mince wor ds. “Man y peopleare asking what the reporting relationship is going to be with America. I tell them that in China Jerry Yang should report to How Can Y ou Catch a Tiger . . . 155me. I am chairman of the board. He is a board member. I am his boss, he is not my boss. All of the decision making is right here in China.”This was in line with Ma’s conviction that Alibaba had to be a China-born and China-run company. Political considerations inside China’s regulatory structure dictate a high degree of “na-tive son” identity. At the same time, Ma was playing for bigger stakes than just China. He recognized that China’s economy and demographics meant that it was inevitable that country would be in the forefront of global e-commerce in the near future. Playing for global stakes meant that a China base was an asset, not, as many had previously assumed, a liability. Meanwhile, new employees from Yahoo! China had to be inducted into the peculiarly posi-tive way of thinking of Alibaba’s chairman. Jack Ma gave them their ﬁrst lesson in a speech made to employees. He titled the speech “Edison Tricked the World.” The original manuscript has been lost, but an employee who was present when Ma delivered it reconstructed the gist of the text:T oday is the ﬁrst time I am meeting with our new Yahoo! friends in person. I want to thank you for coming. I also want to share with you some reasons for success, even though most of you will probably not beneﬁt from them. Since you are all hardworking and intelligent, you will probably reject my comments out of hand. A few of you may be lazy enough to get something out of them, however. Let’s get to the point. There are many extremely clever people in the world. And there are lots of well-educated peoplewho seem unable to succeed. This is because they’ve been wrongly taught from an early age. They have developed the habit of being overly diligent and hardworking. Many of these people remember Edison’s famous phrase, the one about genius being 99 percent sweat and the rest inspiration. They have been led around by the nose by this saying for their entire lives. I’m telling you now it’s 156wrong. If you plod forward with dili gence, in the end you’ll be leftwith nothing. Edison was in fact too lazy to consider the real re a-sons for his success—t hat is w hy he came out wit h that phrase an d tricked the whole world. It’s time for us to rethink the facts. Someof you may think I am talking nonsense. Let me give you one hu n-dred examp les that prove you are wrong. Facts, a fter all, trump any argument. The richest man on earth, Bill Gates, was a programmer who was too lazy to study at school, so he dropped out. He was also too lazy to remem ber all those comp lex DOS comman ds, sohe built that graphic interface . ..  what was it called? I’ve for got-ten. I’m too lazy to remember these things. The result was thatthe entire wor ld now uses t hat “face,” t hat “win dow,” an d he hasbecome the world’s richest man.Then there is the most valuable brand on earth, Coca-Cola. Theboss of Coca-Co la was even more lazy. C hina’s tea cu lture has a long and venerable histor y, Brazil’s coffee is delicious, but this guy was too lazy to go looking for them. He put a little sugar togethe r with some water, pac kaged it in a bottle and sold it, an d called itCoca-Cola. The rest is histor y. The entire world is drinkin g thisliquid that looks a little like blood. Then soccer. The best socce r player in t he wor ld is [Rona ldo], who is fundamenta lly too lazy tomove around much on the ﬁeld. He just stands before the goal of the other side. He waits for the ball to come near him, then gives it a kick. As one o f the highest-pai d athletes in t he wor ld, peop lepuff him u p and sa y he runs with the ball faster than an yone. It’snot true. Other people run for ninety minutes; he runs for ﬁfteensecon ds. Natura lly he is consi dered faster.Fast food. The most successful fast-food com pany in the worldis McDonald’s. Its boss was lazy in the extreme: too lazy to studythe reﬁnements o f Frenc h cooking or t he comp lex skill of Chinesecuisine. He just stuck a piece of beef in between two chunks of bread and as a result the world has this M sign all over it. The pizzaMHow Can Y ou Catch a Tiger . . . 157boss is the same. We Chinese have lao bing [a kind of stuffed ﬂat bread], with all the things inside. This man was too lazy to stick anything inside; he puts it right on top and sells it as pizza. It’s the same materials but his pizza costs ten times as much as lao bing.Then there are other, more clever lazy people. They were too lazy to climb stairs, so they invented elevators. They were too lazy to walk, so they invented cars, trains, airplanes. They were too lazy to kill people one by one, so they invented nuclear bombs. They were too lazy to work out every calculation, so they invented mathematical formulas. T oo many examples. I’m too lazy to give any more.Oh yes, and then there is that other bit of nonsense I want to mention, about how you have to be in frantic motion in order to stay healthy. How many athletes do you see growing old? Not so many. The longest-lived people on earth are those monks who sit around and are too lazy to eat meat!What would our lives be like right now without all these lazy people? I’m too lazy to think about it. People are like this, but animals too. The tortoise, said to be the longest-living animal on earth—well, tortoises hardly move at all. They just crouch there and as a result live to be a thousand. But compared to rabbits, who are diligent, and who run around all the time . . . who wins? Cows are the most diligent, and as a result people give them nothing but grass to eat and then add the insult of squeezing them for milk. Pandas, in contrast, are lazy things that do nothing at all. They just sit there gnawing on a piece of bamboo all day. What do people do with them? They protect them and call them “national treasures”!T o return to our work: Y ou see people running around here in the company. Are they the ones who are most highly paid? Ab-solutely not. Those most highly paid sit around looking carefree. They probably have a lot of stock options as well. The examples I give are just to clarify an issue, which is that, in fact, this world 158relies on laz ypeople to carr y it forward. The world is marvelous , thanks to them. Now you should all be aware of the reason for your lack of success !Laziness is not, of course, stu pid-laz y. If you want to be ableto work less, you have to think of ways to do it, clever ways tobe allowed to be lazy. Y ou have to have a lazy sty le, a lazy state o f mind. Like me. I’ve been laz y since I was a child. Look how short I am—I was even too lazy to grow. That’s the state of mind youneed to cu ltivate.Thank you all a gain!Yahoo! China Challenges Google and BaiduSearch engines are big business: it is estimated that by 2009 the value of the advertisin g market on search en gines in America alone wi ll grow to over $5 billion. C hina’s mar ket is sma ller but is expected to come near $1 billion by 2010. All of the globe’s major players are picking up the pace in China in order to occu py that vital part of the Internet mar ket.The major search engine players in China are Baidu and Google. Over the course of 2004 and 2005, these two sur ged ahead of com petitors, most im portant ly ahead of Yahoo! C hina. Baidu’s 33.1 percent of the market in 2004 rose to 46.5 percent in 2005. Goo gle’s 22.4 percent of the market rose to 26.9 percent in 2005. Ya hoo! C hina, meanw hile, lost ground. Its mar ket share went from 30.2 percent to 15.6 percent. After Alibaba acquired Yahoo! China, Jack Ma decided to im plement a total revision of the Yahoo! site, an d he did it to resem ble the Goo gle look.Google is the greatest competitor for the search engine mar -ket in the world. Goo gle not onl y maintains a ﬁrm hold on the Western mar ket but since 2005 has systematica lly begun a cam -How Can Y ou Catch a Tiger . . . 159paign in China. China’s own local company, Baidu, was listed on Nasdaq at the end of 2005, and the extravagant rise in its price swiftly turned all eyes in its direction. All of this was difﬁcult for Jerry Yang to accept, understanding as he did the importance of the China market. Most people believe that the reason he was willing to relinquish Yahoo! China to Alibaba was not merely that Yahoo! China was in difﬁcult straits but more importantly that competitive global pressure was forcing him to undertake a by-pass strategy. Yahoo!’s cooperation with Alibaba has always had the shadow of Google behind it. Once Microsoft started bidding for Yahoo! the struggle for the pearl between the two mightiest dragons in the world was on. Since the contest started, Microsoft and Yahoo! have engaged in on-again, off-again negotiations that, as of this writing, are on hold.If Yahoo! fell behind in the China market, it clearly would have no chance in the future to overtake Google on the wider stage, and Ma was aware of the odds. In the second half of 2005, he mobilized a transformation campaign at Yahoo! China. He be-gan with the simple slogan, “In China, Yahoo! is search, and search is Yahoo!” He publicly declared that Yahoo! fully intended to sit at the place of honor in China’s search engine market. In order to achieve this transformation, Ma did three things. First, he threw out the homepage of the previous Yahoo! China site, replacing it with a starkly simple page that initiated searches. This homage to Google’s homepage made it clear that, indeed, search was Yahoo! and Yahoo! was search. Second, he forecast a wildly optimistic ﬁgure for Yahoo! China’s revenues in 2006. The ﬁgure was so outrageous that few took it seriously: everyone felt that Jack Ma was under great pressure and that he often used the device of self-encouragement to whip up enthusiasm and spur performance. Ma was, after all, a teacher and knew how to draw out the poten-tial in students. Third, he clariﬁed what Alibaba meant by “search” and how that ﬁt into the overall strategy of the parent company. 160In doing this, it became a pparent t hat his searc h goals for Yahoo! China and the search goals of Google were different.Ma’s overarching strategy for the company maintains a clear focus on t he business o f e-commerce. “In t he comin g ﬁve years, we will be integrating searc h in our development o f e-commerce,” Ma has repeatedly stated. E-commerce remains the holy grail—value-added services for sma ll and medium-size d enter prises re -main t he driving business mo del. In exp laining t his, Ma again uses the analogy o f weiqi (Go), the Asian game that uses smalliblack and white stones on a grid-lined board. Despite its sim ple rules, the game requires consi derable menta l attention. T he ob-jective is to gain control of the board by surrounding your op -ponent’s pieces an d taking them out o f the action. Kee ping your own pieces c lose toget her reduces t heir chances o f being attac ked; keeping your pieces more widely deployed increases your own chances for contro lling the board. These two postures are gener-ally con ﬂicting; t he player constant ly has to consi der the balance between defense and offense. Ma enjoys discussing weiqi with hisifavorite aut hor, Louis C ha. It forms his menta l landscape when he is thinking about the future o f the company. Most peop le aim for an end result; Ma sees the probabilities in various shifting moves along the way and knows t hat as t he board changes, strate gy also shifts. “T hose w ho exce l at weiqi look at the overall structure,” ihe has said. “Those who are bad at it think just about the ﬁnal result.”Part o f the shifting nature o f the “board” in t he Internet realm is the way in which technology is gradually being tamed, as it were, an d made to suit t he nee ds of human beings. “Ri ght now, searc h engines are tec hnology-driven; ‘searc h’ is a game for engineers,” Ma has noted to employees. “It doesn’t really take into account the true nee ds of users. Searc h should just be a too l. It can’t c hange our lives, w hereas t he Internet can an d will change China.”How Can Y ou Catch a Tiger . . . 161Ma acquired Yahoo! China because he felt that Alibaba lacked search capability in growing the e-commerce business, and this lack was obstructing growth. After buying Yahoo! China, Ma began to mold the search capabilities in service of Alibaba goals. The general manager for search operations of Yahoo! agrees with that approach: “If you talk in terms of user satisfaction,” Tian Ji-ang declared to an audience at the March 2006 conference on search engine strategies, held in Nanjing, “no matter whether it is Yahoo!’s search functions, or Baidu, or Google, all of them are inadequate. They are the product of engineers’ brains; their man-made categorization is not in line with what people need. T echnology should be in the service of people, not the other way around. If people are in the service of technology, we have tech-nology for technology’s sake. That’s just going to frighten users away.”Some have taken exception to this view. Zhou Shaoning, president of Google’s Greater China Sales and Business Develop-ment Group, is one of them. Zhou’s response to Tian Jiang’s com-ments was that de facto change has to be propelled by technology ﬁrst. The average man in the street cannot dream up the direc-tion and degree of technological change. Only after a product has made an appearance can it be worked upon, modiﬁed, adapted. Search in general was a technology that still relied mainly on the input of technicians. At Google, therefore, engineers enjoy the highest positions. “They can deliver. Whatever you ask them to do, they can do,” he said proudly. At the same time, he admitted that products created purely by engineers were not necessarily market-ready; they needed the validation of users. Zhou Shaon-ing has pointed out that the growth of the Internet is creating a tremendous increase in the volume of information. Search is an important method of both gathering and consolidating informa-tion. It can raise the efﬁciency of people’s activities and therefore is radically changing people’s lives.162At the end of the day, Alibaba and Google have different con -cepts in mind when they discuss search. They therefore also have different formulations of market strategy. It will be interesting to watch how the different perspectives a ffect the development o f China’s future Internet in dustry.Search En gines and Keyword Servi ces“It can work onl y if it is local.” Jack Ma a pplies this mantra to Internet practices not on ly in China but also in t he Unite d States. “American Yahoo! is based on the needs of America ; Alibaba Ya -hoo! similarl y has to be based on the needs of China. It cannot simply copy.”Ma’s emphasis was necessary when Yahoo! China came un -der the Alibaba rubric, for the tem ptation was to co py and paste the old system into t he new. In or der to meet t he nee ds not on ly of the Chinese public but also of the special user groups operat -ing in the realm of Taobao and Alibaba, Ma transformed the old Yahoo! searc h engine into one t hat too k advantage of paying customers in China. Both Taobao and Alibaba offer paid serv icesthat allow clients to put their ke ywords at the head of search results. This service is connecte d to the primar y rationa le of the enterprise, which is to provide useful tools to companies engaged in e-commerce that help them make mone y. The ke yword ser -vice is not on ly an ideal sales too l for Alibaba but also is necessar y for enterprises that are using the Internet for their promotion. When buyers search the Alibaba site and come across enter prises in which they may be intereste d, they can peruse in formation that includes keyword searches .Creatin g a seamless search en gine re quired extremel y com-petent en gineers w ho understoo d the goals of the overa ll system. How Can Y ou Catch a Tiger . . . 163More importantly, it required an understanding of how to use the integrative capabilities of Internet resources in order to at-tain the goals of e-commerce. Ma was intentionally creating an e-commerce service with limitless capability. This took advantage of all the various parts of the puzzle that he was drawing together: Alipay, Yahoo!’s search engine, and so on. Ma was bringing seem-ingly disparate groups into the same arena. By integrating these, he was allowing “no change” to inﬂuence “all change,” a pro-foundly misunderstood tenet in Chinese philosophy.Yahoo! China’s share of the China search market had dropped from 30.2 percent to 15.6 percent between 2004 and 2005, and so Jack Ma decided to undertake a total face-lift of the site. In No-vember 2005 he announced to the public that Yahoo! China had changed its format. The homepage had been simpliﬁed, as noted earlier. Nonetheless, only three months later, Ma had changed his mind. After returning from a trip to the States, he declared, “When Yahoo! doesn’t act like Yahoo! is when it will be really successful.” He had just been to visit the forty engineers at the American Yahoo! headquarters who had been merged into Ali-baba. He complained to them that they lacked a feel for what the customer needed; they were behaving like, well, engineers. From now on, he hoped that engineers would look at problems from the perspective of users of the Internet. One person later revealed that, as a result, Yahoo! China’s homepage would have not only a search box but also under that some hot topics and, under the hot topics, hot content.In addition to these face-lift changes, Ma began to reorganize Yahoo!’s personnel. He began by pulling together a new high-level management team. He made Tian Jiang, Yahoo! China’s gen-eral manager, directly responsible to him. Under Tian Jiang came Li Rui, in charge of Yahoo!’s e-mail business as well as deputy general manager of all China business. Directly under him was Mao Xin, in charge of the new search portal business, including 164the original Yahoo! team. T his direct line o f comman d allowed clear communications, in theory, and was helpful in increasing control over any problems that might arise in the course of Ya -hoo! C hina’s growth. The direct line of comman d also increase d pressure on su bordinates. “Ma put a consi derable amount o f pres-sure on me,” said Tian Jiang. “He demanded that Yahoo! China’s page browsin g rate be increase d by a minimum o f 200 percent.” In addition, a num ber of new emp loyees were hired in or der to improve the portal. Prior to the merger, Yahoo!’s content de -partment tota led aroun d forty people. Alibaba now increase d this, since Ma felt that existing content was too lifeless. He felt that Yahoo! China needed to concentrate its focus on three areas: en -tertainment, s ports, an d ﬁnance. T hese three promise d the highest number of hits, an d entertainment was t he area on w hich Jack Ma chose to focus.“From now on, Ya hoo! wi ll be enterin g the entertainment ﬁeld,” announce d Jack Ma in t he early part o f the Y ear o f the Dog (2006). Entertainment had been shown to be the one thing most wanted by “Net people.” Since Ya hoo! Searc h inten ded to become China’s premier searc h engine, it followed that Yahoo! had to go into that territory. In January 2006, Jack Ma announced that he was teamin g up with Hunan Sate llite an d the Hua yi brothers to develop a comp letely new form o f entertainment s how, ca lled Ya-hoo! Searc hes for the Star s. Through entertainment , Yahoo! Searc hes for the Stars hoped to ac hieve a daily increase in t he num bers of search users. T he China Internet Association had predicted that the total search market in China would continue to maintain an annua l growth rate o f 70 percent over t he next t hree years, as it had in the years just past. T he opportunities were consi derable.Jack Ma’s January 2006 announcement about moving into entertainment led to a liaison between Ya hoo! an d three of the most famous movie directors in C hina: C hen Kaige, Feng Xiao -gang, and Zhang Jizhong. In Beijing, Yahoo! Search announced How Can Y ou Catch a Tiger . . . 165that it was investing $3.75 million (RMB 30 million) in this ven-ture. Each director was invited to make a short ad relating to the subject of Yahoo! Search. The result was to be less of an ad than a short movie, a brief video on the Internet that experimented with the possibilities of the media. Ma addressed the subject in concrete terms. “The content of most interest to the common man on the Internet is entertainment. If Yahoo! Search is to be-come the premier choice, then it must throw itself wholeheart-edly into entertainment, it must lead in entertainment.” People in the industry felt that this was a weak spot at that time. Baidu had been strong in entertainment when MP3 searches came in vogue, but it then ran up against copyright infringement of downloaded material and found it necessary to think of a better way to get trafﬁc. Jack Ma felt that short movies or video clips would perhaps be the trend in the near future, and would in any event be able to deliver good promotion results. Chen Kaige, Feng Xiaogang, and Zhang Jizhong were therefore engaged to help deliver the con-tent. The fame of these three men is stupendous in China. Their association with the project was a huge draw for hopeful young men and women of talent.The general plan in the Yahoo! Searches for the Stars was to put out a call for acting and directing talent, somewhat like the initial stages of American Idol. Any young person could participate in the contest. From January 4 to late February 2006, judges—including the three directors—would be selecting an initial 150 people to go on to the second stage of the contest. From these, they would choose thirty-six, and then nine, and the ﬁnal three. These ﬁnal-ists would be Yahoo!’s Stars. The prize: to work together with the three directors in the ﬁlming of three short ﬁlms, as actors or as assistant directors themselves, involved in all stages of the creative process. The plan called for all activities to be broadcast via the In-ternet, live, in real time. Not only were winners able to work with famous directors, but after the shoot they could, if they wanted, 166become contracte d actors wit h the Hua yi brothers. T his was ir-resistible to anyone with dreams of being a star.Led by the directors, the voters for the event would be the great mass o f public Internet users. Votin g could be done on t he Internet, using somet hing ca lled a Yahoo! Pass. Eac h holder of a Yahoo! Pass ID was allowed to cast ten votes a day. We will not follow the course o f this contest an y farther—su fﬁce it to sa y it was an ingenious way to encourage more tra fﬁc on Ya hoo!