chapter 1Put Up Your Fists!There are two sides to every ﬁght, and both invariably get hurt in a battle. Jack Ma does not understand this conventional wisdom, for he loves a good ﬁght. The tougher the ﬁght, the more he enjoys it, and the harder the work, the happier he becomes. The logic may seem strange to some, but Ma has followed this approach since he was a boy.Jack Ma was born on September 10, 1964, into a family that lived on the shores of West Lake in Hangzhou. Ma legend has it that his family was common and ordinary, but ordinary families do not live on the shores of West Lake. Ma’s mother and father spent their lives as professional performers of ping tan, a traditional 2style of storytelling and ballad singing performe d in Suz hou, in southern China.As a result of this background, Ma grew up speaking the Suzhou dialect wit h his parents, an d he has stron g attac hmentto the city an d the traditions o f that historic p lace. Suz hou has two kinds of people, as the saying goes: one kind loves to talk, and the other loves to listen. One does not have to look far into Ma’s backgroun d to ﬁnd the roots o f his astonis hing ability to extemporize onstage and his ability to inspire high perfor -mance t hrough his speeches. From c hildhood, Ma watc hed and absorbed the training o f professiona l performers, especia lly hisparents. His own performance style may be attributed to that early exposure: Ma uses sim ple and direct language to ex plain precise ly what he means. He wastes no wor ds—an d he gets to the point.Nonet heless, Ma was not t he kind of child who liked to talk much or have anyt hing to do wit h achievement. Li ke many boys his age, he was regarded as a rebel: stubborn, naughty, incorrigible , the kind of boy who had to be disciplined repeatedly, but even that discipline did not c hange him. Muc h of this stri king out against others may have had to do with his status as a social out -cast. T he Cultural Revo lution in C hina began shortly after Ma was born, an d he grew up in an environment o f extreme socia l tension. The family was on the wrong side of political correct -ness: Ma’s grandfather had been a fﬁliated with the Kuomintan g (KMT), t he side that lost in C hina’s Communist-vs.-KMT civi l war. Ma was therefore the child of a family that, legally and mor -ally, was re garded as beneath the concern o f societ y.The family was c lassiﬁed as belonging to t he “ﬁve blacks,” meaning the ﬁve categories of people who had earned the h a-tred of the masses. T hese groups included landlords, rich peas-ants, counterrevo lutionaries, evi ldoers, an d rightists, a ll of whom could be loosely summarized as people on the wrong side of the Put Up Y our Fists! 3political spectrum. Methods of persecution against the ﬁve blacks included beating and torture.Perhaps to mute a kind of rage against the world in which he found himself, Ma immersed himself in the lore and romanticism of martial arts novels. These are called wu xia novels in Chinese. Wu refers to things martial, and xia (pronounced shia) are peopleadept in martial arts but also steeped in a chivalrous approach to justice, people who belong to a brotherhood of like-minded outlaws. The link between wu xia novels and Ma’s heritage is sim-ple: the great outlaws of Chinese lore (as in the great sixteenth-century Chinese novel Outlaws of the Marsh, also known as Water Margin) operated around the lakes and rivers of southern China, speciﬁcally in the Jiangsu and Zhejiang regions. Suzhou is in Ji-angsu; Hangzhou is in neighboring Zhejiang. The novel incor-porated folktales and legends from as early as the twelfth century. By maintaining a profound emotional link with the past, Ma was able in his childhood to ride through a desperate period of social unrest in China.Social unrest during the Cultural Revolution was a product of many factors including, for a large segment of society, personal and prolonged acquaintance with hunger. The problems of the period known as the Three Y ears of Natural Disaster in China were originally attributed to natural causes, but are now under-stood to be due partly to natural disasters and some 60 percent to mismanagement. These hard years began after the Great Leap Forward of 1958, when national policies disrupted the normal raising and distribution of food. In the ensuing years of famine, some thirty million people are said to have died as a direct or indirect result of not having enough to eat. Children born dur-ing or shortly after this harsh time were unavoidably stunted in their natural growth. Ma’s diminutive size may or may not have resulted from malnourishment, but his feisty nature is evidence that, however challenged, he was determined to survive.4Perhaps because he was so sma ll, Ma a lways wante d to be-come a kind of martial arts master in life. Profoundly inﬂuenced by wuxia novels, he fought with anybody who gave him any reason to put up his ﬁsts, but he fought main ly to stic k up for and defend his friends, an accepta ble code of honor to him.The unfortunate thing about Ma’s pugnacious attitude to -ward life was t hat he was, an d remains, s kinny and short. He fought often, an d he often lost. “I was scrawny w hen I was young, but I was a terriﬁc ﬁghter,” Ma says of himself. “I was never afraid of opponents w ho were bigger than I.” He was badly woun ded a number of times, an d once had to be taken to t he hospita l to get stitched up and put back together again. Since there was no anes -thesia at t hat time, he gritted his teet h and came t hrough with an even stronger wi ll.Nobody among teachers, neighbors, and family held out any hope that a boy who so loved to ﬁght wou ld amount to muc h in the future. His friends were t he only ones w ho disagree d: they considered him a righ teous hero. From an early age, Ma had been able to create a co hesive bond amon g a select group of peers.There is an o ld adage in C hinese t hat says one can see how big the man will become when the child is just three, and one can see what the old man wi ll look like when he is seven. Ma’s character was forme d quite ear ly, and anyone looking at him at the age of seven would have recognized one or two key traits. He hated mediocrit y, falseness, an d bullying. He wou ld not to lerate injustice, an d clearly, during t he Cu ltural Revo lution, injustice surrounded him pervasively. T oo, he was determined to work for ideals: perhaps because o f the inﬂuence o f wuxianovels, he was fully convince d of the power o f right-min ded dreams.“Men are made bigger by adversity and injustice” is one of Ma’s favorite sa yings. Ma was in a difﬁcult position at home, since his parents were un derstan dably trying to escape criticism an d keep a low proﬁle. When Jack came home bloody after another Put Up Y our Fists! 5ﬁght, his father whipped him with a bamboo rod. Ma notes to-day that he tried hard to hold himself back from ﬁghting, mostly because he did not want to stir up trouble for the family and did not want his parents to be disappointed in him. At times, appar-ently, the bullying became too great. The gang of his rivals in Hangzhou often used psychological tricks to goad him into a ﬁght. One incident has become famous in the lore surround-ing Jack Ma: security forces came to the family home, targeting Ma’s grandfather but at the same time using Maoist language to criticize the young boy. They told him he had better behave, or else. The rivals had sneaked up and were watching from outside the windows. The next day, at school, when the teacher used the same phrase from the Maoist textbook, a schoolmate shot Ma a snickering look. Ma threw his textbook at the boy, the boy in turn threw his book bag at Ma, and a battle ensued. And so we can see that Ma grew up ﬁghting for his family name; he grew up in the midst of struggle.Mathematics vs. EnglishPeople say that if you want to change the world, you should ﬁrst change yourself. Ma seems to have done the opposite: he changed the world but preserved himself much as he was. He started out small and unremarkable, which he remains, and while he initially struggled with math, he was a whiz in English—and this is still true today.Different from other children from the beginning, he was not particularly charming or adorable, and he got terrible marks, generally failing math. The strange thing was that he had unbe-lievably ﬂuent English: in the 1970s and 1980s, when math and engineering trumped humanities, this was not the way teachers 6thought things should be. Ma’s stu bbornness an d his bellicose na-ture naturally inﬂuenced his studies. In middle school, however, he was fortunate to have a likeable young woman as his geog -raphy teacher. Her teac hing style was natura l and lively, and she often to ld stories a bout herself in or der to i llustrate her points. Once she told a story that beneﬁted Ma for years to come, to the point t hat he believes it actua lly changed his whole life.The story was quite simp le. One day, the teac her was wa lking along the shore of West Lake and some foreigners asked her to tell them about C hinese geography. Her En glish was good enou gh that she cou ld respon d intelligently. “Y ou a ll have to stu dy geog -raphy,” she told the students, “but even more important is for you to study English. For w hen foreigners as k you somet hing and you can’t answer t hem, you wi ll make all Chinese peop le lose face.”Ma went home to pick up some money, and on the very same day spent six mao ,aroun d two U.S. dollars at t he time, to buy a ra dio. He use d this to listen to t he Eng lish broadcast every day. Ma was twelve years old when he started applying himself to learnin g English. Nowa days most C hinese c hildren wou ld feel that starting Eng lish at the age o f twelve was too late. Bac k then, when the policy of opening and reform had not yet begun and nobody knew w hat political movement mi ght be comin g next, studying Eng lish at the age o f twelve was a precocious decision.Ma’s parents had no English at all. They could not write the alphabet and so they were no help in his self-study. His e fforts ran up against many o bstacles, but he carrie d on main ly because he so thoroughly enjoyed the language. He soon started haunt -ing the shores o f West La ke, trying to latch onto foreigners wit h whom he cou ld practice spea king Eng lish. From t he start, he was thick-skinned when it came to making mistakes. Soon, peopl ewho talked to him wou ld push the glasses back on their noses to take anot her look: they assume d that he was an overseas C hinese recently returned to the mainland.Put Up Y our Fists! 7In the course of this self-study, Ma made quite a few foreign friends. T wo of them were critical in his understanding of West-ern thinking and will be discussed later. Others taught him much about the outside world, even though he had never put one foot outside the gates of China. After starting college, Ma would still regularly seek out foreigners in hotels with whom to carry on conversations. His many years of diligence laid the foundations for a high degree of competence and cultural understanding.Ma remembers his early student days fondly. If you ask him what he is most proud of, he will tell you stories relating to his ac-complishments in English. He’ll tell you about using his pedicab to serve as an English-speaking guide for foreigners at the age of thirteen. He’ll tell you about his mistakes and how they didn’t kill him—his mantra seems to be that you may have problems, but if they don’t kill you, you can always get up and start again. How-ever, other than being admired by people for his English prowess, Ma will not tell you about anything else he experienced in those years because it was not an easy time.Ma Goes to CollegeCompared to luminaries of the Internet in China, men whose names include Jiang Nanchun, CEO of Focus Media, and Chen Tianqiao, CEO of Shanda, Jack Ma had an arduous path to col-lege. Jiang Nanchun was sent to East China Normal College just because of one essay for which he won a prize. Chen Tianqiao graduated from Fudan University on the strength of being an outstanding young soldier in Shanghai. Both of these men are now regarded as among the richest in China, their wealth mea-suring more than $1 billion. In contrast, Ma never went to a ﬁrst-rate middle school or grade school, let alone college. All were 8third- or fourth-tier institutions. Even more interestin g, he too k the college entrance examination three times and failed the ﬁrst two.After failing the examination t he ﬁrst time, Ma began a de-livery service wit h his pedicab. He a lso app lied to wor k in a hotel but was turned down because he was so short. But after many setbacks and tremen dous determination he ﬁnally succee ded in getting into co llege. Since he has become famous, Ma has not been reticent in talking about these failures. On the contrary, he likes to use his own failures to encoura ge others. He jokes that his own failures in co llege exams mig ht give hope to t hose w hose marks are bad and who need a boost  to their self-conﬁdence. Ma believes ﬁrmly that you have to ta ke hold of your own life and make it into somet hing, not wait passive ly for events to happen. He also believes that this can make a success out of most anyone. “I am rea lly rather stu pid,” he says. “My brain is so sma ll that I can only think of one t hing at a time. I f you as k me t hree things in a row, I can’t absorb them. ”In passing tests an d getting into both high school and then college, Ma’s biggest hurdle was mat hematics. T he Chinese po licy at the time adhered to what is described as a “wooden bucket theory,” and college admissions were ru led by this theory. The capacity o f the bucket was determine d not by the length of the longest staves around its sides but by its shortest. One’s total score, or “capacity,” had to be deﬁned by one’s lowest mar ks, not one’s best. Ma’s longest “s hort staves” were so s hort that in e ffect his whole bucket could contain very little. His shortest staves were, of course, in mat h. He sim ply couldn’t ﬁgure out how to do mat h.The ﬁrst time Ma too k the college exam, he got a mar k that signiﬁed total defeat. Head hanging down, he went to work as a hired laborer. As mentione d earlier, he responded to a hotel help-wanted ad; he and his cousin , who was ta ll and handsome, went together. The cousin was hired, but Ma went home rejected. After Put Up Y our Fists! 9that, he worked transporting things, including magazines for three publishers with whom his father had connections. He would ride his pedicab over and pack magazines, twenty-ﬁve to a bundle, then ride the ten kilometers to the train station that shipped the magazines to other places.One day, Ma was hired to help copy documents at an institu-tion called the Zhejiang Dance Troupe Association. Here, he got hold of a book called Life, by the author Lu Yao. Fate may well have determined the serendipitous appearance of this book. It so inﬂuenced Ma that it changed his thinking in short order and helped guide the future course of his life. Just as Lu Yao’s later book, A Common World, inﬂuenced a generation of young peoplein the 1970s, Life inﬂuenced all who lived through the 1960s. Its hero, Gao Jialin, was a so-called intellectual living in a farming village. Although talented, Gao was not able to achieve his ideals in life. He tried hard, but something always happened to push him backward just when he was reaching a new stage. As a result, he never had the opportunity to develop his talents.Ma saw himself in this sad story. More importantly, he saw that the path of life is long, but there are critical moments when things change, and the outcome of those moments can be determined in a very short time. Nobody’s life is a straight line, everyone faces forks in the road, and most of life is ﬁlled with tribulations. Precisely because of this, people should face forward with opti-mism and not be surprised when they encounter problems. They should recognize that they can ride over these problems, laugh at life with courage, and use their own enthusiasm to create their lives. This profoundly optimistic approach to life may have been enhanced by a reading of Lu Yao, but Life may also have been just the catalyst to allow Ma to exercise his own native instincts.Now Ma decided that he would try again to get into college. He began preparing a second time for the exam. China’s college entrance exams were given once a year. The practice of national 10exams had been reinstate d in 1978, a fter a hiatus o f more t han a decade. As an indication of how hard it was to get into college, the following statistics from the Ministry of Education are illustrative: 6.1 mi llion people registered for the exam in 1978, 5.8 mi llion people too k it, an d of these mi llions, a tota l of 402,000 peop lewere admitted to institutions of higher education. In 1980 and 1981, w hen Ma was ta king the exam, t he huge initia l bulge of aspirants had not yet wor ked its way t hrough the system, so it is not surprising that many excellent candidates were rejected.Ma too k study courses in t he summer o f 1980, bicycling back and forth between his home an d the school. At the secon d exam, Ma’s math mark came up from 1 to 19, still far below the passing grade. Even worse, t his secon d failure discoura ged his par-ents. T hey had held on to t he hope that he mig ht go to co llege; now they asked him to go out and ﬁnd a job.For the next year, Ma wor ked days and studied at night, and spent every Sun day in t he library at Z hejiang University. Here he was to meet six of the key people with whom he is happilyworking in the realm of e-commerce to day. This time, w hen he prepare d for the exam, Ma too k a different approac h to mat h: he memorized formulas and equations as if he were memorizing literature. T he age-old practice in t he Chinese sc holastic tra dition is to memorize an d recite literature: a ll classics have been stu died in this way, and Ma simply followed this ancient way.Three days before the third exam, one o f Ma’s professors, Professor Y u, sai d to him in a somew hat discouraging way, “Ma Y un, your math is dreadful. If you pass this time, I will start writ -ing my name u pside down.” This had the salutary effect of mak-ing Jac k Ma angry , but it a dded to his determination to actua lly pass math; it was something he remembered for many years.In contrast to suc h pessimism was anot her inci dent that Ma remem bers, w hich resonate d far more deeply than any negative approach. A young woman from the countryside had such spirit Put Up Y our Fists! 11that she was invited to be on the TV program Dialogue, of compa-rable fame to the Oprah show in the United States. In the course of the show, this young woman, whose education reached only through the second year of middle school, said, “There will be light in your eyes only if there are dreams in your heart.” This was more in line with Jack Ma’s beliefs. He took the exam for the third time, and this time he passed. On the morning of the exam, he had chanted aloud the ten basic mathematical formulas, and during the exam he applied them, one by one. Coming out of the exam, he compared answers with his classmates and knew that he deﬁnitely had come up to the mark. This time, his math grade was 79—not high, but enough to squeak through.T o most people in China, a mark of 79 in math would seem pathetic; to Jack Ma, it was above the passing mark of 70, and that was what counted. Unfortunately, it was still not high enough for him to be allowed into the general college curriculum, known in China as ben ke. China divides college into regular courses of study and a more limited occupational-education college. Ma was permitted only to take the more limited curriculum. However, now that the god of good fortune had started smiling on Jack Ma, he helped him along even more. The rolls for ben ke at Hangzhou Normal University were not totally ﬁlled, so Ma was allowed to enter the ben ke program there. He was assigned to study foreign languages.The comments of Professor Y u may have spurred Ma on to greater efforts: we do not know if that statement about writing his name upside down was made with good intentions or not. We do know that Jack Ma was already well on his way to becoming a pro at disregarding the doubts and opposition of others. He has often stated, “People who don’t like me, or who are opposed to people like me, are very much against us. Those who appreciate people like me are very much for us. I don’t want everyone to like me, and that could never be the case anyway. But if everyone was 12against me, t hat wou ldn’t necessari ly be bad. What I most despise are attitudes in the middle, the ‘middling.’ I am against medioc -rity in every way. And the degrees by which I measure may be different. Sa y, for exam ple, that the degree of your en durance for having people not like you is twenty mi llion. Someone e lse’s may be thirty million. Mine would be two hundred million.” Ma’s ability to “ta ke it” stoo d him in good stead, and he had ﬁnally been a dmitted to co llege. He entere d college wit h tremen dous excitement and curiosity. His path there could be called a route from life to death and back again.College and a DreamIn 1984 Ma was twenty years old. He had ﬁnally, with his “block -head energy,” been allowed to stri de through the gates o f college. The college he entere d was not impressive or famous; in fact it could not have been more ordinary. The term normal in the name lHangzhou Norma l College refers to an institution t hat prepares people to teac h school, genera lly middle or high school. Ma was generously allowed to enter the regular full curriculum: he was told he was being allowed to “join the ranks of revolution,” a l-lowed to “reform himself.”Both the English language and the idea of teaching ﬁt him perfectly. Spoken En glish was his stron g suit, an d he took to co l-lege as a ﬁsh takes to water. He sailed smoothly along, wind at his back, heart full of enthusiasm, and body full of martial arts vigor. With the simple opportunit y to go to co llege, Ma began his quest for the outstanding in life. From the day he entered college, fate began to smile upon him. He found the classes easy and realized that he did not nee d to spend all his time stu dying. As a resu lt, he began to involve himself in the student union and was soon Put Up Y our Fists! 13elected its president. Later, he was elected president of the entire League of Student Unions of Hangzhou. T o a student from the lower tier of colleges, this was something of a miracle.Many of his peers looked at this transformation and at what Ma has since gone on to accomplish, and wonder how it all hap-pened. “This is the same guy who used to eat in our dining hall,” they say, “but there he is, and here we are, still sleeping away on the same old campus.”Ma himself has strong opinions about achieving success. He says, “I personally know that others are better at calculating than I am. I know that others can also talk better than I can. But I was quite successful in college and I have been successful in found-ing a company. Therefore, I tell young people, if Jack Ma can be successful, I believe that 80 percent of people can also be success-ful.”Part of Ma’s success comes from his ability to rouse people’s enthusiasm, and he attributes that ability to his years of teaching. “The ability to stand up and speak in front of people was devel-oped, trained into me, in the process of my teaching. Now, when I get up onstage I don’t prepare. The minute I open my mouth, I can’t hold back what I have to say.” Ma’s ability to talk is as famed in Internet circles; he is known worldwide as stylish, charming, and frank. After founding Alibaba, this man who was Hangzhou born and bred and had never left its environs was able to go abroad and, in the most carefree, easy manner, win customers and supporters among Americans and Europeans.When Ma graduated, he was the only one among ﬁve hun-dred graduates of the ben ke program to be placed as a teacher in a higher institution. The others were placed in middle or high schools. He was appointed to teach at the Hangzhou Electronics T echnology College. There he spent the next ﬁve years, con-scientiously teaching English to young people. He would not have lasted that long had he not made a promise to one of his 14mentors, an o lder man w ho came to visit him ear ly in his ca-reer. This leader from a local institute knew that Ma , restless and ambitious, might be inclined to head out on his own, as manyof his peers were doing. Jack Ma felt that commitments were binding. He too k to heart t he request by his elder and promise d he would stay for ﬁve years, and he did.In the course o f those ﬁve years, Ma became famous locally as a dynamic an d irresisti ble professor. Stu dents wou ld cut c lasses just to come see him “perform.” The results of his teaching style were quite astonis hing: students w ho had little foundation in En glish soon found that they were opening t heir mout hs and speaking a foreign language. Ma is proud of his techniques. “I have analyzed Li Yang’s ‘Craz y English,’ ” he says of Li’s unort hodox met hod of teaching Eng lish, “and if I had joine d in that business I cou ld have topped him. My tricks truly are able to make a person speak a foreign language.” Durin g this time, however, man y of Ma’s peers were setting up businesses or going a broad. And so, in a ddition to teaching at the Hangzhou Electronics T echnology College, Ma began teac hing night classes to friends invo lved in foreign trade. This put him in touc h with the wider wor ld of business; it a lso allowed him to form a core group of comrades, several of whom remain A libaba’s key personne l today.