chapter 9The Personal Life and Thoughts of Jack MaFamilyDecember 15, 2005, marked the date of a major change in Aliba-ba’s senior-level personnel. On that day, Jack Ma announced that an employee named Zhang Ying would be leaving the company. When he made this announcement, the auditorium was at ﬁrst silent, then many in the audience began to cry.Zhang Ying was Jack Ma’s wife. She had been with the com-pany from the beginning and rendered outstanding ser vice. Her decision to leave the company was initially rejected by the board 178of directors; em ployees were a lso against it. Z hang Ying herself stood up to this pressure and slowly but surely persuaded the company to let her go. She told the company that this was not a decision ma de lightly and it was not Jack Ma’s decision; it was made voluntari ly on her own. “S he feels in part t hat it is improper to have the CEO’s wife there in the company,” Ma tried to ex -plain. “No matter w hat that person is doing, or how we ll, it looks funny.” Outsi ders assume d that the decision was ta ken because the company was maturing, transitioning from start-up to regular operations, an d it was no longer appropriate to have the wife of the founder invo lved. Jack Ma himself saw it as a persona l choice. “She has had no life of her own for years. She has no friends outside the com pany; she has spent all day every day, from t he beginning, insi de this business.”Ma and his wife, Zhang Ying, came to know each other in college. First ac quaintances, t hen friends, then lovers, t hen man and wife, they have been toget her ever since. As t he Chinese say-ing goes, they have been “immersed in the same juices,” to the extent that they operate as one. Z hang Ying has always remaine d in the backgroun d, as a support to Jac k Ma, but friends say t hat in the ﬁnal analysis, the two rely on each other mutually and are total partners.Their son is now in high school and shows great promise, at least with regard to his height. “He’s already taller than I am!” ex -claims Jack Ma, im plying that perhaps the son long ago shucked off the concerns t hat kept Ma s hort. W hen Ma too k his son to visit his own father, Ma jokingly told him, “See how well I’m rais -ing my son? W hat happened when you were raisin g me?” Bot h men knew we ll that what had happene d was t he so-ca lled Three Y ears of Natural Disaster and the ensuing Cultural Revolution. That it can be joked about to day is a tri bute to t he resilience o f the Chinese peop le.Ma once took a question from reporters that stopped him in The Personal Life and Thoughts of Jack Ma 179his tracks, albeit brieﬂy. The question was, “What are you plan-ning for Valentine’s Day [August 11]?” “I never celebrate Valen-tine’s Day,” he ﬁnally responded, then added that he really was too busy. One can understand the family life issues that this man’s schedule might involve. Ma became a celebrity in 2005 when Alibaba acquired Yahoo! China. Chased by the media, his image became ubiquitous overnight. “I saw myself so often on the news that I got sick of myself,” he later commented. He had always maintained a friendly relationship with members of the press, but now Jack Ma began to hold a grudge against them.The person he could least neglect in his new celebrity sta-tus remained his wife. Like every successful man, Jack Ma has a woman behind him. He has indicated that there is not a moment he does not appreciate the “silent woman” by his side. Just how silent and supportive is this woman? T o all appearances, she is the ultimate partner. In 1995, when Ma was ﬁrst founding the company, he left his teaching position and threw himself into the crazy world of the Internet. Zhang Ying did not object. Instead, she helped him pull together the funds that formed the initial in-vestment in the enterprise. In the single room that served as their ﬁrst ofﬁce, she would count each bit of money before spending it. T ogether Zhang Ying and Jack Ma created the ﬁrst B2B Web page in the history of China’s Internet.By 2005, ten years had gone by and Alibaba’s “family” had grown to more than two thousand employees; the business had in fact become a whale that even dared to swallow Yahoo! China. Zhang Ying decided it was time for her to take a break.“In fact, she is not at all a silent-type woman,” Jack Ma has emphasized when questioned about their relationship. “She is outstanding as a businesswoman as well as in her personal life. Professionally, she has done extremely well.” Ma cannot conceal a sense of pride about her, but at the same time he is candid about who is boss. When asked, “If there is a conﬂict between the two 180of you, w ho sacri ﬁces a little more?” His answer: “Natura lly she does. Her help to me is total. No matter whether it is profession -ally or personally, she totally understands and supports me.” In China, Jack Ma is consi dered to be a fortunate an d very straight-forwar d man.Jack Ma’s Idol, and His Martial Arts Avocatio nFew in China can resist the addictive novels of Jin Y on g (the pen name o f Louis C ha); Jack Ma succum bed many years a go and has modeled his life on the martial code described in the stories. He has said he has “one idol in his heart,” and that is Louis Cha. The author, who is now in his mid-eighties, has described his relation-ship with Jack Ma as one that transcends generational differences and is a genuine friendshi p.Jack Ma em phatically describes his business strate gy in wuxiaterms, and much of his understanding of these terms comes directl y from Cha’s novels. As noted above, these combine martial arts wit h traditiona l Chinese cu lture an d Chinese history. As we learned in the ﬁrst chapter of this book, wuxia means something akin to “martial heroes,” but with dee ply resonatin g layers of cul -tural and philosophical meanin g. Louis C ha lived most o f his life in a British colony, and his exploration of these layers may reﬂect a profound lon ging for home, a home that for man y decades he was una ble to visit. C ha was born on Fe bruary 6, 1924, in t he same province that Jack Ma comes from: Zhejiang Province in southern China. His famil y name is Cha, thou gh it is pronounced za in the Man darin dialect. Kni ghted in 1981 by Queen E liza-beth, he is considered as much a British treasure as Chinese. The Cha famil y moved to Hon g Kong, where Louis became one of the co-founders of the Hon g Kong daily news paper Ming Pao inThe Personal Life and Thoughts of Jack Ma 1811959. He was the paper’s ﬁrst editor in chief, holding this position until 1993, when he retired. At the same time, Louis Cha began writing novels that soon made him the best-selling Chinese au-thor in the world. Over one hundred million copies of his ﬁfteen novels have ofﬁcially been sold worldwide; this ﬁgure does not include pirated copies, which undoubtedly propel it to multiples of that number.Five of these ﬁfteen novels have been published in English. The most famous are The Book and the Sword (1955), The Legend of the Condor Heroes (1957), Flying Fox of Snowy Mountain (1959), andThe Deer and the Cauldron (1969). Cha’s last novel was written in 1972. Although Cha has received many and varied awards and honorary degrees, he began in 2007 a four-year course of study for his nonhonorary Ph.D. in Chinese history at the University of Cambridge.Ma has read the novel The Smiling Proud Wanderer more times than any other book. The character he most appreciates is Feng Qingyang because he admires the way that character moves natu-rally, without premeditation. “He has thought through everything and internalized all moves in advance, so that he doesn’t have to think about them. They are a part of him.” As noted above, the word move is a special term in Chinese that signiﬁes not just physical action but also mental discipline and focus. In martial arts training, the mental focus is as important, if not more so, than the physical result. This training is of cardinal importance to Jack Ma; his own moves in the realm of business are what have brought him recognition as a master of both strategy and well-timed ac-tion. Ma also compares himself to Feng the teacher—his mission in life is to bring along students who can surpass him. “I too come from the life of being a teacher. I most like it when my colleagues and my students can surpass me.”Among the wu xia concepts Jack Ma put into actual use in his business dealings is a sense of key values. T ermed the “Six 182Sacred Swor ds” in A libaba parlance, t hese va lues are reco gnized by Western investment ﬁrms as bringing a major contribution to the bottom line. They are factored into an employee’s per -formance ratin gs and so are rein forced in ver y real-world terms. The Six Swor ds derive origina lly from w hat are ca lled the Nine Swords of Dugu, although nine were consolidated to six at Ali -baba. (Du gu is a c haracter in certain o f Cha’s nove ls, including The Smi ling Prou d Wanderer,The Return o f the Con dor Heroes , andThe Deer an d the Cau ldron.)Another saying that has been in ﬂuentia l in Ma’s t hinking is “No moves trumps having moves.” Once an opponent knows a person’s moves, the opponent can use those against him. This relates to t he fundamenta l idea in martia l arts t hat a person’s own strengt h can be turne d against him, ma ke him off balance, ma ke him lose what had been his core defense. “Y our opponent’s stron -gest points are a lso his wea kest,” sa ys Ma. “Most people think that the places to attac k are t hose that show wea kness. But t he strengths are generally vulnerable. And the opposite is true: when everyone thinks there is a great danger in a particu lar strate gy, you have to look closely for there may be great opportunities hiding inside.”In genera l, Ma is a contrarian w ho uses wuxia thinking to conceptua lize scenarios t hat others mig ht miss. In Western terms, the phrase “thinking outside the box” is a start on understand -ing the process, but it is re latively unidimensiona l com pared to the multidimensiona l training t hat wuxia nove ls talk about. T he training includes sustained focus on logical consequences. For ex -ample, one discipline is to visua lize a far-focus an d then a near-focus rea lity, then keep the vision in min d as you c lose your eyes and mentally move your reality from one place to another. The same is done in terms of time: training an internal eye to see dif -ffferent rea lities or scenarios at different times as factors c hange. Sports psychologists are aware of the beneﬁts of mental training The Personal Life and Thoughts of Jack Ma 183for physical performance; wu xia masters have used these tricks for centuries. Jack Ma has said that he sees the world as an enormous weiqi board, which similarly requires sustained logical thinking and focus. In using the moves and the mental training of wu xiamasters, he has so far been able to apply ancient traditions to modern business with considerable success.Natural-Born PerformerIt is clear that Jack Ma has absorbed the lessons of martial arts to an unusual degree and applies them to his business strategy. It is equally clear to most who have heard Jack Ma speak that he is a natural-born performer.Jack Ma has street smarts. He speaks to the heart of an issue in down-home language and will never be accused of a lack of self-conﬁdence. As his friend Louis Cha says, “he strides the heavens like a white stallion.” This is a take-off on the name Ma (meaning “horse”), but it also refers to the ancient Asian tradition of a white steed galloping through metaphysical realms at the head of his tribe. The white horse in Mongolian, Tibetan, and later Chinese philosophy is a being that can penetrate universes with a super-natural understanding. Not a businessman, MBA, programmer, nor engineer, Jack Ma is seen as someone who transcends these limited spheres. T o his admirers, he strides the heavens.It is refreshing, therefore, to hear Ma look at his own failures and derive lessons from them. He has made several about-face turns in business strategy. As a result, he keeps people guessing: he never seems to play by the conventional rules of the game. Dur-ing the depths of the Internet “winter,” Ma was secretly building Taobao. The cooperation with Yahoo! China has shocked many people in the ﬁeld. In 2007 the entire company was reorganized 184prior to t he listing of Alibaba.com on t he Hon g Kong stock ex-change, and it will take some time for the industry to digest all the implications. Ma intends to have Alibaba join the ranks of the Fortune 500 in 2009. T his latest gamble represents his biggest throw o f the dice, an d it is un deniable that many are waiting for him to fall from grace.But Jack Ma has a trac k recor d as a winner. From an ear ly age he liked a goo d ﬁght, and he has kept that feisty attitu de as an adult. At the same time, he has occasionally revealed a deeper sense o f socia l responsibility, the desire to in ﬂuence fundamenta l social change. One sma ll anec dote illustrates t his basic drive. It relates to the very ﬁrst time Ma appeared on television, back in 1995. He reca lls:We had just moved our business in Han gzhou out of m y home toa separate o fﬁce. I wou ld ride my bike back to the ofﬁce at eig ht in the evening, a fter dinner. One nig ht, I su ddenly came across abunch of people removin g a manhole from over the water main in a street. T here must have been ﬁve or six o f these guys, stan d-ing aroun d using a big woo den po le to pry it o ff. I assume d they were going to steal the cover and sell it as scra p metal for somemoney. T he thing was, a few days ear lier I had seen a story in t hepaper a bout how a c hild had fallen into one o f these holes anddrowned after someone took the manhole cover. So it u pset me toseepeople stea ling anot her cover. T here were a num ber of them, however, an d just one o f me, p lus they were big. I looked aroun dand didn’t see an y policemen, and the few people nearb y weren’t taking any notice o f this. So I ro de on a little, then turne d aroun dand rode back, and I went back and forth like this, trying to decidewhat to do. Finall y, I couldn’t stand it an y longer. I sto pped near the men. I kept one foot on my pe dal as I s houted at one o f them, “Y ou put that back!” I was t hinking that if they charged me, Icould run. I raised m y ﬁst at them as I shouted. So one of the menThe Personal Life and Thoughts of Jack Ma 185did walk over to me and he said, “What did you say?” That actually pleased me, because here they were responding. I said I wanted the men to put the manhole back in its place. The man then asked me what I thought they were doing. I said, “Y ou’re getting ready to take that manhole and you’d better put it back.” As I said it, I thought it was a pretty stupid question on his part. Looking around, I ﬁnally realized that I was being ﬁlmed, on television. The TV station was doing a kind of psychology experiment, ﬁnding out what people would do about the theft, how long it would take for someone to stand up against it.WealthOn October 17, 2005, Jack Ma was listed as number four in a list of thirty names of the wealthiest entrepreneurs in the IT ﬁeld in China. This ranking can be accomplished only by published re-ports of wealth, so it skips over privately held fortunes. Privately held wealth is able to operate in a freer manner than wealth that is subject to government scrutiny, and therefore some people feel it is a most unhappy thing to be put on the list. Ma ﬁnds it un-fortunate for other reasons as well: the ranking creates a taste for money that affects people’s attitudes. Worshiping wealth changes a community’s sense of values.This is not the fault merely of a list, of course. Ma and oth-ers feel that “we are living in an age of wealth” in which money is the yardstick for measuring life. As major fortunes are being made in China, a few senior businesspeople are beginning to be more philanthropic, some admittedly as a form of public penance, others because they understand the leverage their wealth can have on social change. Ma is ambivalent about philanthropy—but not about social change. He likes to think of himself not as a 186businessman but as an entre preneur. T o him, businessmen sim-ply try to amass money, whereas entrepreneurs have the more important mission of bringing about positive change. “T o busi -nessmen an d tradespeople, most ever ything is done in or der to make money. Entrepreneurs, in contrast, create va lue. By creat -ing value for society, they inﬂuence society. Making money is a fundamenta l attribute o f entre preneurs, but it is not your entire capability.” Ma exp lained this attitu de in a heartfelt response to an interviewer’s questions on CCTV . He went on to say that he felt that philanthropists carr y aroun d a shadow over t heir activities: “Whenpeople chase after wea lth, in a sense t hey also look down on it even while they are enjoying its pleasures. So those who engage in philanthropy are o ften a little con ﬂicted. Remem ber that saying, ‘So ric h all he has left is money.’ Few peop le talk about that saying right now, and the reason is that we are in a period in history whenpeople are piling up capital and not wantin g to think too muc h about its downsi de. The motivation to c hase after money right now is very strong. As a result, people’s attitude t o-ward wealth is different from w hat it was before.”Another saying t hat Ma likes is “I f we are going too fast, we need to slow down a little, wait for our souls to catch up.” He feels that raw wea lth is a not a good indicator o f quality of life; an in dividual’s well-being cannot be measure d pure ly in terms of money. All of this sounds like protesting too much, since it is being said by a ver y wealthy man. But Ma quite speciﬁcally chal-lenges t he conventiona l attitu de towar d money. “A lot of peop leunderstand how to make money, and there are plenty of peopl ein the wor ld who can ma ke mone y. There are not man y who can inﬂuence t he wor ld, push society to ma ke itself better. T o ma ke a great company, that’s what you have to do.” Wealth is incidental, as deﬁned by the piling up of mone y, and Ma is am bitious enou gh to want to c hange C hina in a fundamenta l way: “Speci ﬁcally, I want to change the history of China’s e-commerce.”The Personal Life and Thoughts of Jack Ma 187A Missionary for E-CommerceIn carrying out e-commerce, the most important thing is to keep doing what you are doing right now with passion, to keep it up.—Jack MaAlibaba is beginning to take its place among those companies that bring to mind an individual with a mission. With Matsushita, one thinks of its founder, Matsushita Konosuke; Whampoa brings to mind Li Ka-shing; Microsoft is Bill Gates. Jack Ma’s mission is e-commerce.When Ma speaks, his hands are always waving around. He never stands still but always moves as though preparing to attack. In any interview with the press, he takes the opportunity to pros-elytize for e-commerce. He wants to make sure that this newly arrived vehicle is daily more familiar to every person in China. He believes e-commerce will restructure the way all business and commerce are done, resulting in radical savings in energy, envi-ronment, and human effort. As a result, he has become known as a kind of spiritual proselytizer in China’s world of business.One narrowly deﬁned example of e-commerce beneﬁts to the Chinese business community is often summed up as “Chi-nese people vs. Wal-Mart.” Wal-Mart buys in superlarge quanti-ties and is thereby able to squeeze down prices of small sup-pliers. In China today, more than four-ﬁfths of all business is conducted by small and medium-sized enterprises. Since there are an estimated 32 million such enterprises in the country, sup-plying cost-saving services to this needy group of customers is, in Jack Ma’s opinion, not only good business but also good for the entire economy of China. At the same time, he feels it will be good for the world in streamlining business links, saving in areas where the extra funds can more proﬁtably be put into in-novation and a better world.188That, brieﬂy, is the theory. In order to promote that theory, Ma has come u p with a num ber of soun d bites that press home t he message:We want to give commerce back to busines speople; that is, allow businesspeople themselves to choose what the y need , the language in w hich they nee d to operate, t he technology they need to use .E-commerce is a process that uses modern methods to in -crease tra de opportunities, to raise t he efﬁciency o f produc-tion and trade , and to lower costs.Even the most perfect product will not be acce pted by the market unless it is use ful to the mar ket. If there are rea l ben-eﬁts to busines speople and enter prises, a product wi ll ﬂy. E-commerce has to deliver those real beneﬁts.The winners o f e-commerce in t he future wi ll not be tradi-tional enter prises, but the y also will not be purely Internetcompanies. The future winners will mer ge the methods o f both.What makes us successful as a com pany is that we are onl y astep and a half ahead of others. The reason this is best is that products we put before the public can be adopted by them, actuall y used b y them . People need to feel that our e-com-merce tools are sim ple and eas y. More than two ste ps ahead of peop le means you lose that imme diate use fulness.There are two as pects to e-commerce. One is voluntar y, theother is forced. The establishment of trust s ystems belon gs tothe forced aspect. I te ll everyone t hat when Alibaba mem bersuse the TrustPass, it’s like the doctor forcing a sick person to take a certain medicine: “Here, take this, it will be good fo r you.” The Personal Life and Thoughts of Jack Ma 189   E-commerce has no “best” model. All it has is a model that is most suited to yourself. Alibaba is not so much an e-com-merce company as we are an electronic ser vices company.    Y ou can’t do e-commerce in one fell swoop—one shout and you all rise up. Building the systems is an incremental pro-cess.    SARS made everyone realize that e-commerce is good. E-commerce allowed business to go on without  people infecting everyone else. That’s not to say that SARS made e-commerce into something even better. It simply enabled recognition.   The two biggest problems in e-commerce right now are safety or the security of transactions, and trust. Of these, the more critical is trust.  The most attractive thing about e-commerce is its openness.