chapter 5Taobao: A New Weapon in  Jack Ma’s ArsenalIn May 2003, a notice appeared on Alibaba’s internal Web site that seemed to warn employ-ees about a fast-developing Web site called Taobao. The notice said, “Attention, a group of  people are quickly creating a site very similar to Alibaba, but for individual consumers. It’s name is Taobao.” Debate began immediately inside the company about this new threat.  People were soon talking about nothing else in their spare time, but senior management appeared unaware of the problem and remained mute.118Alibaba employees began to get angry, won dering why man-agement did not investigate this looming problem. In July, Alibaba announced that it was investing $12 million (RMB 100 million) to create C hina’s biggest persona l transaction site in C hina: Tao -bao. On ly after this announcement did emp loyees rea lize that Taobao was their very own child .In Chinese t he wor d taobaomeans “searc hing or prospecting for treasure.” Ma had maintaine d tight secrecy in t he course o f developing this gold-panning idea. Work had begun around the time o f the SARS crisis in t he spring of 2003 an d had continue d offsite, un known to a ll but a few in t he company. Corporate co -hesion and a degree of secrecy unknown to most organizations in China is one o f Jack Ma’s stren gths. He consi ders or ganizationa l structure to be a part o f the company’s tec hnology an d its reason for success. Employees are required to maintain strict conﬁden -tiality about or ganizationa l structure. “Our structure is our core competitiveness. It has been hammere d out over t he course o f many mistakes,” says Ma. “I myself don’t know how Sina is orga -nized and run. I f I did know, it wou ld be easy to attac k and defeat them.”On April 7, 2003, Ma had called together about ten Alib -aba employees in an ur gent meetin g. They were as ked to si gn nondisclosure statements; t his was not forced upon t hem but was meant to impress on them the need for secrecy. All did in fact sign the statements, w hich one em ployee later note d “were tota lly in English so we had no time to rea d and absorb the whole thing anyway.” After the meeting, this core group was transferred to the original Lakeside Gar den rooms, t he “sacre d land” of Alibaba, where wor k had ﬁrst begun. T here they wor ked on the develop-ment of the new site. “At ﬁrst, we were just wanting to main -tain secrec y, so we se parated out t he group,” Ma sai d later. W hen SARS hit, however, t he separation prove d to be fortuitous, as t he group was able to continue intensive and undisturbed work.Taobao: A New Weapon in Jack Ma’s Arsenal 119Taobao soon became legendary in the ﬁeld of C2C auction marketplaces inside China. It started from a base of zero and in the short space of two years had become the number one on-line auction mart in the country. This was not unrelated to the strength of the company from which it had been spawned, but the development of Taobao nonetheless represented an enormous risk. It was a gamble that could have taken Alibaba out of action: Jack Ma essentially mortgaged Alibaba in order to bring Taobao into being.Ma is a natural gambler, with an acute sense of the market. When Alibaba announced that it would be putting serious money into developing Taobao, winter shadows were still darkening the skies of the Internet world. Alibaba’s investment represented the largest sum invested by a China company in Internet activity since the bursting of the dot-com bubble. Moreover, Taobao had strong competition. Foreign-owned eBay had purchased one-third of the shares of a Chinese company called EachNet in 2002 for $30 million, and in 2003 eBay purchased the remaining shares for $150 million. The combined eBay-EachNet site held 80 percent of market share, and eBay had vowed to continue investing in the China market in order to maintain absolute dominance.Jack Ma’s decision to enter the C2C realm was dubbed a “reckless gamble” by all media at the time. Meg Whitman, global head of eBay, forecast that “Taobao will survive at most for eigh-teen months.” Eighteen months later, eBay had to revise that fore-cast. Zheng Xigui, eBay’s COO in China, announced instead, “We are preparing to ﬁght a protracted war in China; we are ready to go forward with a one-hundred-year plan.” Gone was the assurance of easy victory. By now, Meg Whitman herself had left eBay, leaving the situation in China for Li Ka-shing and T om.com to sort out.The term move in martial arts parlance appropriately char-acterizes Jack Ma’s strategy in this instance. Mongolian wrestlers 120may circle each other for an hour before one ma kes a lightning-fast move and the other is suddenly on the ground. The Chinese boxer Hu Qing weighs less than 110 pounds, but the speed and timing of his thrust is teac hing the sport that the right move can easi ly overcome musc le. Ma’s move came in t he form o f a ﬁendish decision: without warning, he decided to allow users on Taobao to con duct transactions for free. T his was t he closest t hing he cou ld do to “ kneecapping” eBay, w hich was a lready charg-ing a fee. The Internet culture of China is different from that of the Unite d States: Ma knew t hat eBa y-EachNet’s user fees were the cause o f such customer comp laints t hat they were an Ac hil-les’ heel for eBay in China. “Alibaba kept to the idea of growing the mar ket ﬁrst. We knew we cou ldn’t an d shouldn’t try to ma ke money rig ht away.” As a resu lt of this policy, eBay-Eac hNet saw its customer base irrevocably melt away.Alibaba’s strate gy had been planned well in advance. T he idea was born in ear ly 2003, w hen Alibaba’s business was re latively sta-ble and Ma felt that the consumer e-commerce marketplace wasbeginning to mature. T he senior mana ger Sun Dan yu was put incharge o f the Taobao project. Sun remem bers that “eBay-Eac hNet had become quite large in China, but we recognized that it had alot of weaknesses too. Customers com plained, which was our o p-portunity. T he comp laints were directe d at the payment fees. T hey were an inappropriate strategy for China at the time. ”Western com panies suc h as Amazon.com, in a ddition to eBa y, have adhered to a business mo del that charges a percentage fee for each transaction. The model has enabled companies to bring in a measure of revenue an d not sim ply give awa y the digital “farm.” China’s A libaba and Taobao believed that transactions s hould be free, at least initially, while ser vices enable them to charge anovera ll mem bership fee. Additiona l value-added services can be selected off a menu, depending on nee d. That mo del works well Taobao: A New Weapon in Jack Ma’s Arsenal 121under certain conditions: a company must have enough capital to survive the period before reaching critical mass, and a company must have a large and effective sales force in order to grow mem-bership fast. Taobao had both of these qualiﬁcations.Preparations were intense before launching Taobao. Having pinpointed the opponent’s weak points, Sun Danyu completed a detailed market research and strategic plan in just 120 days, down to the composition of the founding team of ten people. The team went to work in secrecy and emerged with a product. With no market promotion of any kind, Taobao was formally launched on May 10, 2003. Within the next twenty days, Taobao had received its ten thousandth registered customer.Bloodbath in the Advertising ArenaProﬁts are the weathervane for businessmen. At the same time, the Chinese believe that if you have enough capital, in a market economy you can generally ﬁght your way into most businesses before you turn a proﬁt. Fighting one’s way into a new market for Alibaba required massive investment, though, particularly in advertising and promotion. Products not advertised are, as they say in China, like the suggestive glances of a hopeful lover on a pitch-black night: they get nowhere.When Taobao was launched, Alibaba was therefore already ﬁghting its way forward under the protective shield of a heavy advertising budget. By the end of July 2004, its competitor in the B2B market, Huicong, had burned through close to $1.2 mil-lion (RMB 10 million) in advertising with the clear objective of skewering its opponent. Alibaba, for its part, now put several million into ads on television. “We will not spare any funds,” 122responded Huicon g. “We wi ll continue t he advertisin g war a gainst Alibaba to the en d.”In the C2C realm, the ﬁghting was worse. Advertising wars within China had become vio lently com petitive. A libaba had decided to advertise Tao bao on t he Internet but soon came up against concerted opposition: eBay had signed exclusive advertis -ing agreements wit h the three main portals in C hina. T he agree-ments state d that if these porta ls were found to be doing promo -tion of any kind with competitors of eBay, they would pay large ﬁnes. At t his point eBa y deﬁned its com petitors as inc luding the various auction sites o f Ya-bao, Yibi-de, Guar dian On line, Yahoo! Auction, and Taobao. With little recourse, Taobao was forced to place ads in suc h ignominious locations as su bway stations, public buses, and elevators .“In order to increase name recognition of Taobao,” Sun Danyu state d, “we wi ll be spending in the neighborhood of sev-eral tens o f millions o f RMB in a ds.” Despite t his bravado, peop lein the company knew that the best promotion was in fact word of mout h. Far more re gistered mem bers have come into t he auction site via t his met hod than any ot her. The conventiona l wisdom had been that advertising on portals was the best medium for C2C advertisin g. Face d with a blockade by the portals, Tao bao found other ways an d in the process discovere d that they wor ked better. The Taobao advertising strategy involved three stages. The ﬁrst was to re ly completely on wor d-of-mout h communication, which brought an ear ly group o f users into t he site. T hese mem -bers were important in laying the foundation for the next stage in Taobao’s growth, that of the “farmin g villages surroun d the cities” strategy. Har king back to a guerri lla tactic in war fare, the phrase in this context meant using SMS (short message ser vice) Web sites that badly needed revenue since t hey had recent ly been hurt by tightening government po licies. T he third stage came from t he end of 2003 to the beginning of 2004, when Taobao was able to Taobao: A New Weapon in Jack Ma’s Arsenal 123set up a cooperative relationship with MSN China. At the time, several other Internet companies bid more than Taobao for this alliance, but MSN chose Taobao for strategic reasons.Through all of these methods, Taobao was able to break out of the embargo placed upon it by the three main portals. It found a number of breaches in eBay’s wall. All of these experiences sharpened the skills and toughened the willpower of both the Alibaba and the Taobao teams. Like their leader, they seemed to thrive on adversity. Like him, too, they found ways around prob-lems and discovered that when one’s opponent is doing one thing it is the best time to do another.Taobao, Alipay, and LocalizationMencius, a venerated Chinese philosopher, noted, “Climate, ge-ography, and man must be in accord.” This saying, dating from around 300 b.c.e. , expresses a tenet that is equally true today.The word in Chinese for localization uses the character for “earth,” and signiﬁes “being of the local earth.” Only by being rooted in local circumstances in China can one hope to sweep away all obstacles, and make oneself invincible. There is in fact no other way to do business in China, for local circumstances are very much under local control. Few foreign enterprises in China have fully been able to master all the problems in being local, to “win over the spirits of the local water and earth.” They recog-nize the issues in theory but ﬁnd it hard to implement them in practice. Localization requires the understanding that companies both beneﬁt from and must in turn contribute to the local soil in which they grow. Chinese companies are well aware that they exist in a society that must beneﬁt from their activities: they pay attention to cultivating that society.124The Chinese phrase that is o ften use d to describe this nurtur -ing activity can be interpreted in many ways. T o Western minds, “Gathering together resources from the four directions, which allows one to create beneﬁt for the eight realms” ma y soun d ab-struse, but it is quite concrete in t he Chinese context. In gen-eral, it means that a company has to be in accord with “all under heaven,” w hich means ma king sure t hat the com pany does not beneﬁt alone. T he long-term way o f business is t hrough peop le’s hearts, it is not through short-term proﬁt and opportunistic self-interest. It also invo lves, therefore, intricate (an d perhaps to t he Western min d unseem ly) interre lations hips between government and corporate business. T o the Chinese, however, these interrela -tionships are sim ply an inte gral part of the cultivation o f local soil. Taobao un derstoo d these things. Prior to beginning the strategy by which he countered eBay, Jack Ma liked to say that “eBa y may be a shark in the ocean, but we are a croco dile in the Yangtze River. We wi ll be defeated if we ﬁght out on the open seas. If we ﬁght here in the river, there’s no chance t hey are going to win.” He knew w hat he was ta lking about—in terms o f local support, no body has a stronger position than Jack Ma. While eBay was going for globalization, Taobao was deciding to play the opposite hand: it wou ld be relying on ex -treme localization an d on the resources o f its native soi l. Ma o ften reminds his team that it is useful to change your stance frequently in order to see t hings from different perspectives. Tao bao in e ffect changed its global stance, went local, and as a resu lt, so far at least, has won the game.Although eBay may have un derstoo d these things equally well, it had difﬁculty comp lying wit h the rules of the game. T wo key problems for eBay were its need, as a publicly owned com -pany, to show proﬁts, and its ina bility, as an American com pany, to operate a via ble payment p latform wit hout full regulatory as -sistance. In America, the business model of eBay has worked spec -Taobao: A New Weapon in Jack Ma’s Arsenal 125tacularly well; eBay realized proﬁts almost from the beginning and for years has delivered excellent annual results. It has become one of the fastest-growing enterprises in the world. Trying to copy this miracle in China has been another story. Without being care-fully attuned to the Chinese concept of “climate, geography, and man,” eBay had a near-zero chance of success. In its defense, eBay played a very good game. China’s consumer e-commerce mar-ket had been dominated by the Internet-based transaction plat-form known as EachNet; eBay ﬁrst invested in and then bought this company. All the way up to early 2006, this company played the dominant role in China’s C2C market. Somebody calculated that the volume of business transacted on EachNet in 2003 was roughly equivalent to the total 2003 sales volume of ten Wal-Mart stores inside China. According to the chairman and CEO of eBay-EachNet, Shao Yipo, three million people bought things on eBay-EachNet every day. More than thirty-ﬁve thousand types of things were traded: e-Bay-EachNet’s sellers sold a national ﬂag every ﬁve minutes in China, a watch every three minutes, a stamp-collecting item every minute, a pair of athletic shoes every thirty seconds, and a T -shirt every ten seconds. With EachNet, eBay had a strong position until Taobao’s superior staying power and regulatory support undercut its business.Taobao knew the unique considerations in China and pre-pared for the challenge. Preparations required building up a large war chest and engineering entire systems that did not exist before. T o resolve the secure-payment-system bottleneck, Taobao devel-oped Alipay. Just as Alibaba had incubated Taobao, so Taobao in-cubated Alipay. It now is a separately incorporated company, but from the beginning Alipay enjoyed the support of a China-ﬁrst regulatory policy in the area of online payment.Unlike Taobao, eBay was not an insider and did not enjoy the same freedom to utilize government-supported payment systems. Regulatory restrictions are key to creating a barrier to foreign 126entry in the ﬁnancia l and communications arenas in C hina. T he fact that Alibaba is headquartered abroad is immaterial: creative licensing enables the company to stay under the protective wing of China’s re gulatory system, a native son on native ground.“We Do Not Int end to M ake a Profit for th e Next Thr ee Years”In conventional wisdom, a com pany that does not make a proﬁt is a com pany that will not survive. On ly if you have proﬁts will you have investors, and only thencan you really grow. Shareholders , employees, the enter prise itself—all de pend on this basic under -standing.Jack Ma went against this mainstream thinking with Taobao. He determined that Taobao would be a com pletely free ser vicefor at least its ﬁrst year an d would not ex pect an y proﬁts for its ﬁrst three years. In China, as elsewhere, this was called “burning money,” and most people disa pproved of the method. Onl y onewho both saw farther down t he road and had the resources to survive could play this game. Ma had ﬁgured it out in detail in advance. He did not hide his intentions: he calml y stated, “The reason we have save d up such a hoard of cash is so t hat we can go out and wage war.”The tar get of that war was eBa y. The war was wa ged againsta com pany that had been cu ltivatin g the mar ket for severa l years and was just beginning to taste the sweetness of making some money. The Taobao warnin g was clear: if eBa y-EachNet did not similarly implement a free policy, man y of its customers wou ld be moving to Taobao.With Taobao, Ma did not intend to kee p losin g mone y for-ever. Base d on his calculations, he sim ply believed that a circu-Taobao: A New Weapon in Jack Ma’s Arsenal 127itous path to the goal was best. Ma was not only striking out at eBay in implementing a free policy, however. He was accepting reality. Unlike eBay’s managers, Ma recognized that the time was not ripe in China for charging fees for a service that couldn’t sustain them. If under a fee-based business model you did not in fact win customers and did not in fact make a proﬁt, then you were hastening your demise by charging fees. On the other hand, if for a period you could build up a loyal base of customers, satisfy their needs, and begin to be necessary to their own proﬁtability, then you could blithely charge fees in the future. Ma believed that in the future Taobao absolutely would be proﬁtable. “We have a sufﬁcient amount of ‘deep breath’ to hold us,” Ma told his team, drawing on the analogy of qigong practice. “And we have plenty of conﬁdence. After all, before Alibaba began to charge fees it also went through a three-year stage of free services.”As a result of this, up to now, not one of Taobao’s depart-ments faces the pressure of having to be a proﬁt center. The goal of the operating department of the Web site is to make a site that is as simple and easy to use as possible, and to make club members feel comfortable and at ease. The goal of the technical department is to make the site stable and secure for purchasing. The PR de-partment is asked to popularize the whole concept of Web pur-chasing, to spread the practice throughout the general Chinese public. Meanwhile, the ﬁnance department is asked to keep tabs. As Ma says, “We know the difference between spending money and burning money. We also know that we are making a choice between putting our energies toward making a tiny amount of money right now and putting our energies toward creating chan-nels for water to ﬂow into in the future.” Water is a synonym for money in China.Taobao has a well-developed timetable for its staged devel-opment and for the day it intends to start turning a proﬁt. This is not emphasized to employees, however. They are not to waste 128their time worr ying about it. Ma o ften sa ys, “If a person’s min d is always counting money, worried about money, he will never be able to satisfy the real needs of customers. He won’t be put -ting the customer ﬁrst.” T he coro llary: only when Tao bao club members are ma king money t hemselves wi ll Taobao itse lf and its employees be making money. As with Alibaba, Ma emphasizes that the ﬁrst ﬁve dollars in a mem ber’s pocket should stay there and help him ma ke ﬁfty dollars. On ly then should Taobao reac h in and ask for ﬁve.The Strate gy Sounds Good; Will It Work ?China’s manu facturin g industries are current ly facing increas -ingly thin pro ﬁt margins, t heir level of discom fort is rising, an d in general things are perceived to be getting worse. Inﬂation is rising rapidly, higher costs o f inputs are forcing price increasesand slower sa les, and the common man is feeling the pinc h. Face d with this, Chinese businesses are being forced to be inventive and ﬁnd better mo dels. This is part of what spurred Jack Ma an d Tao-bao to break the old B2C mold.The traditional B2C business model requires a large invest -ment in ware houses an d distribution centers. Mi ddleman costs are high, and the pro ﬁt margin genera lly remains aroun d 5 per -cent. Jack Ma is not in favor of traditional B2C models—for good reason. He feels that, “even in America, wit h its exce llent logistica l systems, a company like Amazon is on ly making 5 per-cent. In China, the B2C market is fairly mature, but look at Joyo and Dangdang—they are ﬁnding it hard, which says to me t hat the mo del has pro blems.” As a resu lt, on May 10, 2006, A libaba announced that the largest Internet-based marketplace in Asia, Taobao, was forma lly launching a com pletely new kind of B2C Taobao: A New Weapon in Jack Ma’s Arsenal 129enterprise. It declared that the Taobao B2C model was different from the traditional model as represented by Amazon.Back in 2004, Ma had already indicated that e-commerce would not have the same distinctions between B2B and B2C—the lines would be blurred. “Like running water, which you just reach out and use these days, buying things on the Internet will be the same. It will be that convenient.” At the same time, Ma has predicted that in the future all forms of e-commerce will con-verge, operating on top of a large platform. After linking up the previous platforms, a completely new form of B2C model will be born.In 2005 Ma began to test this idea. He led Alibaba’s buyers and sellers over to Taobao and encouraged Taobao sellers to put product on Alibaba. He was seeing if the companies could indeed break through the barrier between B2B and C2C, cross-fertiliz-ing and thus increasing the total market.Sun Danyu has commented on a process that both he and Jack Ma feel will be the way business is handled in the future. “The traditional proﬁt model for B2C involves putting pressure on producers to lower their prices, and thereby taking a larger margin between the buying price and the selling price. The new B2C model helps the seller be the actual seller. The platform itself is paid for its service; it is not taking a margin for the transac-tion.” This critical difference means that the B2C service is an ally who is stroking the fur in the right direction, making everybody want the same thing. As Sun explains, “Our services model allows product producers to keep more proﬁt, which in the end means that they put more resources into technology and innovation. In the end, that allows the great mass of consumers to beneﬁt as well.” Sun adds, “The purpose of Taobao’s model is to help fac-tory producers make money and to help consumers save money. It is to shorten the chain between ultimate buyer and ultimate seller, including all those links along the way that take up money.” 130This mo del had been gestatin g in A libaba for a long time. T he company knew that it required a host of supporting roles from afﬁliated organizations: banks, credit organizations, authentication and veriﬁcation se rvices, payment platforms, securit y and credit-rating ﬁrms. On ly with the development o f an entire system cou ld the innovative power of enterprises that Sun eulogized ﬁnally reach out to beneﬁt consumers. A ll the various parts o f a com plex system had to be nudged forwar d simu ltaneous ly for the mo del to ﬂy. Several factors have worked in Alibaba’s favor, including the export-driven mo del of China’s fast-growin g econom y.Storefronts is the term use d to describe the main way pr o-ducers make their presence and products known on both the Alibaba and Taobao platforms. Ma has said that in fact A libaba and Taobao operate as on line rea l estate companies, provi ding services to companies that situate themselves along their “roads.” As soon as t he new Tao bao mo del appeared, a num ber of well-known brands, both internationa l and Chinese, began setting up dedicated storefronts on Taobao. Major brands routinely using the site to day include Motoro la, No kia, Haier, Lenovo, Great Wa ll Computer, App le iPod, and many ot hers. Some companies have begun making products speciﬁcally for the Taobao B2C platform. As of June 2007, A libaba.com hosted 2.4 mi llion store fronts. T his should be seen in t he context o f there being on ly aroun d 1.5 mi l-lion Web sites in China. Of the storefronts, 22,000 paid for Gold Supplier status an d 10,900 for Internationa l TrustPass status on the internationa l marketplace; 222,000 pai d for China TrustPass status on the domestic marketplace. Taobao’s statistics, including revenue an d proﬁt ﬁgures, are less avai lable than Alibaba.com’s, given t hat the company is sti ll closely held.Even as Taobao’s storefronts increased, various other play -ers were positionin g themselves. Accor ding to Shao Yipo, eBa y-EachNet’s CEO, eBay was extreme ly pleased to be investing even more in EachNet. Within ﬁfteen years, eBay predicted, China’s Taobao: A New Weapon in Jack Ma’s Arsenal 131market would become the largest individual online marketplace in the world.Jack Ma heard all this, and he must have smiled. He sat there biding his time, with a massive amount of cash in his back pocket. He knew that sometimes you had to be patient, but he was ready to take the gamble. Ma waited, and in the meantime invested an-other $42 million (RMB 350 million) in Taobao.Forming Alliances: The Three Big Portals and the Three Big Auction HousesAlthough Ma is independent by nature, he has never rejected the beneﬁts of forming strategic alliances when it serves a business purpose. He knows that, like his heroes, one is not fully in control of one’s own fate.Faced with greater foreign competition as a result of WTO regulations, many Chinese companies have been gathering in pro-tective groups, which are given different names, such as “group,” “alliance,” or “partnership,” depending on the situation. Several industries enjoy special consideration due to national security fac-tors, including media, publishing, banking and ﬁnance, and the In-ternet, but they too will face a day of reckoning in the near future. Alibaba began to recognize that a strategic alliance would be in its interests as the competition heated up. Ma is aware that forming an alliance is an art form: it requires matching up the synergies of appropriate partners and avoiding traps, but in this case, he had to take the risk, for others were recognizing the same logic. Since the early 2000s , the ﬁeld of players has been shifting and reconﬁgur-ing: Sina allied with Yahoo! and NetEase came to an agreement with EachNet, while Sohu allied itself with Taobao.The NetEase-EachNet afﬁliation is one unfortunate proof 132of how hard it is to ma ke such alliances stic k. The two com panies were initially optimistic about prospects, and NetEase’s CEO, Li Jinghui, and EachNet’s CEO, Shao Yipo, were full of smiles. The cooperation did not last long. On July 9, 2002, a crac k appeared in the alliance w hen a link to NetEase’s own auction house s howed up on the homepage of NetEase. This apparently unethical move was disturbing to the industry, as Eac hNet declared that NetEase was copying Eac hNet’s site, an d initiate d legal action. In t he end, an out-of-court settlement calmed things down, but both parties were left with ill feelings. The resu lt? Eac hNet an d eBay forme d a strategic re lations hip in Marc h 2002. In June 2003, eBay in -creased its investment in China by acquiring EachNet.Taobao and Sohu Link U pOn Apri l 12, 2005, So hu and Taobao (now C hina’s largest con -sumer auction site) announced that they too were forming a strategic alliance. Bot h enjoyed a large customer user base. T hey agreed to cooperate both online an d off in promoting t he ad-vance of China’s Internet-based economy.This time, t he two rea lly did become strate gic alliance part-ners an d were a ble to rea lize the potentia l of the union. Sogo, un -der Sohu, was one of the best-known Internet brands in China, with tens o f millions o f registered users an d tremen dous tra fﬁc; its contents an d searc h capabilities were unique. Tao bao also enjoye d superior brand recognition and premier technology. The chair -man o f the board and CEO o f Sohu, Zhang Chaoyang, expressed his optimism a bout this cooperation wit h Taobao. “T his is provi d-ing a completely new cooperative model for the C2C industry,” he declared. “Coo peratin g with Taobao provides Sohu’s tremen -dous user base an arena for secure on line transactions , which will Taobao: A New Weapon in Jack Ma’s Arsenal 133help spur the development of e-commerce. In addition, payment questions have always troubled Chinese e-commerce; we are glad to see the launching of Alipay, a tool that is providing new meth-ods of resolving the bottleneck of secure payment for Internet transactions. We will continue to pay close attention to Alipay and will look for ways to cooperate in the future.”In April 2005 Ma said, “Taobao is China’s largest C2C Web site. It enjoys nearly 5.3 million registered members at present [that ﬁgure would increase dramatically to 39.9 million by the end of June 2007] and more than 6 million trade items. Tao-bao respects the leading position of Sohu in the world of portals, and admires its strong positioning in the market.” Taobao’s COO, Sun Danyu, analyzed the way the situation had changed over the years: “China’s Internet has transitioned from merely trying to get the attention of browsers and providing them with entertainment toward recognizing that the Net must be useful and must provide businesses with tools to grow. Our alliance is another indication of a maturing industry.”Two Dragons Fight for the PearlThe world has many examples of two dragons ﬁghting for a pearl: Coca-Cola and Pepsi, McDonald’s and KFC. In China, when there is talk about eBay, people generally mention Taobao in the same breath: despite their realignment, the two continue to be heated contenders for the online auction marketplace. At ﬁrst, this seems to be comparing apples and oranges, for until recently Taobao has not come close to being in the same class as the global giant eBay. Any direct challenge against eBay would have been foolhardy. From today’s perspective, however, eBay seems to have been all but chased out of China, and Jack Ma can sit back and smile.134In Decem ber 2006, eBa y bowed to the reality of its dimin-ished role in China and announced a joint venture with the TOM Group to carry forward operations. The TOM Group is one of the leading Chinese- language media groups in the greater C hina region an d is contro lled by the tycoon Li Ka-s hing. Accor ding to the ofﬁcial press release regarding this new venture, “eBay will have a 49 percent sta ke in t he joint venture, an d TOM On line [a subsidiary o f TOM Group] wi ll have a 51 percent sta ke. Bot h companies will make ﬁnancial contributions to the venture, in -cluding a US$40 mi llion cas h contri bution from eBa y and US$20 million in ﬁnancing from TOM On line.”The Seemingly No-Move Move: Alibaba’sCompetitive AdvantageFor an Internet company to become ﬁrst in its in dustry in two years and the largest consumer online marketplace in China is notable. Eac h of Taobao’s actions has also, intentiona lly or not, in -ﬂuence d the overa ll industry in C hina. Tao bao is ca lled a mirac le in the history of the China Internet .In looking at this mirac le, Forbes magazine has written, “I f Jack Ma has his way, t hen his will be the company dominating t he global online auction marketplace, not eBay, but Taobao.” How did Taobao mana ge to pull down t he com pany everyone consi d-ered to be invinci ble, and in so little time? Jac k Ma’s answer is t he same as it has always been: “Only through conscientious ser vicecan Tao bao be universa lly acclaimed. Only through conscientious service can one win a customer’s satis faction an d trust. T his is the path to growth for any enterprise.”Alibaba provides service in e-commerce, as a B2B on line busi-ness services company. It manages an d operates t he globe’s largest Taobao: A New Weapon in Jack Ma’s Arsenal 135Internet-based trading marketplace. Every day, Alibaba’s Web site has on it products from more than 220 countries and regions. It uses the “ecosystem” that the company has built: the TrustPass services, the Gold Supplier services, the storefront building ser-vices, the payment platform, and others. The key consideration determining Alibaba’s survival is its ongoing level of quality of service.In order to ensure that Alibaba users were satisﬁed, Ma brought over a new concept from the home electronics company Haier. This was called the “one piece of fabric” concept, and it was used successfully at Haier. When its servicepeople ﬁrst started going into people’s homes to install an air conditioner or refrig-erator, they would bring with them a piece of fabric with which they would wipe up their tracks before they left. This simple ges-ture of respect made people so happy that it became a very ef-fective sales tool. This polite service strategy of Haier was adapted to Alibaba’s circumstances. Its underlying concept is an attitude of total service. Taobao was the beneﬁciary of all these Alibaba strategies for success. Most importantly, it beneﬁted from Alipay. If no fees and a trust-evaluation system enabled Taobao to develop its base, the decisive factor in allowing the company to grow has been Alipay’s method of secure payment. Trust is the treasure by which Taobao has routed eBay, but the contribution of Alipay has been indispensable.In May 2006, the China Internet Network Information Cen-ter (CNNIC) released a report on the consumer online transac-tion market. Taobao held 67.3 percent of market share, greatly exceeding eBay-EachNet’s 29.1 percent. The number of Taobao users had reached 19 million, slightly lower than eBay-EachNet’s 20.5 million but rising fast. By December 2006, eBay was forced to admit that Taobao’s business model had essentially crippled its competitiveness in China. Carefully declaring that it was notpulling out of China, it sought a “big mountain at its back” in 136the form o f Li Ka-s hing. It conce ded majority owners hip in the country to his TOM Group.Taobao had indeed been a gamble, but as of 2008, its rev -enues were growin g 100 percent year after year, an d it is t he larg-est consumer mar ketplace in C hina. Its main competitor is now TOM EachNet, jointly owned 49 percent by eBay and 51 percent by the TOM Grou p. A secon d and serious com petitor is Pai pai.com, a company owne d by T encent an d whose name signi ﬁes an auction market. It is assumed that eventually Taobao will start charging for listings or transactions; unti l that time, it continues to scoop in customers, a ll of whom bring cross-p latform beneﬁts for the other Alibaba businesses. They use Alipay for payment, and many Taobao sellers actua lly source t heir products on A libaba.com’s domestic mar ketplace.By the time of Taobao’s ascent, Alipay had already completed seamless payment arran gements wit h the four ma jor state-owne d banks of China, as we ll as the China Merc hant Ban k system; it will likely be a good horse to follow in the future. Taobao moved up to being num ber one in C hina wit hin two years o f its found-ing. T his so-ca lled mirac le of Taobao is easier to un derstan d when one remembers that the company is still not, in fact, making money.