2
Relativity Theory
and Quantum Theory
Einstein's life ended . .. with a demand on us for synthesis.
W. Pauli[Pl]
2a. Orderly Transitions and Revolutionary Periods
In all the history of physics, there has never been a period of transition as abrupt,
as unanticipated, and over as wide a front as the decade 1895 to 1905. In rapid
succession the experimental discoveries of X-rays (1895), the Zeeman effect
(1896), radioactivity (1896), the electron (1897), and the extension of infrared
spectroscopy into the 3 /un to 60 /an region opened new vistas. The birth of quan-
tum theory (1900) and relativity theory (1905) marked the beginning of an era in
which the very foundations of physical theory were found to be in need of revision.
Two men led the way toward the new theoretical concepts: Max Karl Ernst Lud-
wig Planck, professor at the University of Berlin, possessed—perhaps obsessed—
by the search for the universal function of frequency and temperature, known to
exist since 1859, when Gustav Robert Kirchhoff formulated his fundamental law
of blackbody radiation (19a)*; and Albert Einstein, technical expert at the Swiss
patent office in Bern, working in an isolation which deserves to be called splendid
(3).
In many superficial ways, these two men were quite unlike each other. Their
backgrounds, circumstances, temperaments, and scientific styles differed pro-
foundly. Yet there were deep similarities. In the course of addressing Planck on
the occasion of Planck's sixtieth birthday, Einstein said:
The longing to behold . . . preestablished harmony** is the source of the inex-
haustible persistence and patience with which we see Planck devoting himself
to the most general problems of our science without letting himself be deflected
by goals which are more profitable and easier to achieve. I have often heard
that colleagues would like to attribute this attitude to exceptional will-power
*In this chapter, I use for the last time parenthetical notations when referring to a chapter or a
section thereof. Thus, (19a) means Chapter 19, Section a.
**An expression of Leibniz's which Einstein considered particularly apt.
RELATIVITY THEORY AND QUANTUM THEORY 27
and discipline; I believe entirely wrongly so. The emotional state which enables
such achievements is similar to that of the religious person or the person in love;
the daily pursuit does not originate from a design or program but from a direct
need [El].
This overriding urge for harmony directed Einstein's scientific life as much as it
did Planck's. The two men admired each other greatly.
The main purpose of this chapter is to make some introductory comments on
Einstein's attitude to the quantum and relativity theories. To this end, it will be
helpful to recall a distinction which he liked to make between two kinds of physical
theories [E2]. Most theories, he said, are constructive, they interpret complex phe-
nomena in terms of relatively simple propositions. An example is the kinetic the-
ory of gases, in which the mechanical, thermal, and diffusional properties of gases
are reduced to molecular interactions and motions. 'The merit of constructive the-
ories is their comprehensiveness, adaptability, and clarity.' Then there are the
theories of principle, which use the analytic rather than the synthetic method:
'Their starting points are not hypothetical constituents but empirically observed
general properties of phenomena.' An example is the impossibility of a perpetuum
mobile in thermodynamics. '[The merit of] theories of principle [is] their logical
perfection and the security of their foundation.' Then Einstein went on to say,
'The theory of relativity is a theory of principle.' These lines were written in 1919,
when relativity had already become 'like a house with two separate stories': the
special and the general theory. (Of course, the special theory by itself is a theory
of principle as well.)
Thus, toward the end of the decade 1895-1905 a new theory of principle had
emerged: special relativity. What was the status of quantum theory at that time?
It was neither a theory of principle nor a constructive theory. In fact, it was not
a theory at all. Planck's and Einstein's first results on blackbody radiation proved
that there was something wrong with the foundations of classical physics, but old
foundations were not at once replaced by new ones—as had been the case with
the special theory of relativity from its very inception (7). Peter Debye recalled
that, soon after its publication, Planck's work was discussed in Aachen, where
Debye was then studying with Arnold Sommerfeld. Planck's law fitted the data
well, 'but we did not know whether the quanta were something fundamentally
new or not' [Bl].
The discovery of the quantum theory in 1900 (19a) and of special relativity in
1905 (7) have in common that neither was celebrated by press releases, dancing
in the streets, or immediate proclamations of the dawn of a new era. There all
resemblance ends. The assimilation of special relativity was a relatively fast and
easy process. It is true that great men like Hendrik Antoon Lorentz and Henri
Poincare had difficulty recognizing that this was a new theory of kinematic prin-
ciple rather than a constructive dynamic theory (8) and that the theory caused the
inevitable confusion in philosophical circles, as witness, for example, the little book
28 INTRODUCTORY
on the subject by Henry Bergson written as late as 1922 [B2]. Nevertheless, senior
men like Planck, as well as a new generation of theorists, readily recognized spe-
cial relativity to be fully specified by the two principles stated by Einstein in his
1905 paper (7a). All the rest was application of these theoretical principles. When
special relativity appeared, it was at once 'all there.' There never was an 'old'
theory of relativity.
By contrast, the 'old' quantum theory, developed in the years from 1900 to
1925, progressed by unprincipled—but tasteful—invention and application of ad
hoc rules rather than by a systematic investigation of the implications of a set of
axioms. This is not to say that relativity developed in a 'better' or 'healthier' way
than did quantum physics, but rather to stress the deep-seated differences between
the evolution of the two. Nor should one underestimate the tremendous, highly
concrete, and lasting contributions of the conquistadores, Einstein among them,
who created the old quantum theory. The following four equations illustrate bet-
ter than any long dissertation what they achieved:
V,T) = ^ I (2.1)
Planck's formula for the spectral density p of blackbody radiation in thermal equi-
librium as a function of frequency v and temperature T (h = Planck's constant,
k = Boltzmann's constant, c = velocity of light), the oldest equation in the quan-
tum theory of radiation. It is remarkable that the old quantum theory would orig-
inate from the analysis of a problem as complex as blackbody radiation. From
1859 until 1926, this problem remained at the frontier of theoretical physics, first
in thermodynamics, then in electromagnetism, then in the old quantum theory,
and finally in quantum statistics;
Einstein's 1905 equation for the energy E of photoelectrons liberated from a
metallic surface irradiated by light of frequency v (19e), the oldest equation in the
quantum theory of the interaction between radiation and matter;
Einstein's 1906 equation for the specific heat c, of one gram-atom of an idealized
crystalline solid, in which all lattice points vibrate harmonically with a unique
frequency v around their equilibrium positions (R is the gas constant) (20), the
oldest equation in the quantum theory of the solid state; and
the equation given in 1913 by Niels Bohr, the oldest equation in the quantum
theory of atomic structure. Long before anyone knew what the principles of the
RELATIVITY THEORY AND QUANTUM THEORY 2Q
quantum theory were, the successes of equations like these made it evident that
such a theory had to exist. Every one of these successes was a slap in the face of
hallowed classical concepts. New inner frontiers, unexpected contraventions of
accepted knowledge, appeared in several places: the equipartition theorem of clas-
sical statistical mechanics could not be true in general (19b); electrons appeared
to be revolving in closed orbits without emitting radiation.
The old quantum theory spans a twenty-five-year period of revolution in phys-
ics, a revolution in the sense that existing order kept being overthrown. Relativity
theory, on the other hand, whether of the special or the general kind, never was
revolutionary in that sense. Its coming was not disruptive, but instead marked an
extension of order to new domains, moving the outer frontiers of knowledge still
farther out.
This state of affairs is best illustrated by a simple example. According to special
relativity, the physical sum (r(y,,i>2) of two velocities w, and v2 with a common
direction is given by
a result obtained independently by Poincare and Einstein in 1905. This equation
contains the limit law, ff(v,,c) = c, as a case of extreme novelty. It also makes
clear that for any velocities, however small, the classical answer, a(vi,v2) = vt +
r>2, is no longer rigorously true. But since c is of the order of one billion miles per
hour, the equation also says that the classical answer can continue to be trusted
for all velocities to which it was applied in early times. That is the correspondence
principle of relativity, which is as old as relativity itself. The ancestors, from Gal-
ileo via Newton to Maxwell, could continue to rest in peace and glory.
It was quite otherwise with quantum theory. To be sure, after the discovery of
the specific heat expression, it was at once evident that Eq. 2.3 yields the long-
known Dulong-Petit value of 6 calories/mole (20a) at high temperature. Nor did
it take long (only five years) before the connection between Planck's quantum
formula (Eq. 2.1) and the classical 'Ray leigh-Einstein-Jeans limit' (hv <C kT)
was established (19b). These two results indicated that the classical statistical law
of equipartition would survive in the correspondence limit of (loosely speaking)
high temperature. But there was (and is) no correspondence limit for Eqs. 2.2 and
2.4. Before 1925, nothing was proved from first principles. Only after the discov-
eries of quantum mechanics, quantum statistics, and quantum field theory did
Eqs. 2.1 to 2.4 acquire a theoretical foundation.
The main virtue of Eq. 2.5 is that it simultaneously answers two questions:
where does the new begin? where does the old fit in? The presence of the new
indicates a clear break with the past. The immediate recognizability of the old
shows that this break is what I shall call an orderly transition. On the other hand,
a revolution in science occurs if at first only the new presents itself. From that
moment until the old fits in again (it is a rule, not a law, that this always happens
30 INTRODUCTORY
in physics), we have a period of revolution. Thus the births of the relativities were
orderly transitions, the days of the old quantum theory were a revolutionary
period. I stress that this distinction is meant to apply to the historical process of
discovery, not to the content of one or another physical theory. (I would not argue
against calling the abandonment of the aether and the rejection of absolute simul-
taneity in 1905 and the rejection of Newton's absolute space in 1915 amazing,
astounding, audacious, bold, brave ... or revolutionary steps.)
No one appreciated the marked differences between the evolution of relativity
and quantum theory earlier and better than Einstein, the only man who had been
instrumental in creating both. Nor, of course, was anyone better qualified than he
to pronounce on the structure of scientific revolutions. After all, he had been to the
barricades. Let us see what he had to say about this subject.
Early in 1905 he wrote a letter to a friend in which he announced his forth-
coming papers on the quantum theory and on special relativity. He called the first
paper Very revolutionary.' About the second one he only remarked that 'its kine-
matic part will interest you' [E3].
In a report of a lecture on relativity that Einstein gave in London on June 13,
1921, we read, 'He [Einstein] deprecated the idea that the new principle was
revolutionary. It was, he told his audience, the direct outcome and, in a sense, the
natural completion of the work of Faraday, Maxwell, and Lorentz. Moreover
there was nothing specially, certainly nothing intentionally, philosophical about
it....'[Nl].
In the fall of 1919, in the course of a discussion with a student, Einstein handed
her a cable which had informed him that the bending of light by the sun was in
agreement with his general relativistic prediction. The student asked what he
would have said if there had been no confirmation. Einstein replied, 'Da konnt'
mir halt der liebe Gott leid tun. Die Theorie stimmt doch.' Then I would have to
pity the dear Lord. The theory is correct anyway [Rl]. (This statement is not at
variance with the fact that Einstein was actually quite excited when he first heard
the news of the bending of light (16b).)
These three stories characterize Einstein's lifelong attitude to the relativity the-
ories: they were orderly transitions in which, as he experienced it, he played the
role of the instrument of the Lord, Who, he deeply believed, was subtle but not
malicious.
Regarding Einstein's judgment of his own role in quantum physics, there is
first of all his description of his 1905 paper 'On a heuristic point of view concern-
ing the generation and transformation of light' as very revolutionary (19c). Next
we have his own summary: 'What I found in the quantum domain are only occa-
sional insights or fragments which were produced in the course of fruitless strug-
gles with the grand problem. I am ashamed* to receive at this time such a great
honor for this' [E4]. Those words he spoke on June 28,1929, the day he received
*I have translated Ich bin beschdmt as / am ashamed rather than as / am embarrassed because I
believe that the first alternative more accurately reflects Einstein's mood.
RELATIVITY THEORY AND QUANTUM THEORY 31
the Planck medal from Planck's own hands. By then the revolutionary period of
the old quantum theory—which coincided exactly with the years of Einstein's
highest creativity!—had made way for nonrelativistic quantum mechanics (and
the beginning of its relativistic extension), a theory which by 1929 was recognized
by nearly everyone as a new theory of principle.
Einstein dissented. To him, who considered relativity theory no revolution at
all, the quantum theory was still in a state of revolution and—as he saw it—
remained so for the rest of his life; according to him the old did not yet fit in
properly. That is the briefest characterization of Einstein's scientific philosophy.
He was more deeply commited to orderly transition than to revolution. He could
be radical but never was a rebel.
In the same speech in 1929, he also said, 'I admire to the highest degree the
achievements of the younger generation of physicists which goes by the name
quantum mechanics and believe in the deep level of truth of that theory; but I
believe that the restriction to statistical laws will be a passing one.' The parting
of ways had begun. Einstein had started his solitary search for a theory of prin-
ciple that would maintain classical causality in an orderly way and from which
quantum mechanics should be derivable as a constructive theory.
Far more fascinating to me than the substance of Einstein's critique of quantum
mechanics—to be discussed in detail in (26)—is the question of motivation. What
drove Einstein to this search which he himself called 'quite bizarre as seen from
the outside' [E5] ? Why would he continue 'to sing my solitary little old song' [E6]
for the rest of his life? As I shall discuss in (27), the answer has to do with a grand
design which Einstein conceived early, before the discovery of quantum mechanics,
for a synthetic physical theory. It was to be a theory of particles and fields in
which general relativity and quantum theory would be synthesized. This he failed
to achieve.
So to date have we all.
The phenomena to be explained by a theory of principle have become enor-
mously richer since the days when Einstein made the first beginnings with his
program. Theoretical progress has been very impressive, but an all-embracing the-
ory does not exist. The need for a new synthesis is felt more keenly as the phe-
nomena grow more complex.
Therefore any assessment of Einstein's visions can be made only from a vantage
point that is necessarily tentative. It may be useful to record ever so briefly what
this vantage point appears to be to at least one physicist. This is done in the fol-
lowing 'time capsule,' which is dedicated to generations of physicists yet unborn.*
2b. A Time Capsule
When Einstein and others embarked on their programs of unification, three par-
ticles (in the modern sense) were known to exist, the electron, the proton, and the
"The following section is meant to provide a brief record without any attempt at further explanation
or reference to literature. It can be skipped without loss of continuity.
32 INTRODUCTORY
photon, and there were two fundamental interactions, electromagnetism and grav-
itation. At present the number of particles runs into the hundreds. A further
reduction to more fundamental units appears inevitable. It is now believed that
there are at least four fundamental interactions. The unification of all four types
of forces—gravitational, electromagnetic, weak, and strong—is an active topic of
current exploration. It has not been achieved as yet.
Relativistic quantum field theories (in the sense of special relativity) are the
principal tools for these explorations. Our confidence in the general field theoret-
ical approach rests first and foremost on the tremendous success of quantum elec-
trodynamics (QED). One number, the g factor of the electron, may illustrate both
the current level of predictability of this theory and the level of experimental pre-
cision which has been reached:
u/ _ ox -f1 159 652 46° (127> (75) X 10"12 predicted by pure QED*
(g ' (1 159652200(40) X 10-'2 observed
It has nevertheless become evident that this branch of field theory will merge with
the theory of other fields.
'If we could have presented Einstein with a synthesis of his general relativity
and the quantum theory, then the discussion with him would have been consid-
erably easier' [PI]. To date, this synthesis is beset with conceptual and technical
difficulties. The existence of singularities associated with gravitational collapse is
considered by some an indication for the incompleteness of the general relativistic
equations. It is not known whether or not these singularities are smoothed out by
quantum effects.
There is hope that gravitational waves will be observed in this century (15d).
The ultimate unification of weak and electromagnetic interactions has probably
not yet been achieved, but a solid beach-head appears to have been established in
terms of local non-Abelian gauge theories with spontaneous symmetry breakdown.
As a result, it is now widely believed that weak interactions are mediated by mas-
sive vector mesons. Current expectations are that such mesons will be observed
within the decade.
It is widely believed that strong interactions are also mediated by local non-
Abelian gauge fields. Their symmetry is supposed to be unbroken so that the cor-
responding vector mesons are massless. The dynamics of these 'non-Abelian pho-
tons' are supposed to prohibit their creation as single free particles. The technical
exploration of this theory is in its early stages.
Promising steps have been made toward grand unification, the union of weak,
electromagnetic, and strong interactions in one compact, non-Abelian gauge
*In this prediction (which does not include small contributions from muons and hadrons), the best
value of the fine-structure constant a has been used as an input: a"1 = 137.035 963 (15). The
principal source of uncertainty in the predicted value of (g — 2) stems from the experimental uncer-
tainties of a, leading to the error (127). The error (75) is mainly due to uncertainties in the eighth
order calculation [Kl].
RELATIVITY THEORY AND QUANTUM THEORY 33
group. In most grand unified theories the proton is unstable. News about the pro-
ton's fate is eagerly awaited at this time.
Superunification, the union of all four forces, is the major goal. Some believe
that it is near and that supergravity will provide the answer. Others are not so
sure.
All modern work on unification may be said to represent a program of geo-
metrization that resembles Einstein's earlier attempts, although the manifold sub-
ject to geometrization is larger than he anticipated and the quantum framework
of the program would not have been to his liking.
In the search for the correct field theory, model theories have been examined
which reveal quite novel possibilities for the existence of extended structures
(solitons, instantons, monopoles). In the course of these investigations, topological
methods have entered this area of physics. More generally, it has become clear in
the past decade that quantum field theory is much richer in structure than was
appreciated earlier. The renormalizability of non-Abelian gauge fields with spon-
taneous symmetry breakdown, asymptotic freedom, and supersymmetry are cases
in point.
The proliferation of new particles has led to attempts at a somewhat simplifed
underlying description. According to the current picture, the basic constituents of
matter are: two classes of spin-% particles, the leptons and the quarks; a variety
of spin-1 gauge bosons, some massless, some massive; and (more tentatively) some
fundamental spin-zero particles. The only gauge boson observed so far is the pho-
ton. To date, three kinds of charged leptons have been detected. The quarks are
hypothetical constituents of the observed hadrons. To date, at least five species of
quarks have been identified. The dynamics of the strong interactions are supposed
to prohibit the creation of quarks as isolated, free particles. This prohibition, con-
finement, has not as yet been implemented theoretically in a convincing way. No
criterion is known which enables one to state how many species of leptons and of
quarks should exist.
Weak, electromagnetic, and strong interactions have distinct intrinsic symmetry
properties, but this hierarchy of symmetries is not well understood theoretically.
Perhaps the most puzzling are the small effects of noninvariance under space
reflection and the even smaller effects of noninvariance under time reversal. It
adds to the puzzlement that the latter phenomenon has been observed so far only
in a single instance, namely, in the K° - K° system. (These phenomena were first
observed after Einstein's death. I have often wondered what might have been his
reactions to these discoveries, given his 'conviction that pure mathematical con-
struction enables us to discover the concepts and the laws connecting them' [E7].)
It is not known why electric charge is quantized, but it is plausible that this
will be easily explicable in the framework of a future gauge theory.
In summary, physicists today are hard at work to meet Einstein's demands for
synthesis, using methods of which he probably would be critical. Since about 1970,
there has been much more promise for progress than in the two or three decades
34 INTRODUCTORY
before. Yet the theoretical structures now under investigation are not as simple
and economical as one would wish. The evidence is overwhelming that the theory
of particles and fields is still incomplete. Despite much progress, Einstein's earlier
complaint remains valid to this day: 'The theories which have gradually been
associated with what has been observed have led to an unbearable accumulation
of independent assumptions' [E8]. At the same time, no experimental evidence or
internal contradiction exists to indicate that the postulates of general relativity, of
special relativity, or of quantum mechanics are in mutual conflict or in need of
revision or refinement. We are therefore in no position to affirm or deny that these
postulates will forever remain unmodified.
I conclude this time capsule with a comment by Einstein on the meaning of the
occurrence of dimensionless constants (such as the fine-structure constant or the
electron-proton mass ratio) in the laws of physics, a subject about which he knew
nothing, we know nothing: 'In a sensible theory there are no [dimensionless] num-
bers whose values are determinable only empirically. I can, of course, not prove
that. .. dimensionless constants in the laws of nature, which from a purely logical
point of view can just as well have other values, should not exist. To me in my
'Gottvertrauen' [faith in God] this seems evident, but there might well be few who
have the same opinion' [E9].
References
Bl. U. Benz, Arnold Sommerfeld, p. 74. Wissenschaftliche Verlags Gesellschaft, Stutt-
gart, 1975.
B2. H. Bergson, Duree et Simultaneite: A Propos de la Theorie d'Einstein. Alcan, Paris,
1922.
El. A. Einstein, Ansprachen in der Deutschen Physikalischen Gesellschaft, p. 29.
Muller, Karlsruhe, 1918.
E2. , The London Times, November 28, 1919.
E3. , letter to C. Habicht, undated, most probably written in March 1905.
E4. , Forschungen und Fortschritte 5, 248 (1929).
E5. , letter to L. de Broglie, February 8, 1954.
E6. , letter to N. Bohr, April 4, 1949.
E7. , On the Method of Theoretical Physics. Oxford University Press, Oxford,
1933. Reprinted in Philos. Sci. 1, 162, (1934).
E8. , Lettres a Maurice Solovine, p. 130. Gauthier-Villars, Paris, 1956.
E9. , letters to I. Rosenthal-Schneider, October 13, 1945, and March 24, 1950.
Reprinted in [Rl], pp. 36, 41.
Kl. T. Kinoshita and W. B. Lindquist, Phys, Rev. Lett. 47, 1573 (1981).
Nl. Nature 107, 504 (1921).
PI. W. Pauli, Neue Ziiricher Zeitung, January 12, 1958. Reprinted in W. Pauli Col-
lected Scientific Papers, Vol. 2, p. 1362. Interscience, New York, 1964.
Rl. I. Rosenthal-Schneider, Reality and Scientific Truth, p. 74. Wayne State University
Press, 1980.
