12
The Einstein-Grossmann
Collaboration
In memoriam: Marcel Grossmann
12a. From Prague to Zurich
Grossmann appeared in previous chapters as the helpful fellow student who made
his course notes available to Einstein, as the helpful friend who together with his
father paved the way for Einstein's appointment at the patent office in Bern, and
as the friend to whom Einstein dedicated his doctoral thesis. It is now time to get
better acquainted with him.
Grossmann, a descendant of an old Swiss family, was born in 1878 in Budapest,
where his father was employed. He spent his first fifteen years there, then went
to Switzerland, where he finished high school. Thereupon he studied at the ETH
from 1896 to 1900, together with Einstein. During the next seven years, he taught
high school, first in Frauenfeld and then in Basel. In that period he finished his
thesis, 'On the Metrical Properties of Collinear Structures,' which earned him his
doctoral degree at the University of Zurich, and published two geometry books for
high school students and three papers on non-Euclidean geometry, his favorite
subject. These papers contain very pretty planimetric constructions which, we are
told, were praised by one no less than Hilbert [SI]. After a six-year pause, he
published another four papers on related subjects in the years 1910-12. He pre-
sented one of these at the fifth international congress of mathematicians in Cam-
bridge, England, in August 1912 [Gl]. The mentioned papers are his entire sci-
entific output prior to the collaboration with Einstein, which began a few months
after the Cambridge conference. Evidently none of his prior research had any
bearing on differential geometry or tensor analysis.
Grossmann had meanwhile joined the mathematics faculty at the ETH in
Zurich, first as a stand-in and then, in 1907, as a full professor of geometry. Soon
thereafter, he began to organize summer courses for high school teachers. In 1910
he became one of the founders of the Swiss Mathematical Society. The next year
he was appointed dean of the mathematics-physics section of the ETH.
One of the first acts of the uncommonly young dean was to sound out Einstein
208
annTHE EINSTEIN-GROSSMANN COLLABORATION 209
as to whether he might be interested in returning to Zurich, this time to the ETH.
Grossmann's letter is lost but not Einstein's reply: 'I am certainly prepared in
principle to accept a teaching position at your [ETH]. I am extraordinarily happy
about the prospect of returning to Zurich. This prospect has led me in recent days
not to accept a call which reached me [from] the University of Utrecht' [El]. A
positive outcome of Grossmann's initiative appeared to be assured. Speedy action
was called for, however. Einstein was now in great demand. The offer from
Utrecht, made by Willem Julius, 'one of the most original exponents of solar phys-
ics' [E2], was only the first of several he received in 1911 and 1912. None of these
swayed him. Zurich was where he wanted to be. Even before any official action
had been taken, he telegraphed Zangger, 'Habe Grossmann zugesagt,' Have said
yes to G. [E3]. Zangger himself wrote to the authorities, urging quick action,
especially because he had heard that an offer from Vienna might be forthcoming
[S2]. Einstein also wrote to Zangger of an offer (which he declined) to lecture at
Columbia University in New York in the fall of 1912 [E4].
On January 23, 1912, the ETH authorities sent their recommendation for a
ten-year appointment [S3] to the federal Department of the Interior. It included
recommendations from Marie Curie ('one is entitled to have the highest hopes for
him and to see in him one of the first theoreticians of the future') and from Poin-
care (already mentioned in Chapter 8). The authorities quickly accepted the pro-
posal, and on February 2 Einstein could write to Alfred Stern, 'Two days ago I
received the call from the [ETH] (halleluia!) and have already announced here
my k. k.* departure' [E5]. And so, in the fall of 1912, Einstein began the next
phase of his academic career.
It was to last for only three semesters. Berlin was beckoning even before he
arrived in Zurich. In the spring of 1912, Emil Warburg, the eminent director of
the Physikalisch Technische Reichsanstalt, asked him to join the staff of his insti-
tute. The formalities concerning the Zurich appointment had been completed by
then. The offer from Vienna also came through after the ETH decision had been
made. 'I declined to take anything into consideration until I had settled in Zurich,'
Einstein wrote to Zangger, whom he had informed of the Berlin and Vienna over-
tures [E6].
There was one man who at that time came close to changing Einstein's mind
and perhaps his destiny: Lorentz. During the Solvay conference in October 1911,
Lorentz asked Einstein what the prospects were of his coming to Utrecht [LI].
Perhaps it was not clear to Einstein whether Lorentz would actually have liked
to see a foreigner occupy the chair in Utrecht. At any rate, upon his return to
Prague he wrote to Lorentz, 'I write this letter to you with a heavy heart, as one
who has done a kind of injustice to his father . . .' and added, 'If I had known that
you wanted me to go to Utrecht then I would have gone' [E7]. Lorentz replied
*k. k. = kaiserlich und koniglich = imperial and royal, the adjectives referring to the Austro-
Hungarian empire.
210 RELATIVITY, THE GENERAL THEORY
that Einstein should accept his post in Zurich cheerfully and in good spirits [LI].
Soon thereafter, Lorentz the father figure spoke again. On February 29, 1912,
Einstein wrote to Zangger, 'I was called to Leiden by Lorentz to be his successor.
It was good that I was already committed to Zurich, for, if not, I would have had
to go there' [E8]. The Leiden position went to Ehrenfest, who took over in the fall
of 1912. Some time in 1913 Einstein sent Ehrenfest a letter which must often have
given its recipient food for thought: 'When Lorentz called me at that time I expe-
rienced an undeniable shudder' [E9].
12b. From scalar to tensor
In August 1912, Einstein and his family arrived back in Zurich. On the tenth of
that month they were officially registered as residents of an apartment at Hof-
strasse 116. Some time between August 10 and August 16, it became clear to
Einstein that Riemannian geometry is the correct mathematical tool for what we
now call general relativity theory. The impact of this abrupt realization was to
change his outlook on physics and physical theory for the rest of his life. The next
three years were the most strenuous period in his scientific career.
In order to appreciate what happened in August 1912, it is essential to know
that before his arrival in Zurich Einstein had already concluded that the descrip-
tion of gravitation in terms of the single scalar c-field of the Prague days had to
go and that a new geometry of physical space-time was needed. I am convinced
that he arrived in Zurich with the knowledge that not just one but ten gravitational
potentials were needed. This opinion is based on some remarks in Einstein's
papers; on a study of all the letters from the period March-August 16, 1912,
which are in the Einstein archives in Princeton; and on recollections by myself
and by Ernst Gabor Straus, Einstein's assistant from 1944 to 1948, of conversa-
tions with Einstein.
To begin with, let us recall that the second of the 1912 papers discussed in the
previous chapter [E10] was completed in March. Toward the end of that month,
Einstein wrote to Besso, 'Recently, I have been working furiously on the gravi-
tation problem. It has now reached a stage in which I am ready with the statics.
I know nothing as yet about the dynamic field, that must follow next. . .. Every
step is devilishly difficult' [Ell].* Yet his initial response to the finished part, the
static case, was strongly positive. From Prague he wrote to Ehrenfest, 'The inves-
tigations on the statics of gravitation are ready and satisfy me very much. I really
believe I have found a piece of truth. I am now thinking about the dynamic case,
one again going from the special to the general' [E12]. This undated letter was
certainly written in 1912 and most probably before the middle of May, since by
that time, Einstein had become less assured. On May 20 he wrote to Zangger,
'The investigations on gravitation have led to some satisfactory results, although
"This important letter is not contained in the EB volume of their correspondence.
THE EINSTEIN-GROSSMANN COLLABORATION 211
until now I have been unable to penetrate beyond the statics of gravitation' [El 3].
Soon thereafter, there are hints of difficulties: 'The further development of the
theory of gravitation meets with great obstacles' ( . . . stosst auf grosse Hinder-
nisse) [El4]. This undated letter to Zangger also contains a reference to von
Laue's discovery of X-ray diffraction. Since Einstein wrote congratulations to von
Laue in June [El5], it is most probable that the letter to Zangger was written in
that same month. Another letter, certainly written in June, contains a similar com-
ment: 'The generalization [of the static case] appears to be very difficult' [E16].
These repeated references to his difficulties are never accompanied by expressions
of doubt about his conclusions concerning the red shift and the bending of light.
He never wavered in his opinion that these phenomena were to be part of the
future physics. For example, he wrote in June, 'What do the colleagues say about
giving up the principle of the constancy of the velocity of light? Wien tries to help
himself by questioning the gravitational [action of] energy. That, however, is
untenable ostrich polities' [El6]. It is my understanding that Einstein was sure he
was moving in the right direction but that he gradually came to the conviction that
some essential theoretical tools were lacking.
There is a brief and cryptic statement in the last paper Einstein wrote in
Prague, in July, which indicates that he was onto something new. This paper (a
polemic against Abraham to which I shall return later) contains the following
phrase: 'The simple physical interpretation of the space-time coordinates will
have to be forfeited, and it cannot yet be grasped what form the general space-
time transformation equations could have [my italics]. I would ask all colleagues
to apply themselves to this important problem!' [El7]. Observe the exclamation
mark at the end of this sentence. I do not know how often such a symbol is found
in Einstein's writings, but I do know that it occurs only rarely.
On August 10, as said, Einstein registered as a Zurich resident. On August 16,
he writes a letter to Hopf. Gone are the remarks about devilish difficulties and
great obstacles. Instead, he writes, 'Mit der Gravitation geht es glanzend. Wenn
nicht alles trugt habe ich nun die allgemeinsten Gleichungen gefunden' [E18].*
What happened in July and early August 1912?
Two statements by Einstein tell the story. In his Kyoto address (December
1922), he said, 'If all [accelerated] systems are equivalent, then Euclidean geom-
etry cannot hold in all of them. To throw out geometry and keep [physical] laws
is equivalent to describing thoughts without words. We must search for words
before we can express thoughts. What must we search for at this point? This
problem remained insoluble to me until 1912, when I suddenly realized that
Gauss's theory of surfaces holds the key for unlocking this mystery. I realized that
Gauss's surface coordinates had a profound significance. However, I did not know
*'It is going splendidly with gravitation. If it is not all deception, then I have found the most general
equations.' One Einstein biographer wrote general for most general [S4], a nontrivial modification
of this crucial phrase.
212 RELATIVITY, THE GENERAL THEORY
at that time that Riemann had studied the foundations of geometry in an even
more profound way. I suddenly remembered that Gauss's theory was contained
in the geometry course given by Geiser when I was a student. ... I realized that
the foundations of geometry have physical significance. My dear friend the math-
ematician Grossmann was there when I returned from Prague to Zurich. From
him I learned for the first time about Ricci and later about Riemann. So / asked
my friend whether my problem could be solved by Riemann's theory [my italics],
namely, whether the invariants of the line element could completely determine the
quantities I had been looking for' [II].
Regarding the role of Carl Friedrich Geiser,* it is known that Einstein attended
at least some of Geiser's lectures [K2]. Toward the end of his life, he recalled his
fascination with Geiser's course [S5] on 'Infinitesimalgeometrie' [E19]. Gross-
mann's notebooks (preserved at the ETH) show that Geiser taught the Gaussian
theory of surfaces.
I believe that this first encounter with differential geometry played a secondary
role in Einstein's thinking in 1912. During long conversations with Einstein in
Prague, the mathematician Georg Pick expressed the conjecture that the needed
mathematical instruments for the further development of Einstein's ideas might
be found in the papers by Ricci and Levi-Civita [Fl]. I doubt that this remark
made any impression on Einstein at that time. He certainly did not go to the
trouble of consulting these important papers during his Prague days.
Einstein's second statement on the July-August period was made in 1923: 'I
had the decisive idea of the analogy between the mathematical problem of the
theory [of general relativity] and the Gaussian theory of surfaces only in 1912,
however, after my return to Zurich, without being aware at that time of the work
of Riemann, Ricci, and Levi-Civita. This [work] was first brought to my attention
by my friend Grossmann when I posed to him the problem of looking for generally
covariant tensors whose components depend only on derivatives of the coefficients
\-Sra,} of the quadratic fundamental invariant [g^dx^dx']' (my italics) [E20].
We learn from these two statements that even during his last weeks in Prague
Einstein already knew that he needed the theory of invariants and covariants
associated with the differential line element
'Geiser was a competent and influential mathematician who did much to raise the level of the math-
ematics faculty at the ETH [Kl]. His successor was Hermann Weyl.in which the ten quantities g^, are to be considered as dynamic fields which in
some way describe gravitation. Immediately upon his arrival in Zurich, he must
have told Grossmann of the problems he was struggling with. It must have been
at that time that he said, 'Grossmann, Du musst mir helfen, sonst werd' ich ver-
riickt!' [K2], G., you must help me or else I'll go crazy! With Grossmann's help,
THE EINSTEIN-GROSSMANN COLLABORATION 213
the great transition to Riemannian geometry must have taken place during the
week prior to August 16, as is indicated by Einstein's letter to Hopf.
These conclusions are in harmony with my own recollections of a discussion
with Einstein in which I asked him how the collaboration with Grossmann began.
I have a vivid though not verbatim memory of Einstein's reply: he told Grossmann
of his problems and asked him to please go to the library and see if there existed
an appropriate geometry to handle such questions. The next day Grossmann
returned (Einstein told me) and said that there indeed was such a geometry, Rie-
mannian geometry. It is quite plausible that Grossmann needed to consult the
literature since, as we have seen, his own field of research was removed from
differential geometry.
There is a curiously phrased expression of thanks to Grossmann which, I
believe, comes close to confirming this recollection of mine. It is found at the end
of the introduction to Einstein's first monograph on general relativity, written in
1916: 'Finally, grateful thoughts go at this place to my friend the mathematician
Grossmann, who by his help not only saved me the study of the relevant mathe-
matical literature but also supported me in the search for the field equations of
gravitation' [E21].
Finally, there is a recollection which I owe to Straus [S6], who also remembers
that Einstein was already thinking about general covariance when he met Gross-
mann. Einstein told Grossmann that he needed a geometry which allowed for the
most general transformations that leave Eq. 12.1 invariant. Grossmann replied
that Einstein was looking for Riemannian geometry. (Straus does not recall that
Einstein had asked Grossmann to check the literature.) But, Grossmann added,
that is a terrible mess which physicists should not be involved with. Einstein then
asked if there were any other geometries he could use. Grossmann said no and
pointed out to Einstein that the differential equations of Riemannian geometry
are nonlinear, which he considered a bad feature. Einstein replied to this last
remark that he thought, on the contrary, that was a great advantage. This last
comment is easily understood if we remember that Einstein's Prague model had
taught him that the gravitational field equations had to be nonlinear since the
gravitational field necessarily acts as its own source (see Eq. 11.14).
Having discussed what happened in July and early August 1912,1 turn to the
question of how it happened. Einstein gave the answer in 1921:
The decisive step of the transition to generally covariant equations would cer-
tainly not have taken place [had it not been for the following consideration].
Because of the Lorentz contraction in a reference frame that rotates relative to
an inertial frame, the laws that govern rigid bodies do not correspond to the
rules of Euclidean geometry. Thus Euclidean geometry must be abandoned if
noninertial frames are admitted on an equal footing. [E22]
Let us pursue Einstein's 'decisive step' a little further.
In June Einstein had written to Ehrenfest from Prague, 'It seems that the
214 RELATIVITY, THE GENERAL THEORY
equivalence [principle] can hold only for infinitely small systems [and] that there-
fore Bonn's accelerated finite system cannot be considered as a static gravitational
field, that is, it cannot be generated by masses at rest. A rotating ring does not
generate a static field in this sense, although it is a field that does not change with
time. ... In the theory of electricity, my case corresponds to the electrostatic field;
on the other hand, the general static case would, in addition, include the analog
of a static magnetic field. I am not that far yet. The equations found by me must
refer only to the static case of masses at rest. Born's field of finite extension does
not fall in this category. It has not yet become clear to me why the equivalence
principle fails (or finite fields (Born)' [E23].* Einstein was not the greatest expert
in following the scientific literature, but he apparently did know Born's main
paper of 1909 on the relativistic treatment of rigid bodies [Bl]. At the Salzburg
conference in the fall of 1909, Born's presentation of his work on the rigid body
[B2] immediately preceded Einstein's own report on the constitution of radiation
[E25], and it is known that the two men used that occasion for private discussions
on scientific topics of so much common concern [B3]. In June 1912 Einstein was
brooding over Born's earlier work, as his letter to Ehrenfest shows. I find this
fascinating since Born's formalism of 1909 manifestly has Riemannian traits! It
seems sufficiently interesting to explain how this came about.
The two main points of Born's work are (1) to define rigidity as a limiting
property of a continuously deformable medium (ignoring all aspects of its atomic
constitution) and (2) to define rigidity only as a differential, not as a global, prop-
erty. Born considered first the case of nonrelativistic Newtonian mechanics. Let
£' (i = 1,2,3) denote the cartesian coordinates of some point in the medium at the
time t = 0. The distance ds between two points £' and £' + d£' at t = 0 is given
by
*In a short paper entitled 'Does There Exist a Gravitational Action Analogous to the Electrodyn-
amic Induction Effect?' [E24], published in the Quarterly for Forensic Medicine, Einstein briefly
pursued the electromagnetic analogy mentioned in his letter to Ehrenfest. This uncommon choice of
journal was made in order to contribute to a Festschrift for Zangger. It may also indicate that Ein-
stein felt less than secure about his results.Let x'(l-',t) be the coordinates at time t of the point that was at £' at t = 0. Follow
the so-called Lagrangian method, in which the functions x' are used to describe
the history of every particle of the fluid [L2]. At t, the distance ds between two
infinitesimally close points is given by ds2 = 'Z.(dx')2. Since
THE EINSTEIN-GROSSMANN COLLABORATION 215
we have
The pu are in general time-dependent fields which satisfy pu(t;fi) = 5W. In the
Newtonian case, Bern's infinitesimal rigidity condition is given by dpu/dt = 0.
This is an invariance condition: ds2 remains the same at all times and has forever
the magnitude given by the Euclidean expression (Eq. 12.2).
Born attempted next to generalize from the Newtonian to the special relativistic
case by means of a 'relativistic Lagrangian method.' Instead of the x'(g,t), he intro-
duced *"(£")) x* = ict(£ = icr is the proper time) and we have
The Minkowskian line element
becomes, when expressed in Lagrangian coordinates,
Consider those world points which are simultaneous as seen by an observer mov-
ing with four-velocity w*1 with the volume element df?: u^d^dx^/d^1 = 0. Use
this relation to eliminate d£ from Eq. 12.8. Then Eq.12.8 can be written in the
form of Eq. 12.4 with the rigidity condition dpu/dr = 0. Ehrenfest [E26] and
Herglotz [HI] noted that Bern's relativistic local rigidity criterion for a volume
element of a body in general motion can be phrased as follows. Relative to an
observer at rest, that volume element suffers a Lorentz contraction corresponding
to the instantaneous velocity of the center of that volume element. For our pur-
poses, it is of no relevance to discuss the paradoxes to which this approach gives
rise for the case of a finite body—the case to which Einstein referred in his June
7 letter to Ehrenfest. The interested reader can find more on this subject in Pauli's
encyclopedia article [PI].
Bern's reasoning can be transcribed as follows. In the Newtonian case, intro-
duce a three-dimensional manifold on which Eq. 12.4 defines a Riemannian met-
ric. The transformations (Eq. 12.3) are point transformations linear in the differ-
entials which leave ds2 invariant. The pkl are determined by the dynamics that
governs the motions of the medium. Generalize to four dimensions.
I now return to Einstein. In his papers, he remained silent on the specific prob-
2l6 RELATIVITY, THE GENERAL THEORY
lem of the rigid body until 1916 [E27]. Could it be, however, that Horn's formal-
ism had given him the inspiration for general covariance?
However this may be, after his first dicussions with Grossmann, Einstein had
found the correct starting point for general relativity. The real work could now
begin. Hard days lay ahead. In October Einstein wrote to Sommerfeld:
At present I occupy myself exclusively with the problem of gravitation and now
believe that I shall master all difficulties with the help of a friendly mathema-
tician here. But one thing is certain, in all my life I have labored not nearly as
hard, and I have become imbued with great respect for mathematics, the subtler
part of which I had in my simple-mindedness regarded as pure luxury until
now. Compared with this problem, the original relativity is child's play. [E28]
12c. The collaboration
The Einstein-Grossmann paper (referred to here as EG), published in 1913
[E29], contains profound physical insight into the nature of measurement, some
correct general relativistic equations, some faulty reasoning, and clumsy notation.
First some remarks about the notation. The concepts of covariant and contra-
variant tensors are introduced, but all tensor indices are written as subscripts. For
example, the covariant metric tensor is denoted by g^, its contravariant counter-
part by 7^. In 1914 Einstein abandoned this miserable notation. 'Following Ricci
and Levi-Civita, we denote the contravariant character in such a way that we
place the index in the upper position' [E30]. Even then he excluded the coordinate
differentials dx* from this rule. Nor does EG contain the modern convention that
summation over repeated indices is automatically understood. This rule was intro-
duced in 1916—by none other than Einstein himself [E31]. Later he said in jest
to a friend, 'I have made a great discovery in mathematics; I have suppressed the
summation sign every time that the summation must be made over an index which
occurs twice.. ..' [K2]. I do not believe it will serve the reader if I push historical
accuracy to the point of adhering to the EG notations. Instead, I shall transcribe
the EG equations into their modern form by adopting the notations and conven-
tions of Weinberg's book on gravitation and cosmology [Wl]. All technicalities
that can be covered by a reference to that text will be omitted.
In EG, Einstein expresses his indebtedness to Mach for inspiring some of his
ideas. Comments on the influence of Mach on Einstein, an important subject in
its own right, will be deferred till Chapter 15.
As we have seen, the equivalence principle in its primitive form (equality of
gravitational and inertial mass for a material object) was Einstein's guide ever
since 1907. It is characteristic, -because of his limited acquaintance with the liter-
ature, that only five years later would he become aware of the precision measure-
ments of Roland the Baron Eotvos of Vasarosnameny that showed the high degree
of accuracy of the equality of inertial and gravitational mass. He discussed the
*For an account of the precursors of Eotvos and of the latter's experiments, see [W2]. For a descrip-
tion of improved results of more recent vintage, see the papers by Dicke and collaborators [Rl] and
by Braginskii and Panov [B4].THE EINSTEIN-GROSSMANN COLLABORATION 217
Eotvos experiments for the first time in EG, concluding that 'the physical identity
of gravitational and inertial mass . .. possesses a high degree of probability.'*
After these prefatory remarks, I turn to Grossmann's contribution to EG. 'Ein-
stein grew up in the Christoffel-Ricci tradition,' Christian Felix Klein wrote in
his history of mathematics in the nineteenth century [K3]. This masterwork
explains how from a mathematical point of view general relativity may be consid-
ered as one of the culmination points in a noble line of descendance starting with
the work of Carl Friedrich Gauss, moving on to Georg Friedrich Bernhard Rie-
mann, and from there to Elwin Bruno Christoffel, Gregorio Ricci-Curbastro,
Tullio Levi-Civita, and others. I hope my readers will derive the same enjoyment
as I did in reading these original papers as well as Klein's history. I would further
recommend the essays by Dirk Struik on the history of differential geometry [S7].
I restrict my own task to explaining how Einstein 'grew up.' The two principal
references in Grossmann's contribution to EG are the memoir 'On the Transfor-
mation of Homogeneous Differential Forms of the Second Degree' by Christoffel
[Cl], written in Zurich in 1869, and the comprehensive review paper of 1901 on
the 'absolute differential calculus' [R2] by Ricci and his brilliant pupil Levi-
Civita.
Grossman's contribution consists of a lucid exposition of Riemannian geometry
and its tensor calculus. In addition, he gives mathematical details in support of
some of Einstein's arguments. He begins with a discussion of the invariance of the
line element (Eq. 12.1) under the transformation
Then follow the definitions of tensors, the principal manipulations of tensor alge-
bra (as in [ W3]), the use of the metric tensor to relate covariant and contravariant
tensors, and the description of covariant differentiation ('Erweiterung'). Recall
that the covariant derivative V^ of a contravariant vector V is given by
where the affine connection ('Christoffel Drei-Indizes Symbol') FJ, is a nontensor
given by [W4]
2l8 RELATIVITY, THE GENERAL THEORY
Of particular interest for EG is the covariant divergence of a second-rank tensor
T" rwm
* For dcfiniteness, «**** is defined in a locally cartesian system where 0 denotes the time direction, 123
the space directions.where
For a symmetric T"" we have:
a relation that Einstein used in the discussion of energy-momentum conservation.
As a further instance of covariant differentiation, the equation
should be mentioned [ W6]. This is one of the relations that threw Einstein off the
track for some time.
Grossmann devotes a special section to antisymmetric tensors. He notes that
Eq. 12.13 implies that
He also points out that ^^/Vg is a contravariant fourth-rank tensor derived
from the Levi-Civita symbol ^^ = + 1( —1) if a@y8 is an even (odd) permuta-
tion of 0123, zero otherwise.* As a result
is a tensor, the dual of Fyl.
Grossmann's concluding section starts as follows. 'The problem of the formu-
lation of the differential equations of a gravitation field draws attention to the
differential invariants . .. and ... covariants of ... ds2 = g^dx^dx".' He then
presents to Einstein the major tensor of the future theory: the 'Ghristoffel four-
index symbol,' now better known as the Riemann-Christoffel tensor [W7]:
THE EINSTEIN-GROSSMANN COLLABORATION 219
From this tensor 'it is ... possible to derive a second-rank tensor of the second
order [in the derivatives of £„,],' the Ricci tensor:
"The specifications of the actual rods and clocks suited for this purpose are delicate [Ml]. This
author must confess to an occasional doubt as to whether this problem has as yet been fully under-
stood on the atomic and subatomic levels.Having come this close, Grossmann next makes a mistake to which I shall return
in the course of describing Einstein's contributions to EG, a topic which should
be prefaced by stating Grossmann's agreement with Einstein. 'With pleasure, he
[G.] was ready to collaborate on this problem under the condition, however, that
he would not have to assume any responsibility for any assertions or interpreta-
tions of a physical nature' [E32].
Einstein begins by stating his desideratum: to generalize the theory of relativity
in such a way that his earlier result on the variability of the light velocity in an
inhomogeneous static gravitational field [E33] shall be contained as a special case.
Without preliminaries, he turns at once to the demand of general covariance: the
motion of a mass point shall be determined by Eqs. 11.12 and 12.1, which I copy:
These equations shall be invariant under the transformations (Eqs. 12.9 and
12.10), and ds2 shall be an 'absolute invariant.' Then he goes on to state the prin-
ciple of equivalence as we know it today: there is a special transformation of the
type(Eq. 12.9):
that brings the quadratic form (Eq. 12.22) locally on principal axes:
This local coordinate frame in which the gravitational field has been transformed
away acts as a free-falling infinitesimal laboratory. Time and space measurements
can be performed locally in this frame by the same methods used in the special
theory of relativity.* It follows that in terms of the general dx1', as in Eq. 12.22,
'the corresponding natural distance can be determined only when the g^ which
determine the gravitational field are known. . .. The gravitational field influences
the measuring bodies... in a definite way.' With these words, he states the broad
program of the general theory of relativity.
220 RELATIVITY, THE GENERAL THEORY
Einstein uses Eqs. 12.21 and 12.22 to discuss the properties of the energy and
momentum of a matter distribution with mass m (m being 'a characteristic con-
stant independent of the gravitational potential'). In particular he derives the
expression
for the energy-momentum tensor of pressureless matter, where p0 = ml Va and
VQ = d£ is the rest-volume element of the material distribution. His next advance
is made with the help of Grossmann's Eq. 12.15. He conjectures that the energy-
momentum conservation laws must be of the generally covariant form
in which the second term expresses the action of the gravitational field on matter.
The geodesic equation of motion
[dr = (—g^dx'dx")^2 is the proper time] for a particle with nonvanishing mass
is not found in EG (Einstein first derived this equation in 1914). It is important
to note this absence, since the two authors experienced some difficulty in recog-
nizing the connection between their work and the Newtonian limit. For later pur-
poses, it is helpful to recall how this limit is found for the equation of motion (Eq.
12.28) [W8]: (1) neglect die/dr relative to dt/dr (slow motion); (2) put dgjdt
= 0 (stationarity); (3) write
and retain only first-order terms in hm (weak-field approximation). Then one
obtains the Newtonian equation
where <j> = — h^/2 is the Newtonian potential, so that
Nevertheless, though the discussion of the motion of matter was not complete,
all was going well so far, and the same continued to be true for electrodynamics.
Indeed, EG contains the correct generally covariant form of the Maxwell
equations:
THE EINSTEIN-GROSSMANN COLLABORATION 221
12d. The Stumbling Block
Clearly, Einstein and Grossmann were in quest of a tensor !"„, of such a kind that
the Newton-Poisson equation(see Eqs. 12.17 and 12.18). There remained the last question: what are the field
equations of gravitation itself? Einstein guessed correctly that 'the needed gener-
alization [of the Newtonian equations] should be of the form
where ... F,,,, is a ... tensor of the second rank which is generated by differential
operations from the fundamental tensor gf,.'
Then the trouble began.
would emerge as a limiting case. This, Einstein said, was impossible as long as
one requires, in the spirit of Eq. 12.35 that F^ be no higher than second order in
the derivatives of the g^. Two arguments are given for this erroneous conclusion.
The first one, found in Einstein's part, can be phrased as follows. One needs a
generalization of div grad 0. The generalization of the gradient operator is the
covariant differentiation. The generalization of 0 is g^. But the covariant deriv-
ative of g,,, vanishes (Eq. 12.16)! In Einstein's words, 'These operations [the cov-
ariant version of div grad] degenerate when they are applied to ... g^. From this,
it seems to follow that the sought-for equations will be covariant only with respect
to a certain group of transformations .. . which for the time being is unknown to
us.'
The second argument, contained in Grossmann's part, is also incorrect. As was
mentioned above, Grossmann saw that the Ricci tensor (Eq. 12.20) might well be
a candidate for T^ in Eq. 12.34. However, according to Grossmann, 'it turns out
. . . that this tensor does not reduce to A0 in the special case of the weak gravita-
tional field.' Reluctantly, the conclusion is drawn in EG that the invariance group
for the gravitational equations has to be restricted to linear transformations only
(dx"/dx'f is independent of x"), since then, it is argued, d/dx"(gvdgp,,/dx'') does
transform like a tensor, which, moreover, reduces to Q^ in the weak-field limit
given by Eq. 12.29. 'If the field is static and if only g^ varies [as a function of
x], then we arrive at the case of Newton's gravitation theory.' The troublesome
Eq. 12.16 had been evaded!
Einstein also gave a 'physical argument' for the impossibility of generally
covariant equations for the gravitational field. This argument, though of course
222 RELATIVITY, THE GENERAL THEORY
incorrect, is nevertheless quite important. Consider (he says) a four-dimensional
space-time domain divided into two parts, L, and L2. The source 6^ of the grav-
itational field (see Eq. 12.34) shall be nonzero only in L,. Nevertheless, B^ deter-
mines the g,,, in all of L by means of Eq. 12.34. Make a generally covariant
transformation #„ -» xj, such that x^ — x'^ in L, while, at least in part of L2,
x^ ¥= x'p. Then g^ ¥= g'^ in that part of L2. The source 6^ remains unchanged:
®i» — &*>in L, while, in L2, 6^ once it is equal to zero stays equal to zero. There-
fore, general covariance implies that more than one g^ distribution is possible for
a given 6^ distribution. 'If—as was done in this paper—the requirement is
adhered to that the g,,, are completely determined by the #„„ then one is forced to
restrict the choice of reference system' (my italics). (Note that the above transfor-
mation x^ —* x\ is not allowed if the transformation is linear!) This reasoning is
quite correct. Then what had gone wrong?
Einstein's 'physical argument' is irrelevant. The gf, are not completely deter-
mined by #„,,. His predicament was, put most succinctly, that he did not know the
Bianchi identities. Let us consider the final form for Eq. 12.34, which he was to
derive in 1915:
where R^ is given by Eq. 12.20 and R = K"g^. The left-hand side satisfies the
four Bianchi identities
Because of these relations, Eq. 12.36 does not determine the g1" uniquely—just as
the Maxwell equations do not determine the electromagnetic potentials uniquely
[W9]. The gf, are determined only up to a transformation gf, —» g'^, correspond-
ing to an arbitrary coordinate transformation x^ —*• x'f. Einstein still had to under-
stand that this freedom expresses the fact that the choice of coordinates is a matter
of convention without physical content. That he knew by 1915—although even
then he still did not know the Bianchi identities (Chapter 15).
We now also understand Grossmann's difficulty with the Newtonian limit. Use
Eq. 12.29 and define h'^ = £„„-}£ v^**- Then Eq- 12-35 becomes
an intransparent relation. However, one is free to choose a coordinate frame in
which
In the static weak-field limit, all components of Rf, except R^ are negligible and
(see Eq. 12.31)
THE EINSTEIN-GROSSMANN COLLABORATION 223
Einstein did not at once perceive the apparent restrictions on general covariance
as a flaw. He felt that the problem had been solved. Early in 1913 he wrote to
Ehrenfest. 'The gravitation affair has been clarified to my full satisfaction
(namely, the circumstance that the equations of the gravitational field are covar-
iant only for linear transformations). One can specifically prove that generally
covariant equations which completely determine the [gravitational] field from the
matter tensor cannot exist at all. What can be more beautiful than that this nec-
essary specialization follows from the conservation laws?' (his italics) [E34].
This concludes a sketch of the arguments by which Einstein and Grossmann
arrived at a hybrid theory in which some basic elements of the ultimate theory are
already in evidence. I shall omit as of less interest the calculations which led them
to explicit expressions for 6^ and T^ in Eq. 12.34 that satisfy the conservation
laws. The effort had been immense. Apologizing to Ehrenfest for a long silence,
Einstein wrote in May 1913, 'My excuse lies in the literally superhuman efforts
I have devoted to the gravitational problem. I now have the inner conviction that
I have come upon what is correct and also that a murmur of indignation will go
through the rows of colleagues when the paper appears, which will be the case in
a few weeks' [E35].
I have now come to the end of the more complex and adventurous part of Ein-
stein's road to the general theory of relativity. It began in 1907 with the equiva-
lence principle, then there were the years of silence, then came the Prague papers
about the c field, and finally the collaboration with Grossmann. In 1913 the theory
was, of course, far from its logical completion. But the remaining story of Ein-
stein's contributions is much more straightforward. It consists mainly of the rec-
ognitions that general covariance can be implemented, that the Ricci tensor is the
clue to the right gravitational equations, and that there are the three classical suc-
cesses of the theory. All this will be discussed in later chapters.
12e. The Aftermath
In 1905 Einstein had dedicated his doctoral thesis to Grossmann. In 1955 he ded-
icated his last published autobiographical sketch [E32] to the same old friend, long
since deceased. The brief remainder of this chapter is devoted to the tale of Ein-
stein and Grossmann from the times following their epochal collaboration until
shortly before Einstein's death.the desired result.
224 RELATIVITY, THE GENERAL THEORY
On September 9, 1913, first Einstein then Grossmann read papers before the
annual meeting of the Swiss Physical Society [E36, G2]. These papers are sim-
plified versions of EG and contain nothing substantially new. Einstein had already
moved to Berlin when their next and last joint paper came out [E37]. In this work,
they returned to the gravitational equations to ask, What are the most general
transformations admissible under the assumption that the g^ are completely
determined by the field equations? In EG they had shown that the demand of
linearity was sufficient for this purpose. Now they found that some nonlinear
transformations are admissible as well (including accelerations of various kinds).
Actually, they were getting closer to the correct answers: their unjustified criterion
of uniquely determined g^, is expressed by a set of four not generally covariant
constraints. As is now well known, four constraints with this property (the so-
called coordinate conditions) are indeed required in the correct general theory in
order to eliminate the ambiguities in the gm by means of the choice of some par-
ticular coordinate system [W10].
All publications by Grossmann during the next seven years deal with pedagog-
ical and political subjects. Among social issues to which he devoted himself during
the First World War was aid to students of all nations who had been taken pris-
oners of war. Between 1922 and 1930 he wrote another five papers on his favorite
subject: descriptive geometry.
By 1920, the first signs of the disease that would fell him, multiple sclerosis,
had already appeared. By 1926 the symptoms were severe. His daughter Elsbeth
Grossmann told me that from then on he had difficulties speaking. In 1927 he had
to resign his professorship at the ETH.
In 1931 Grossmann wrote his last paper [G3]. It is a polemic, without formu-
lae, against the concepts of parallel displacement (Levi-Civita), absolute parallel-
ism (Cartan), and distant parallelism (Einstein). The paper originated as a reac-
tion to what Grossmann was told by a friend about a lecture by Einstein on unified
field theory. Grossmann asserts that there are logical objections to all the concepts
just mentioned. One cannot but feel sad upon reading this paper. Its contents were
discussed in a correspondence between Einstein and Grossmann that is friendly
yet strained. Einstein also wrote to Cartan, urging him not to answer Grossmann
publicly [E38]; Cartan agreed [C2].*
After Grossmann's death in 1936, Einstein wrote a moving and deeply respect-
ful letter to his widow [E39] about Grossmann's 'gruesome fate after early years
rich in work and aspiration.' He writes of Grossmann 'the exemplary student
. .. having good relations with the teachers ... . I, separate and dissatisfied, not
very popular.' He writes of Grossmann's helping him to obtain a job, 'without
which I would not have died but might have spiritually wasted away.' He writes
of 'the joint feverish work a decade later.' And adds, 'Aber eines ist doch schon.
Wir waren und blieben Freunde durchs Leben hindurch.'**
* These two letters are contained in the published Cartan-Einstein correspondence [C3].
**But one thing is really beautiful. We were and remained friends throughout life.
THE EINSTEIN-GROSSMANN COLLABORATION 225
I have a sense of regret that Einstein did not do something for which he had
often demonstrated a talent and sensitivity: to write an obituary shortly after
Grossmann's death. He did so later. In 1955 he wrote of Grossmann, of their
collaboration, and of how the latter had 'checked through the literature and soon
discovered that the mathematical problem had already been solved by Riemann,
Ricci, and Levi-Civita.. . . Riemann's achievement was the greatest one.' In this
article, Einstein wrote, 'The need to express at least once in my life my gratitude
to Marcel Grossmann gave me the courage to write this .. . autobiographical
sketch' [E32].
References
Bl. M. Born, AdP 30, 1 (1909).
B2. , Phys. Zeitschr. 10, 814 (1909).
B3. , Phys. Zeitschr. 11, 233 (1910).
B4. V. B. Braginskii and V. I. Panov, Societ. Phys. JETP 34, 463 (1972).
Cl. E. B. Christoffel, Z. Math. 70, 46 (1869).
C2. E. Cartan, letter to A. Einstein, June 24, 1931.
C3. Cartan-Einstein Correspondence on Absolute Parallelism (R. Debever, Ed.).
Princeton University Press, Princeton, N.J., 1979.
El. A. Einstein, letter to M. Grossmann, November 18, 1911.
E2. , Astrophys. J. 63, 196 (1926).
E3. , telegram to H. Zangger, November 20, 1911.
E4. , letter to H. Zangger, January 27, 1912.
E5. , letter to A. Stern, February 2, 1912.
E6. , letter to H. Zangger, Spring 1912.
E7. , letter to H. A. Lorentz, November 23, 1911.
E8. , letter to H. Zangger, February 29, 1912.
E9. , letter to P. Ehrenfest, 1913, undated.
E10. , AdP3S, 443 (1912).
Ell. , letter to M. Besso, March 26, 1912.
E12. , letter to P. Ehrenfest, 1912, undated.
E13. , letter to H. Zangger, May 20, 1912.
E14. , letter to H. Zangger, 1912, undated.
E15. , postcard to M. von Laue, June 10, 1912.
E16. , letter to L. Hopf, June 12, 1912.
E17. , AdP 38, 1059 (1912).
E18. —, letter to L. Hopf, August 16, 1912.
E19. —— in Helle Zeit, dunkle Zeit (C. Seelig, Ed.), p. 10. Europa Verlag, Zurich,
1956.
E20. Einstein a Praha (J. Bicak, Ed.), p. 42. Prometheus, Prague, 1979.
E21. , Die Grundlage der Allgemeinen Relativitdtstheorie, p. 6. J. A. Barth,
Leipzig, 1916.
E22. —, Geometric undErfahnmg. Springer, Berlin, 1921; also PAW, 1921, p. 123.
E23. , letter to P. Ehrenfest, June 7, 1912.
E24. , Viertelj. Schrift Ger. Medizin 44, 37 (1912).
£25. , Phys. Zeitschr. 10, 817 (1909).
226 RELATIVITY, THE GENERAL THEORY
E26. P. Ehrenfest, Phys. Zeitschr. 10, 918 (1909).
E27. A. Einstein, AdP 49, 769 (1916).
E28. , letter to A. Sommerfeld, October 29, 1912. See A. Hermann, Einstein/Som-
merfeld Briefwechsel, p. 26. Schwabe Verlag, Stuttgart., 1968.
E29. and M. Grossmann, Z. Math. Physik. 62, 225 (1913).
E30. PAW, 1914, p. 1030.
E31. , AdP 49, 769 (1916), Sec. 5.
E32. in Helle Zeit, dunkle Zeit (C. Seelig, Ed.). Europa Verlag, Zurich, 1956.
E33. , AdP 38, 443 (1912).
E34. , letter to P. Ehrenfest, 1913, undated.
E35. , letter to P. Ehrenfest, May 28, 1913.
E36. Viertelj. Schrift Naturf. Ges. Zurich 58, 284 (1913). An abbreviated version
appears in Verh. Schiu. Naturf. Ges. 96, 137 (1914), and a French translation in
Arch. Sci. Phys. Nat. 37, 5 (1914).
E37. and M. Grossmann, Z. Math. Physik. 63, 215 (1915).
E38. , letter to E. Cartan, June 13, 1931.
E39. , letter to Mrs M. Grossmann, September 26, 1936.
Fl. Ph. Frank, Albert Einstein; Sein Leben und seine Zeit, p. 141. Vieweg, Braun-
schweig, 1979.
Gl. M. Grossmann, Proceedings of the 5th International Congress of Mathematicians,
August 1912, p. 66. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1913.
G2. , Viertelj. Schrift Naturf. Ges. Zurich 58, 291 (1913).
G3. , Viertelj. Schrift Naturf. Ges. Zurich 76, 42 (1931).
HI. G. Herglotz, AdP 31, 393 (1909).
II. J. Ishiwara, Einstein Koen-Roku. Tokyo-Tosho, Tokyo, 1977.
Kl. L. Kollros, Verh. Schw. Naturf. Ges. 115, 522 (1934).
K2. , Helv. Phys. Acta Suppl. 4, 271 (1956).
K3. F. Klein, Vorlesungen iiber die Entwicklung der Mathematik im 19. Jahrhundert,
Vol. 2, p. 189. Springer, New York, 1979.
LI. H. A. Lorentz, letter to A. Einstein, December 6, 1911.
L2. H. Lamb, Hydrodynamics (6th edn.), p. 12. Dover, New York.
Ml. C. W. Misner, K. S. Thome, and J. A. Wheeler, Gravitation, p. 393. Freeman,
San Francisco, 1973.
PI. W. Pauli in Encyklopddie der Mathematischen Naturwissenschaften, Vol. V, 2,
Sec. 45, Teubner, Leipzig, 1921.
Rl. P. G. Roll, R. Krotkov, and R. H. Dicke, Ann. Phys. 26, 442 (1964).
R2. G. Ricci and T. Levi-Civita, Math. Ann. 54, 125 (1901).
51. W. Saxer, Viertelj. Schr. Naturf. Ges. Zurich 81, 322 (1936).
52. Se, p. 226.
53. Se, pp. 227-33.
54. Se, p. 242.
55. Se, p. 38.
56. E. G. Straus, discussion with A. Pais, December 11, 1979.
57. D. J. Struik, his 19, 92 (1932); 20, 161 (1933).
Wl. S. Weinberg, Gravitation and Cosmology. Wiley, New York, 1972 (quoted as W
hereafter).
W2. W, pp. 11-13.
THE EINSTEIN-GROSSMANN COLLABORATION 227
W3. W, pp. 93-8.
W4. W, pp. 75, 103-6.
W5. W, pp. 98, 107.
W6. W, p. 105.
W7. W, p. 133.
W8. W, p. 77.
W9. W, p. 161.
W10. W, p. 162.
