i8
Preliminaries
18a. An Outline of Einstein's Contributions
In 1948, I undertook to put together the Festschrift in honor of Einstein's seven-
tieth birthday [Rl]. In a letter to prospective contributors, I wrote, 'It is planned
that the first article of the volume shall be of a more personal nature and, written
by a representative colleague, shall pay homage to Einstein on behalf of all con-
tributors' [PI]. I then asked Robert Andrews Millikan to do the honors, as the
senior contributor.* He accepted and his article is written in his customary forth-
right manner. On that occasion, he expressed himself as follows on the equation
E = hv — P for the photoelectric effect. 'I spent ten years of my life testing that
1905 equation of Einstein's and contrary to all my expectations, I was compelled
in 1915 to assert its unambiguous verification in spite of its unreasonableness,
since it seemed to violate everything we knew about the interference of light' [Ml].
Physics had progressed, and Millikan had mellowed since the days of his 1915
paper on the photoeffect, as is evidenced by what he wrote at that earlier time:
'Einstein's photoelectric equation .. . appears in every case to predict exactly the
observed results.. .. Yet the semicorpuscular theory by which Einstein arrived at
his equation seems at present wholly untenable' [M2]; and in his next paper,
Millikan mentioned 'the bold, not to say the reckless, hypothesis of an electro-
magnetic light corpuscle' [M3]. Nor was Millikan at that time the only first-rate
physicist to hold such views, as will presently be recalled. Rather, the physics
community at large had received the light-quantum hypothesis with disbelief and
with skepticism bordering on derision. As one of the architects of the pre-1925
quantum theory, the "old" quantum theory, Einstein had quickly found both
enthusiastic and powerful support for one of his two major contributions to this
field: the quantum theory of specific heat. (There is no reason to believe that such
support satisfied any particular need in him.) By sharp contrast, from 1905 to
1923, he was a man apart in being the only one, or almost the only one, to take
the light-quantum seriously.
*It was decided later that L. de Broglie, M. von Laue, and P. Frank should also write articles of a
personal nature.
357
358 THE QUANTUM THEORY
The critical reaction to Einstein's light-quantum hypothesis of 1905 is of great
importance for an understanding of the early developments in quantum physics.
It was also a reaction without parallel in Einstein's scientific career. Deservedly,
his papers before 1905 had not attracted much attention. But his work on Brown-
ian motion drew immediate and favorable response. The same is true for relativity.
Planck became an advocate of the special theory only months after its publication;
the younger generation took note as well. Lorentz, Hilbert, F. Klein, and others
had followed the evolution of his ideas on general relativity; after 1915 they and
others immediately started to work out its consequences. Attitudes to his work on
unified field theory were largely critical. Many regarded these efforts as untimely,
but few rejected the underlying idea out of hand. In regard to the quantum theory,
however, Einstein almost constantly stood apart, from 1905 until his death. Those
years cover two disparate periods, the first of which (1905-1923) I have just men-
tioned. During the second period, from 1926 until the end of his life, he was the
only one, or again nearly the only one, to maintain a profoundly skeptical attitude
toward quantum mechanics. I shall discuss Einstein's position on quantum
mechanics in Chapter 25, but cannot refrain from stating at once that Einstein's
skepticism should not be equated with a purely negative attitude. It is true that
he was forever critical of quantum mechanics, but at the same time he had his
own alternative program for a synthetic theory in which particles, fields, and
quantum phenomena all would find their place. Einstein pursued this program
from about 1920 (before the discovery of quantum mechanics!) until the end of
his life. Numerous discussions with him in his later years have helped me gain a
better understanding of his views.
But let me first return to the days of the old quantum theory. Einstein's con-
tributions to it can be grouped under the following headings.
(a) The Light-Quantum. In 1900 Planck discovered the blackbody radiation
law without using light-quanta. In 1905 Einstein discovered light-quanta without
using Planck's law. Chapter 19 is devoted to the light-quantum hypothesis. The
interplay between the ideas of Planck and Einstein is discussed. A brief history of
the photoelectric effect from 1887 to 1915 is given. This Chapter ends with a
detailed account of the reasons why the light-quantum paper drew such a negative
response.
(b) Specific Heats. Toward the end of the nineteenth century, there existed
grave conflicts between the data on specific heats and their interpretation in terms
of the equipartition theorem of classical statistical mechanics. In 1906 Einstein
completed the first paper on quantum effects in the solid state. This paper showed
the way out of these paradoxes and also played an important role in the final
formulation of the third law of thermodynamics. These topics are discussed in
Chapter 20.
(c) The Photon. The light-quantum as originally defined was a parcel of
energy. The concept of the photon as a particle with definite energy and momen-
tum emerged only gradually. Einstein himself did not discuss photon momentum
PRELIMINARIES 359
until 1917. Relativistic energy momentum conservation relations involving pho-
tons were not written down till 1923. Einstein's role in these developments is dis-
cussed in Chapter 21, which begins with Einstein's formulation in 1909 of the
particle-wave duality for the case of electromagnetic radiation and also contains
an account of his discovery of the A and B coefficients and of his earliest concern
with the breakdown of classical causality. The Chapter concludes with remarks
on the role of the Compton effect.
The reader may wonder why the man who discovered the relation E = hv for
light in 1905 and who propounded the special theory of relativity in that same
year would not have stated sooner the relation p = hv/c. I shall comment on this
question in Section 25d.
(d) Einstein's work on quantum statistics is treated in Chapter 23, which also
includes a discussion of Bose's contribution.
(e) Einstein's role as a key transitional figure in the discovery of wave
mechanics will be discussed in Chapter 24.
I shall continue the outline of Einstein's contributions to the quantum theory
in Section 18c. First, however, I should like to take leave of our main character
for a brief while in order to comment on the singular role of the photon in the
history of the physics of particles and fields. In so doing, I shall interrupt the
historical sequence of events in order to make some comments from today's van-
tage point.
18b. Particle Physics: The First Fifty Years
Let us leave aside the photon for a while and ask how physicists reacted to the
experimental discovery or the theoretical prediction (whichever came first) of other
new particles. No detailed references to the literature will be given, in keeping
with the brevity of my comments on this subject.
The discovery in 1897 of the first particle, the electron, was an unexpected
experimental development which brought to an end the ongoing debate about
whether cathode rays are molecular torrents or aetherial disturbances. The answer
came as a complete surprise: they are neither, but rather are a new form of matter.
There were some initial reactions of disbelief. J. J. Thomson once recalled the
comment of a colleague who was present at the first lecture Thomson gave on the
new discovery: 'I [T.] was told long afterwards by a distinguished physicist who
had been present at my lecture that he thought I had been "pulling their leg" '
[Tl]. Nevertheless, the existence of the electron was widely accepted within the
span of very few years. By 1900 it had become clear that beta rays are electrons
as well. The discoveries of the free electron and of the Zeeman effect (in 1896)
combined made it evident that a universal atomic constituent had been discovered
and that the excitations of electrons in atoms were somehow the sources of atomic
spectra.
The discovery of the electron was a discovery at the outer experimental frontier.
360 THE QUANTUM THEORY
In the first instance, this finding led to the abandonment of the earlier qualitative
concept of the indivisibility of the atom, but it did not require, or at least not at
once, a modification of the established corpus of theoretical physics.
During the next fifty years, three other particles entered the scene in ways not
so dissimilar from the case of the electron, namely, via unexpected discoveries of
an experimental nature at the outer frontier. These are the proton (or, rather, the
nucleus), the neutron,* and—just half a century after the electron—the muon,
the first of the electron's heavier brothers. As to the acceptance of these particles,
it took little time to realize that their coming was, in each instance, liberating.
Within two years after Rutherford's nuclear model, Bohr was able to make the
first real theoretical predictions in atomic physics. Almost at once after the discov-
ery of the neutron, the first viable models of the nucleus were proposed, and
nuclear physics could start in earnest. The muon is still one of the strangest ani-
mals in the particle zoo, yet its discovery was liberating, too, since it made possible
an understanding of certain anomalies in the absorption of cosmic rays. (Prior to
the discovery of the muon, theorists had already speculated about the need for an
extra particle to explain these anomalies.)
To complete the particle list of the first half century, there are four more par-
ticles (it is too early to include the graviton) which have entered physics—but in
a different way: initially, they were theoretical proposals. The first neutrino was
proposed in order to save the law of energy conservation in beta radioactivity. The
first meson (now called the pion) was proposed as the conveyer of nuclear forces.
Both suggestions were ingenious, daring, innovative, and successful—but did not
demand a radical change of theory. Within months after the public unveiling of
the neutrino hypothesis, the first theory of the weak interactions, which is still
immensely useful, was proposed. The meson hypothesis immediately led to con-
siderable theoretical activity as well.
The neutrino hypothesis was generally assimilated long before this particle was
actually observed. The interval between the proposal and the first observation of
the neutrino is even longer than the corresponding interval for the photon. The
meson postulate found rapid experimental support from cosmic-ray data—or so
it seemed. More than a decade passed before it became clear that the bulk of these
observations actually involved muons instead of pions.
Then there was the positron, 'a new kind of particle, unknown to experimental
physics, having the same mass and opposite charge to an electron' [Dl]. This
particle was proposed in 1931, after a period of about three years of considerable
*It is often said, and not without grounds, that the neutron was actually anticipated. In fact, twelve
years before its discovery, in one of his Bakerian lectures (1920) Rutherford spoke [R2] of 'the idea
of the possible existence of an atom of mass one which has zero nuclear charge.' Nor is there any
doubt that the neutron being in the air at the Cavendish was of profound importance to its discoverer,
James Chadwick [Cl]. Even so, not even a Rutherford could have guessed that his 1920 neutron
(then conjectured to be a tightly bound proton-electron system) was so essentially different from the
particle that would eventually go by that name.
PRELIMINARIES 361
controversy over the meaning of the negative energy solutions of the Dirac equa-
tion. During that period, one participant expressed fear for 'a new crisis in quan-
tum physics'[Wl]. The crisis was short-lived, however. The experimental discov-
ery of the positron in 1932 was a triumph for theoretical physics. The positron
theory belongs to the most important advances of the 1930s.
And then there was the photon, the first particle to be predicted theoretically.
Never, either in the first half-century or in the years thereafter, has the idea of
a new particle met for so long with such resistance as the photon. The light-quan-
tum hypothesis was considered somewhat of an aberration even by leading phys-
icists who otherwise held Einstein in the highest esteem. Its assimilation came
after a struggle more intense and prolonged than for any other particle ever pos-
tulated. Because never, to this day, has the proposal of any particle but the photon
led to the creation of a new inner frontier. The hypothesis seemed paradoxical:
light was known to consist of waves, hence it could not consist of particles. Yet
this paradox alone does not fully account for the resistance to Einstein's hypoth-
esis. We shall look more closely at the situation in Section 19f.
18c. The Quantum Theory: Lines of Influence
The skeleton diagram below is an attempt to reduce the history of the quantum
theory to its barest outlines. At the same time, this figure will serve as a guide to
the rest of this paper; in it X -* Y means 'the work of X was instrumental to an
advance by Y.' Arrows marked M and R indicate that the influence went via the
theory of matter and radiation, respectively.
If Planck, Einstein, and Bohr are the fathers of the quantum theory, then Gus-
tav Robert Kirchhoff is its grandfather. Since he was the founder of optical spectra
analysis (in 1860, together with Robert Bunsen [Kl]), an arrow leads from him
and Bunsen to Johann Jakob Balmer, the inventor of the Balmer formula [Bl].
From Balmer we move to Bohr, the founder of atomic quantum dynamics.
Returning to Kirchhoff as the discoverer of the universal character of blackbody
radiation [K2], we note that his influence goes via Wien to Planck (see further,
Section 19a).
The arrow from Wien to Planck refers to the latter's formulation of his black-
body radiation law and the triangle Wien-Planck-Einstein to the mutual influ-
ences which led to the light-quantum hypothesis (Sections 19b-d).
The arrow from Bose to Einstein refers to Bose's work on electromagnetic
radiation and its impact on Einstein's contributions to the quantum statistics of a
material gas (Chapter 23, wherein Einstein's influence on Dirac is also briefly
mentioned).
The triangle Einstein-de Broglie-Schroedinger has to do with the role of Ein-
stein as the transitional figure in the birth of wave mechanics, discussed in Chapter
24.
The h marking the arrow from Planck to Bohr serves as a reminder that not
362 THE QUANTUM THEORY
The quantum theory: Lines of influence.
so much the details of Planck's work on radiation as the very introduction by
Planck of his new universal constant h was decisive for Bohr's ideas about atomic
stability. An account of Bohr's influence on Heisenberg and of Heisenberg's and
Schroedinger's impact on Dirac is beyond the scope of the present book.
In the case of Einstein and Bohr, it cannot be said that the work of one induced
major advances in the work of the other. Therefore, the simplified diagram does
not and should not contain links between them. Nevertheless, for forty years there
were influences at work between Einstein and Bohr and these were in fact intense,
but on a different plane. In a spirit of friendly and heroic antagonism, these two
men argued about questions of principle. Chapter 22 deals with Bohr's resistance
to Einstein's idea of the photon. This was but a brief interlude. It ended with the
detailed experimental vindication of the photon concept, to which Bohr fully sub-
scribed from then on. Their far more important debate on the foundations of
quantum mechanics began in 1927. On these issues, the intellectual resistance and
PRELIMINARIES 363
opposition of one against the most basic views held by the other continued una-
bated until the end of Einstein's life. At issue were the criteria by which one should
judge the completeness of the description of the physical world. Their discussions
have not affected the evolution of physical theory. Yet theirs will be remembered
as one of the great debates on scientific principle between two dominant contem-
porary figures.
The dialogue between Bohr and Einstein had one positive outcome: it forced
Bohr to express the tenets of complementarity in increasingly precise language.
This debate will be one of the themes of Chapter 25, which deals with Einstein's
objections to quantum mechanics.
A point made earlier bears repeating here: Einstein's own visions on physics
issues were often in opposition to the mainstream, but they were never negative.
So it was in the case of quantum mechanics. After 1930 he considered this theory
to be consistent and successful but incomplete. At the same time, he had his own
aspirations for a future theory of particles and fields. I shall try to make clear in
Chapter 26 what these were.
I do not believe that Einstein presented valid arguments for the incompleteness
of quantum theory, but neither do I think that the times are ripe to answer the
question of whether the quantum-mechanical description is indeed complete, since
to this day the physics of particles and fields is a subject beset with many unre-
solved fundamental problems. Among these, there is one that was most dear to
Einstein and with which he (and all of us to date) struggled in vain: the synthesis
of quantum physics with general relativity. In the survey given in Chapter 2, I
noted that we still have far to go in regard to this synthesis. The assessment of
Einstein's view of this problem, to be given in Chapter 26, must therefore neces-
sarily be tentative.
References
Bl. J. J. Balmer, AdP 25, 80 (1885).
Cl. J. Chadwick, Proceedings Tenth International Conference on the History of Science,
Ithaca, Vol., 1, p. 159. Hermann, Paris, 1962.
Dl. P.A.M. Dirac, Proc. Roy. Soc. A133, 60 (1931).
Kl. G. Kirchhoff and R. Bunsen, Ann. Phys. Chem. 110, 160 (1860).
K2. , Ann. Phys. Chem. 109, 275 (1860).
Ml. R. A. Millikan, Rev. Mod. Phys. 21, 343 (1949).
M2. , Phys. Rev. 7, 18 (1916).
M3. , Phys. Rev. 7, 355 (1916).
PI. A. Pais, letter dated December 9, 1948.
Rl. Rev. Mod. Phys. 21(3) (1949).
R2. E. Rutherford, Proc. Roy. Soc. A97, 374 (1920).
Tl. J. J. Thomson, Recollections and Reflections, p. 341. Bell, London, 1936.
Wl. H. Weyl, The theory of groups and quantum mechanics (2nd edn.), pp. 263-264
and preface. Dover, New York, 1930 (original edition published in 1928 as Grup-
pentheorie und Quantenmechanik).
