i6
'The Suddenly Famous
Doctor Einstein'
16a, Illness; Remarriage; Death of Mother
Part IV of this book began with an account of Einstein's arrival in Berlin, his
separation from Mileva, his reactions to the First World War, and his earliest
activities in the political sphere. This was followed by a description of the final
phases in the creation of general relativity. In the previous chapter, Einstein's role
in the further development of this theory and its impact on later generations of
physicists were discussed. In this chapter, I turn to the impact of general relativity
on the world at large, an impact that led to the abrupt emergence of Einstein as
a charismatic figure and a focus of awe, reverence, and hatred. I also continue the
story, begun in Section 14a, of Einstein's years in Berlin. To begin with, I retur
to the days just after November 1915, when Einstein completed his work on the
foundations of general relativity.
As was mentioned before, in December 1915 Einstein wrote to his friend Besso
that he was 'zufrieden aber ziemlich kaputt,' satisfied but rather worn out [El].
He did not take a rest, however. In 1916 he wrote ten scientific papers, includin
his first major survey of general relativity, his theory of spontaneous and induced
emission, his first paper on gravitational waves, articles on the energy-momentum
conservation laws and on the Schwarzschild solution, and a new proposal for mea-
suring the Einstein-de Haas effect. He also completed his first semipopular book
on relativity. Too much exertion combined with a lack of proper care must have
been the chief cause of a period of illness that began sometime in 1917 and lasted
several years.
I do not know precisely when this period began, but in February 1917 Einstein
wrote to Ehrenfest that he would not be able to visit Holland because of a liver
ailment that had forced him to observe a severe diet and to lead a very quiet life
[E2]. That quiet life did not prevent him from writing the founding paper on
general relativistic cosmology in that same month. Lorentz expressed regret that
Einstein could not come; however, he wrote, 'After the strenuous work of recent
years, you deserve a rest' [LI]. Einstein's reply shows that his indisposition was
not a trivial matter. He mentioned that he could get proper nourishment because
of the connections that his family in Berlin maintained with relatives in southern
299
300 THE LATER JOURNEY
Germany and added, 'Without this help it would hardly be possible for me to stay
here; nor do I know if things can continue the way they are' [E3]. As a Swiss
citizen, he was entitled to and did receive food parcels from Switzerland [E4], but
that was evidently not enough to compensate for the food shortages in Berlin
caused by the war. He did not follow the advice of his doctor, who had urged him
to recuperate in Switzerland [E5].
At that stage Elsa Einstein Lowenthal took matters in hand. Elsa, born in 1876
in Hechingen in Hohenzollern, was both a first and a second cousin of Albert's.
Rudolf, her father, was a first cousin of Hermann, Albert's father. Fanny, her
mother, was a sister of Pauline, Albert's mother. Elsa and Albert had known each
other since childhood, when Elsa would visit the relatives in Munich and Albert
would come to Hechingen. They had grown fond of each other. In her early twen-
ties, Elsa married a merchant named Lowenthal, by whom she had two daughters,
Use (b. 1897) and Margot (b. 1899). This brief marriage ended in divorce. When
Einstein arrived in Berlin, Elsa and her daughters were living in an upper-floor
apartment on Haberlandstrasse No. 5. Her parents lived on lower floors in the
same building. Elsa's presence in Berlin had been one of the factors drawing Ein-
stein to that city.
It was principally Elsa who took care of her cousin during his illness. In the
summer of 1917, Einstein moved from the Wittelsbacherstrasse to an apartment
next to Elsa's. In September he invited Besso to visit him in his spacious and
comfortable new quarters [E6]. In December, he wrote to Zangger that he felt
much better. 'I have gained four pounds since last summer, thanks to Elsa's good
care. She herself cooks everything for me, since this has turned out to be necessary'
[E7]. However, he still had to maintain a strict diet and was never sure that severe
pains might not return [E8].
Toward the end of the year, his health worsened. It turned out that he was
suffering from a stomach ulcer [E9, E10]. For the next several months, he had to
stay in bed [E10]. His feelings were at a low ebb: 'The spirit turns lame, the
strength diminishes' [Ell]. While bedridden, he derived the quadrupole formula
for gravitational radiation. In April 1918 he was permitted to go out, but still had
to be careful. 'Recently I had a nasty attack, which was obviously caused only
because I played the violin for an hour' [E10]. In May he was in bed again, this
time with jaundice [El2], but completed a fundamental paper on the pseudotensor
of energy-momentum. His dream (in August [E13]) that he had cut his throat
with a shaving knife may or may not have been a reaction to his state of health.
In November he published an article on the twin paradox. In December he wrote
to Ehrenfest that he would never quite regain his full health [El4].
By that time, Albert and Elsa had decided to get married, and therefore Einstein
had to institute procedures to obtain a divorce from Mileva [E15]. The divorce
decree was issued on February 14, 1919. It stipulated that Mileva would receive,
in due course, Einstein's Nobel prize money.*
*See further Chapter 30.
'THE SUDDENLY FAMOUS DOCTOR EINSTEIN' 301
Mileva remained in Zurich for the rest of her life. Initially she took on her own
family name, Marity, but by decree of the cantonal government of Zurich dated
December 24, 1924, she was given permission to revert to the name Einstein. On
occasional visits to his children, Einstein would stay in her home. She was a dif-
ficult woman, distrustful of other people and given to spells of melancholy. (Her
sister Zorka suffered from severe mental illness.) She died in 1948. Some years
thereafter Einstein wrote of her, 'She never reconciled herself to the separation
and the divorce, and a disposition developed reminiscent of the classical example
of Medea. This darkened the relations to my two boys, to whom I was attached
with tenderness. This tragic aspect of my life continued undiminished until my
advanced age' [El6].
Albert and Elsa were married on June 2, 1919. He was forty, she forty-three.
They made their home in Elsa's apartment, to which were added two rooms on
the floor above, which served as Einstein's quarters for study and repose. On
occasion, his stomach pain would still flare up [E17], but in 1920 he wrote to
Besso that he was in good health and good spirits [El8]. Perhaps the most remark-
able characteristic of this period of illness is the absence of any lull in Einstein's
scientific activity.
Elsa, gentle, warm, motherly, and prototypically bourgeoise, loved to take care
of her Albertle. She gloried in his fame. Charlie Chaplin, who first met her in
1931, described her as follows: 'She was a square-framed woman with abundant
vitality; she frankly enjoyed being the wife of the great man and made no attempt
to hide the fact; her enthusiasm was endearing' [Cl]. The affectionate relationship
between her husband and her daughters added to her happiness. Albert, the gypsy,
had found a home, and in some ways that did him much good. He very much
liked being taken care of and also thoroughly enjoyed receiving people at his apart-
ment—scientists, artists, diplomats, other personal friends. In other ways, how-
ever, this life was too much for him. A friend and visitor gave this picture: 'He,
who had always had something of the bohemian in him, began to lead a middle-
class life ... in a household such as was typical of a well-to-do Berlin family . . .
in the midst of beautiful furniture, carpets, and pictures. . . . When one entered
. .. one found Einstein still remained a "foreigner" in such a surrounding—a
bohemian guest in a middle-class home' [Fl]. Elsa gave a glimpse of their life to
another visitor: 'As a little girl, I fell in love with Albert because he played Mozart
so beautifully on the violin.. . . He also plays the piano. Music helps him when
he is thinking about his theories. He goes to his study, comes back, strikes a few
chords on the piano, jots something down, returns to his study. On such days,
Margot and I make ourselves scarce. Unseen, we put out something for him to
eat and lay out his coat. [Sometimes] he goes out without coat and hat, even when
the weather is bad. Then he comes back and stands there on the stairs' [SI]. One
does not have a sense of much intimacy between the two. The bedroom next to
Elsa's was occupied by her daughters; Albert's was down the hall [HI]. Nor do
they appear to have been a couple much given to joint planning and deliberation.
'Albert's will is unfathomable,' Elsa once wrote to Ehrenfest [E19]. In marked
302 THE LATER JOURNEY
contrast to her husband, she was conscious of social standing and others' opin-
ions.*
On various occasions, Einstein would utter asides which expressed his reser-
vations on the bliss attendant on the holy state of matrimony. For example, he
was once asked by someone who observed him incessantly cleaning his pipe
whether he smoked for the pleasure of smoking or in order to engage in unclogging
and refilling his pipe. He replied, 'My aim lies in smoking, but as a result things
tend to get clogged up, I'm afraid. Life, too, is like smoking, especially marriage'
[II].
Shortly after Elsa died, in 1936, Einstein wrote to Born, 'I have acclimated
extremely well here, live like a bear in its cave, and feel more at home than I ever
did in my eventful life. This bearlike quality has increased because of the death
of my comrade [Kameradin], who was more attached to people [than I]' [E20].
It was not the only time that Einstein wrote about his family with more frankness
than grace [E21].
In March 1955, shortly after the death of his lifelong friend Michele Besso,
Einstein wrote to the Besso family, 'What I most admired in him as a human
being is the fact that he managed to live for many years not only in peace but also
in lasting harmony with a woman—an undertaking in which I twice failed rather
disgracefully' [E22].
Half a year after Albert and Elsa were married, his mother came to Berlin to
die in her son's home.
Pauline's life had not been easy. After her husband's death in 1902 left her with
limited means and no income, she first went to stay with her sister Fanny, in
Hechingen. Thereafter she lived for a long period in Heilbron in the home of a
widowed banker by the name of Oppenheimer, supervising the running of the
household and the education of several young children who adored her. Later she
managed for a time the household of her widowed brother Jakob Koch, then
moved to Lucerne to stay with her daughter, Maja, and the latter's husband, Paul
Winteler, at their home at Brambergstrasse 16a. It was to that address that Ein-
stein sent a newspaper clipping 'for the further nourishment of Mama's anyhow
already considerable mother's pride' [E23].
While staying with her daughter, Pauline became gravely ill with abdominal
cancer and had to be hospitalized at the Sanatorium Rosenau. Shortly thereafter,
she expressed the desire to be with her son. In December 1919, Elsa wrote to
Ehrenfest that the mother, now deathly ill, would be transported to Berlin [E24].
Around the beginning of 1920, Pauline arrived, accompanied by Maja, a doctor,
and a nurse [E25]. She was bedded down in Einstein's study. Morphine treat-
ments affected her mind, but 'she clings to life and still looks good' [E25]. She
*Frank remarks that she was not popular in Berlin circles [Fl].
'THE SUDDENLY FAMOUS DOCTOR EINSTEIN.' 303
died in February and was buried in the Schoneberg Cemetery in Berlin. Soon
thereafter, Einstein wrote to Zangger, 'My mother has died.. .. We are all com-
pletely exhausted. .. . One feels in one's bones the significance of blood ties' [E26].
16b. Einstein Canonized
In the early fall of 1919, when Pauline Einstein was in the sanatorium, she
received a postcard from her son which began, 'Dear Mother, joyous news today.
H. A. Lorentz telegraphed that the English expeditions have actually demon-
strated the deflection of light from the sun' [E27]. The telegram that had
announced the news to Einstein a few days earlier read, 'Eddington found star
displacement at the sun's edge preliminary between nine-tenth second and double
that. Many greetings. Lorentz' [L2]. It was an informal communication. Nothing
was definitive. Yet Einstein sent almost at once a very brief note to Naturwissen-
schaften for the sole purpose of reporting the telegram he had received [E28]. He
was excited.
Let us briefly recapitulate Einstein's progress in understanding the bending of
light. 1907. The clerk at the patent office in Bern discovers the equivalence prin-
ciple, realizes that this principle by itself implies some bending of light, but
believes that the effect is too small to ever be observed. 1911. The professor at
Prague finds that the effect can be detected for starlight grazing the sun during
a total eclipse and finds that the amount of bending in that case is 0''87. He does
not yet know that space is curved and that, therefore, his answer is incorrect. He
is still too close to Newton, who believed that space is flat and who could have
himself computed the 0*87 (now called the Newton value) from his law of grav-
itation and his corpuscular theory of light. 1912. The professor at Zurich discovers
that space is curved. Several years pass before he understands that the curvature
of space modifies the bending of light. 1915. The member of the Prussian Acad-
emy discovers that general relativity implies a bending of light by the sun equal
to 1 "74, the Einstein value, twice the Newton value. This factor of 2 sets the stag
for a confrontation between Newton and Einstein.
In 1914, before Einstein had the right answer, he had written to Besso with
typical confidence. 'I do not doubt any more the correctness of the whole system,
whether the observation of the solar eclipse succeeds or not' [E29]. Several quirks
of history saved him from the embarrassment of banking on the wrong result. An
Argentinian eclipse expedition which had gone to Brazil in 1912 and which had
the deflection of light on its experimental program was rained out. In the summer
of 1914, a German expedition led by Erwin Freundlich and financed by Gustav
Krupp, in a less familiar role of benefactor of humanity, headed for the Crimea
to observe the eclipse of August 21. (Russian soldiers and peasants were told by
their government not to fear evil omens: the forthcoming eclipse was a natural
phenomenon [Nl].) When the war broke out, the party was warned in time to
return and some did so. Those who hesitated were arrested, eventually returned
304 THE LATER JOURNEY
home safely but of course without results [N2]. Frustration continued also after
November 18, 1915, the day on which Einstein announced the right bending of
1''74 [E30]. Ten days later, commenting on a new idea by Freundlich for mea-
suring light bending, Einstein wrote to Sommerfeld, 'Only the intrigues of mis-
erable people prevent the execution of this last, new, important test of the theory,'
and, most uncharacteristically, signed his letter 'Your infuriated Einstein,' [E31].
An opportunity to observe an eclipse in Venezuela in 1916 had to be passed up
because of the war. Early attempts to seek deflection in photographs taken during
past eclipses led nowhere. An American effort to measure the effect during the
eclipse of June 1918 never gave conclusive results.* It was not until May 1919
that two British expeditions obtained the first useful photographs and not until
November 1919 that their results were formally announced.
English interest in the bending of light developed soon after copies of Einstein's
general relativity papers were sent from Holland by de Sitter to Arthur Stanley
Eddington at Cambridge (presumably these were the first papers on the theory to
reach England). In addition, de Sitter's beautiful essay on the subject, published
in June 1916 in the Observatory [S2], as well as his three important papers in the
Monthly Notices [S3] further helped to spread the word. So did a subsequent
report by Eddington [E33], who in a communication to the Royal Astronomical
Society in February 1917 stressed the importance of the deflection of light [E34].
In March 1917 the Astronomer Royal, Sir Frank Watson Dyson, drew attention
to the excellence of the star configuration on May 29, 1919, (another eclipse date)
for measuring the alleged deflection, adding that 'Mr Hinks has kindly under-
taken to obtain for the Society information of the stations which may be occupied'
[Dl]. Two expeditions were mounted, one to Sobral in Brazil, led by Andrew
Crommelin from the Greenwich Observatory, and one to Principe Island off the
coast of Spanish Guinea, led by Eddington. Before departing, Eddington wrote,
'The present eclipse expeditions may for the first time demonstrate the weight of
light [i.e., the Newton value]; or they may confirm Einstein's weird theory of non-
Euclidean space; or they may lead to a result of yet more far-reaching conse-
quences—no deflection' [E35]. Under the heading 'Stop Press News,' the June
issue of the Observatory contains the text of two telegrams, one from Sobral:
'Eclipse splendid. Crommelin,' and one from Principe: 'Through cloud. Hopeful.
Eddington' [01]. The expeditions returned. Data analysis began.** According to
a preliminary report by Eddington to the meeting of the British Association held
in Bournemouth on September 9-13, the bending of light lay between 0*87 and
double that value. Word reached Lorentz.f Lorentz cabled Einstein, whose excite-
*For many details about all these early efforts, see especially [E32].
**I shall not discuss any details of the actual observations or of the initial analysis of the data and
their re-analysis in later years. For these subjects, I refer to several excellent articles [Bl, E32, Ml].
•(•The news was brought to Leiden by van der Pol, who had attended the Bournemouth meeting [L3].
'THE SUDDENLY FAMOUS DOCTOR EINSTEIN' 305
ment on receiving this news after seven years of waiting will now be clearer. Then
came November 6, 1919, the day on which Einstein was canonized.f
Ever since 1905 Einstein had been beatus, having performed two first-class mir-
acles. Now, on November 6, the setting, a joint meeting of the Royal Society and
the Royal Astronomical Society, resembled a Congregation of Rites4 Dyson acted
as postulator, ably assisted by Crommelin and Eddington as advocate-procurators.
Dyson, speaking first, concluded his remarks with the statement, 'After a careful
study of the plates I am prepared to say that they confirm Einstein's prediction.
A very definite result has been obtained, that light is deflected in accordance with
Einstein's law of gravitation.' Crommelin added further details. Eddington spoke
next, stating that the Principe results supported the figures obtained at Sobral,
then reciting the two requisite authentic miracles subsequent to Einstein's eleva-
tion to beatus: the perihelion of Mercury and the bending of light, 1"98 + O."30
and 1".61 + 0".30 as observed in Sobral and Principe, respectively. Ludwick
Silberstein,* the advocatus diaboli, presented the animadversiones: 'It is unscien-
tific to assert for the moment that the deflection, the reality of which I admit, is
due to gravitation.' His main objection was the absence of evidence for the red
shift: 'If the shift remains unproved as at present, the whole theory collapses.'
Pointing to the portrait of Newton which hung in the meeting hall, Silberstein
admonished the congregation: 'We owe it to that great man to proceed very care-
fully in modifying or retouching his Law of Gravitation.'
Joseph John Thomson, O.M., P.R.S., in the chair, having been petitioned
instanter, instantius, instantissime, pronounced the canonization: 'This is the most
important result obtained in connection with the theory of gravitation since New-
ton's day, and it is fitting that it should be announced at a meeting of the Society
so closely connected with him.. . . The result [is] one of the highest achievements
of human thought.' A few weeks later he added, 'The deflection of light by matter,
suggested by Newton in the first of his Queries, would itself be a result of first-
rate scientific importance; it is of still greater importance when its magnitude sup-
ports the law of gravity put forward by Einstein' [Tl].
Even before November 6, Einstein and others already knew that things looked
good.
11 find the parallels with the rituals of beatification and canonization compelling, even though they
are here applied to a living person. Note that a beatus may be honored with public cult by a specified
diocese or institution (here, the physicists). A canonized person is honored by unrestricted public
cult. For these and other terms used, see [N3].
^The details of the proceedings quoted here are found in an article in the Observatory [O2].
*Silberstein, a native of Poland who moved to England and later settled in the United States, was
the author of three books on relativity. On several occasions, he was in dogged but intelligent oppo-
sition to relativity theory.
306 THE LATER JOURNEY
On October 22, Carl Stumpf, a psychologist and fellow member of the Prussian
Academy, wrote to Einstein, 'I feel compelled to send you most cordial congratu-
lations on the occasion of the grandiose new success of your gravitation theory.
With all our hearts, we share the elation which must fill you and are proud of the
fact that, after the military-political collapse, German science has been able to
score such a victory . ..' [S4].* On November 3 Einstein replied, 'On my return
from Holland I find your congratulations.... I recently learned in Leiden that
the confirmation found by Eddington is also a complete one quantitatively' [E36].
A few days after the joint meeting of November 6, Lorentz sent another telegram
to Einstein, confirming the news [L4]. On November 7, 1919, the Einstein legend
began.
16c. The Birth of the Legend
'Armistice and treaty terms/Germans summoned to Paris/Devastated France/
Reconstruction progress/War crimes against Serbia.' These are among the head-
lines on page 11 of the London Times of November 7, 1919. Turning to page 12,
one finds that column 1 is headed by 'The glorious dead/King's call to his people/
Armistice day observance/Two minutes pause from work' and column 6 by 'Rev-
olution in science/New theory of the universe/Newtonian ideas overthrown.'
Halfway down the column, there is the laconic subheading 'Space warped.' In this
London Times issue, we find the first report to a world worn by war of the hap-
penings at the meetings of the joint societies the day before. The next day, the
same paper published a further article on the same subject headlined 'The revo-
lution in science/Einstein v. Newton/Views of eminent physicists,' in which we
read, 'The subject was a lively topic of conversation in the House of Commons
yesterday, and Sir Joseph Larmor, F.R.S., M.P. for Cambridge University, ...
said he had been besieged by inquiries as to whether Newton had been cast down
and Cambridge "done in."' (Hundreds of people were unable to get near the room
when Eddington lectured in Cambridge on the new results [E37].) The news was
picked up immediately by the Dutch press [N3a, Al]. Daily papers invited emi-
nent physicists to comment. In his lucid way, Lorentz explained general relativity
to the readers of the Niewe Rotterdamsche Courant of November 19, remarking
that 'I cannot refrain from expressing my surprise that according to the report in
the [London] Times there should be so much complaint about the difficulty of
understanding the new theory. It is evident that Einstein's little book "About the
Special and General Theory of Relativity in Plain Terms" did not find its way
into England during wartime.'** On November 23 an article by Max Born enti-
*I thank A. Hermann for informing me that in October the Berlin papers were already carrying
early reports. An article by Alexander Moszkowski entitled 'Die Sonne bracht' es an den Tag' in
the Berliner Tageblatt of October 8, 1919, must presumably have been based on information from
Einstein himself.
**This article appeared later in translation in The New York Times [N4].
REVOLUTION
SCIENCE.IN
NEW THEORY OF THE
UNIVERSE.
NEWTONIAN IDEAS
OVERTHROWN.
Yesterday afternoon in the rooms of the
Royal Society, at a joint session of the Royal
and Astronomical Societies, the results ob-
tained by Britisli observers of the total solar
eclipse of May 29 were discussed.
The greatest possible interest had been
aroused in scientific circles by the hope that
rival theories of a fundamental physical
problem would bo put to the test, and there was
a very large attendance of astronomers and
physicists. Tt was generally accepted that the
observations were derisive in the verifying of
the prediction of the famous physicist, Einstein,
stated by the President of the Royal Society
as being tho most remarkable scientific event
siiico the discovery of the predicted existence
of the planet Neptune. But there was differ-
ence of opinion as to whether science had to
faco merely a new and unexplained fact, or to
reckon with a theory that would completely
revolutionize Iho accepted fundamentals ofphysics.
Sin FRANK DYSON, (he Astronomer Royal, described
I IIP work of the expeditions Kent respectively to
Nobral in North Brazil and the island of Principe,off the West Coast of Africa. At each of these
place*, if the weather were propitious on tho day of
the eclipse, it, would bo possible, to-take, during
totality a set of photographs of tho obscured sun and
ol a, number of bright stars which happened to be inits immediate vicinity. The desired object was toascertain whether tho light from these stars, as it,
passed the sun. came us dirc.ctly towards us as iC
the sun were not there, or if there was a deflectiondue to il,s presence, and if the latter proved to be
the case, what, the amount, of the deflection was. If
deflection did occur, the stars would appearon the photographic plates at a measurable
distance from their theoretical positions. Hoexplained in detail the apparatus that had beenemployed, the corrections that had to be made fur
various disturbing factors, and the methods bv
which comparison between the theoretical and tho
observed positions had been made. He convinced the
meeting that (hi- nwults were definite and conclusive,llcrlection did take place, and the measurements
showed that the extent of the deflection was in clo>oaccord with the theoretical degree predicted by
Kinstein, HS opposed to half that degree, the amoun
that, would follow from the principles of ^Scwtou.
It is interesting to recall that Sir Oliver T/odgc,speaking at the Itoyal Institution last, February,
had also ventured on a prediction. He doubted it
deflection would be observed, hut was confident, that
if it did fake place, it. would follow the law of Ncwtou
aud not, that of Kinstein.
l)ii. ('KoMJiia.iN and PitoKtssuii KDUJNGTON, two
of the actual observers, followed the Astrouomcr-Itoyal, and gave interesting accounts of their work,
in every way confirming the general conclusions thathad been enunciated.' MOMENTOUS PRONOUNCEMENT."
So far the matter was clear, but when the
discussion began, it was plain that the scientific;
interest centred more in the theoretical bearings
of the results than in the results themselves.
Kven the President of tho Royal Society, in
stating that they had just listened to " one of
the most momentous, if not the most moment-
ous, pronouncements of human thought," had
to confess that no one had yet succeeded in
stating in clear language what the theory of
Einstein really was. It, was accepted, how
ever, that Einstein, on tho bawls of hU theory,
had made three predictions. The first, as to the
motion of the planet Mercury, had been verified.
The second, as to the existence and the degree
of deflection of light as it passed the sphere of
influence of tho sun. had now been verified.
As to the third, which depended on spectro-
scopic observations there was still uncertainty.
But he was. confident that the Einstein theory
must now be reckoned with, and that our con-
ceptions of the fabric of the universe must be
fundamentally altered
At this stage Sir Oliver Lodge, whose con-
tribution to the discussion had been eagerly
expected, left the meeting.
Subsequent speakers joined in congratulating
tho observers, and agreed in accepting their
results. More than one. however, including
Professor Ncwall, of Cambridge, hesitated as
to the full extent of the inferences that had been
drawn and suggested that the phenomena
might bo due to an unknown solar atmosphere
further in its extent than hud been supposed
and with unknown properties. No speaker
succeeded in giving a clear non-mathematical
statement of tho theoretical question.
SPACE ' WARPED."
Put in the most, general way it may bo
described as follows : the Newtonian principles
ansuiiie that space is invariable, that, for
instance, the three angles of a triangle ahvays
equal, and must equal, two right angles. But
these principles really rest on the observa-
tion that the angle's of a triangle do equal two
right miglcs, and tliHt a circle is really circular.
But there are certain physical facts that sootti
tn throw doubt otv the universality
of tlie.se observations, and suggest that space
may acquire a twist or warp in certain circum-
stances, as, for instance, under the influence of
gravitation, a dislocation in itself slight and
applying to the instruments of measurement
as well ns to the things measured. The Ein-
stein doctrine is that the qualities of space,
hitherto believed absolute, are relative to their
circumstances. He drew the inference from
his theory that in certain cases actual raeasum-
Tnent of light would show the effects of tho
warping in a degree that could be predicted
and calculated. His predictions in two of three
cases have now been verified, but the question
remains open as to whether the verifications
prove the theory from which tho predictions
wore deduced.
308 THE LATER JOURNEY
tied 'Raum, Zeit und Schwerkraft' appeared in the Frankfurter Allgemeine Zei-
tung. A column by Freundlich in Die Vossische Zeitung (Berlin) of November 30
begins as follows: 'In Germany a scientific event of extraordinary significance has
not yet found the reaction which its importance deserves.' However, the weekly
Berliner Illustrierte Zeitung of December 14 carried a picture of Einstein on its
cover with the caption 'A new great in world history: Albert Einstein, whose
researches, signifying a complete revolution in our concepts of nature, are on a
par with the insights of a Copernicus, a Kepler, and a Newton.' As far as I know,
the first news in the Swiss papers is found in the Neue Zuricher Zeitung of
December 10, where it is reported that the astronomer Henri Deslandres gave an
account of the May 29 observations before the December 8 session of the French
Academy of Sciences in which he summarized Einstein's theory by saying that
energy attracts energy.
Einstein himself accepted 'with joy and gratefulness' the invitation to write a
guest article in the London Times of November 28, for this gave him an oppor-
tunity for communication 'after the lamentable breach in the former international
relations existing among men of science. ... It was in accordance with the high
and proud tradition of English science that English scientific men should have
given their time and labour ... to test a theory that had been completed and pub-
lished in the country of their enemies in the midst of war.' Referring to an earlier
description of him in the London Times, he concluded his article as follows: 'By
an application of the theory of relativity to the tastes of readers, today in Germany
I am called a German man of science and in England I am represented as a Swiss
Jew. If I come to be regarded as a bete noire, the descriptions will be reversed and
I shall become a Swiss Jew for the Germans and a German man of science for
the English!' The same Times issue carried an editorial reply, 'Dr Einstein pays
a well-intended if somewhat superfluous compliment to the impartiality of
English science,' to Einstein's first remark, followed by the comments, 'We con-
cede him his little jest. But we note that, in accordance with the general tenor of
his theory, Dr Einstein does not supply any absolute description of himself" in
reply to his second remark. The best description I know of Einstein in 1919 is the
photograph on the cover of the Berliner Illustrirte, a picture of an intelligent,
sensitive, and sensuous man who is deeply weary—from the strains of intense
thinking during the past years, from illnesses from which he has barely recovered,
from the pain of watching his dying mother, and, I would think, from the com-
motion of which he was the center (See Plate II).
November 1919 was not the first time Einstein and relativity appeared in the
news. Frank recalls having seen in 1912 a Viennese newspaper with the headlines
'The minute in danger, a sensation of mathematical science' [F2], obviously a
reference to the time dilation of special relativity. In 1914 Einstein himself had
written a newspaper article on relativity for Die Vossische Zeitung [E38]. Thus
he was already somewhat of a public celebrity, but only locally in German-speak-
ing countries. It was only in November 1919 that he became a world figure. For
'THE SUDDENLY FAMOUS DOCTOR EINSTEIN' 309
example, The New York Times Index contains no mention of him until November
9, 1919. From that day until his death, not one single year passed without his
name appearing in that paper, often in relation to science, more often in relation
to other issues. Thus the birth of the Einstein legend can be pinpointed at Novem-
ber 7, 1919, when the London Times broke the news.
The article in The New York Times (hereafter called the Times) of November
9 was a sensible report which contained only one embellishment. J. J. Thomson
was alleged to have said, 'This is one of the greatest—perhaps the greatest—of
achievements in the history of human thought' The words I italicized were not
spoken by Thomson, but they sell better (and may even be true). The Times of
November 9 contains a lead article on 'World outbreak plotted by Reds for
November 7/Lenin's emissaries sought to start rising all over Europe' and a col-
umn on Einstein under the sixfold headline 'Lights all askew in the heavens/Men
of science more or less agog over results of eclipse observation/Einstein theory
triumphs/Stars not where they seem or were calculated to be, but nobody need
worry/A book for 12 wise men/No more in all the world could comprehend it,
said Einstein when his daring publishers accepted it.' The article reported that
'one of the speakers at the Royal Society's meeting suggested that Euclid was
knocked out' (not so, but, again, it sells) and concluded as follows: 'When he [Ein-
stein] offered his last important work to the publishers, he warned them that there
were not more than twelve persons in the whole world who would understand it,
but the publishers took the risk.' Perhaps this story was invented by a reporter.
I think ii. more probable, however, that this often-quoted statement indeed origi-
nated with Einstein himself and was made sometime in 1916, when he published
a pamphlet (with Earth in Leipzig) and a 'popular' book on relativity (with
Vieweg in Braunschweig). At any rate, when in December 1919 a Times corre-
spondent interviewed him at his home and asked for an account of his work that
would be accessible to more than twelve people, 'the doctor laughed good-
naturedly but still insisted on the difficulty of making himself understood by lay-
men' [N5].
Editorials in the Times now begin to stress that quality of distance between the
common man and the hero which is indispensable for the creation and perpetua-
tion of his mythical role. November 11: 'This is news distinctly shocking and
apprehensions for the safety of confidence even in the multiplication table will
arise. ... It would take the presidents of two Royal Societies to give plausibility
or even thinkability to the declaration that as light has weight space has limits. It
just doesn't, by definition, and that's the end of that—for commonfolk, however it
may be for higher mathematicians.' November 16: 'These gentlemen may be great
astronomers but they are sad logicians. Critical laymen have already objected that
scientists who proclaim that space comes to an end somewhere are under obliga-
tion to tell us what lies beyond it.' November 18: the Times urges its readers not
to be offended by the fact that only twelve people can understand the theory of
'the suddenly famous Dr Einstein.' November 25: a news column with the head-
31O THE LATER JOURNEY
lines: 'A new physics based on Einstein/Sir Oliver Lodge says it will prevail, and
mathematicians will have a terrible time.' November 26: An editorial entitled 'Bad
times for the learned.' November 29: A news item headlined 'Can't understand
Einstein' reports that 'the London Times .. . confesses that it cannot follow the
details. .. .' December 7: An editorial, 'Assaulting the absolute,' states that 'the
raising of blasphemous voices against time and space threw some [astronomers]
into a state of terror where they seemed to feel, for some days at least, that the
foundations of all human thought had been undermined.' One cannot fail to notice
that some of these statements were made with tongue in cheek. Yet they convey a
sense of mystery accompanying the replacement of old wisdom by new order.
Transitions such as these can induce fear. When interviewed by the Times on
relativity theory, Charles Poor, professor of celestial mechanics at Columbia Uni-
versity, said, 'For some years past, the entire world has been in a state of unrest,
mental as well as physical. It may well be that the physical aspects of the unrest,
the war, the strikes, the Bolshevist uprisings, are in reality the visible objects of
some underlying deep mental disturbance, worldwide in character. ... This same
spirit of unrest has invaded science . . . ' [N6].
It would be a misunderstanding of the Einstein phenomenon to attribute these
various reactions to a brief and intense shock of the new. The insistence on mys-
tery never waned. One reads in the Times ten years later, 'It is a rare exposition
of Relativity that does not find it necessary to warn the reader that here and here
and here he had better not try to understand' [N7].
The worldwide character of the legend is well illustrated by reports to the For-
eign Office from German diplomats stationed in countries visited by Einstein [Kl].
Oslo, June 1920: '[Einstein's] lectures were uncommonly well received by the
public and the press.' Copenhagen, June 1920: 'In recent days, papers of all opin-
ions have emphasized in long articles and interviews the significance of Professor
Einstein, "the most famous physicist of the present." ' Paris, April 1922: ' ... a
sensation which the intellectual snobism of the capital did not want to pass up.'
Tokyo, January 1923: 'When Einstein arrived at the station there were such large
crowds that the police was unable to cope with the perilous crush ... at the chry-
santhemum festival it was neither the empress nor the prince regent nor the
imperial princes who held reception; everything turned around Einstein.' Madrid,
March 1923: 'Great enthusiasm everywhere .. . every day the papers devoted col-
umns to his comings and goings. . ..' Rio de Janeiro, May 1925: ' ... numerous
detailed articles in the Brazilian press. ... ' Montevideo, June 1925: 'He was the
talk of the town and a news topic a whole week long.. . .' On April 25, 1921,
Einstein was received by President Harding on the occasion of his first visit to the
United States. An eyewitness described the mood of the public when Einstein gave
a lecture in a large concert hall in Vienna that same year. People were 'in a
curious state of excitement in which it no longer matters what one understands
but only that one is in the immediate neighborhood of a place where miracles
happen' [F3].
THE SUDDENLY FAMOUS DOCTOR EINSTEIN 311
So it was, and so it remained everywhere and at all times during Einstein's life.
The quality of his science had long since sufficed to command the admiration of
his peers. Now his name also became a byword to the general public because of
the pictures, verbal and visual, created by that new power of the twentieth century,
the media. Some of these images were cheap, some brilliant (as in the blending of
kings and apostles into twelve wise men). Einstein's science and the salesmanship
of the press were necessary but not sufficient conditions for the creation of the
legend, however. Compare, for example, the case of Einstein with the one and
only earlier instance in which a major discovery in physics had created a world-
wide sensation under the influence of newspapers. That was the case of Roentgen
and the X-rays he discovered in 1895. It was the discovery, not the man, that was
at the center of attention. Its value was lasting and it has never been forgotten by
the general public, but its newsworthiness went from a peak into a gentle steady
decline.
The essence of Einstein's unique position goes deeper and has everything to do,
it seems to me, with the stars and with language. A new man appears abruptly,
the 'suddenly famous Doctor Einstein.' He carries the message of a new order in
the universe. He is a new Moses come down from the mountain to bring the law
and a new Joshua controlling the motion of heavenly bodies. He speaks in strange
tongues but wise men aver that the stars testify to his veracity. Through the ages,
child and adult alike had looked with wonder at stars and light. Speak of such
new things as X-rays or atoms and man may be awed. But stars had forever been
in his dreams and his myths. Their recurrence manifested an order beyond human
control. Irregularities in the skies—comets, eclipses—were omens, mainly of evil.
Behold, a new man appears. His mathematical language is sacred yet amenable
to transcription into the profane: the fourth dimension, stars are not where they
seemed to be but nobody need worry, light has weight, space is warped. He fulfills
two profound needs in man, the need to know and the need not to know but to
believe. The drama of his emergence is enhanced (though this to me seems sec-
ondary) by the coincidence—itself caused largely by the vagaries of war—between
the meeting of the joint societies and the first annual remembrance of horrid events
of the recent past which had caused millions to die, empires to fall, the future to
be uncertain. The new man who appears at that time represents order and power.
He becomes the ddos avrjp, the divine man, of the twentieth century.
In the late years, when I knew him, fame and publicity were a source of amuse-
ment and sometimes of irritation to Einstein, whose tribe revered no saints. Pho-
tographs and film clips indicate that in his younger years he had the ability to
enjoy his encounters with the press and the admiration of the people. As I try to
find the best way to characterize Einstein's deeper response to adulation, I am
reminded of words spoken by Lord Haldane when he introduced Einstein to an
audience at King's College in London on June 13, 1921. On that first visit to
312 THE LATER JOURNEY
England Einstein stayed in the home of Haldane, whose daughter fainted from
excitement the first time the distinguished visitor entered the house. In his intro-
duction, Haldane mentioned that he had been 'touched to observe that Einstein
had left his house [that morning] to gaze on the tomb of Newton at Westminster
Abbey.' Then he went on to describe Einstein in these words:
A man distinguished by his desire, if possible, to efface himself and yet impelled
by the unmistakable power of genius which would not allow the individual of
whom it had taken possession to rest for one moment. [L5]
16d. Einstein and Germany
In April 1914, Einstein set out from Zurich to settle in the capital of the German
Empire, a country still at peace. In December 1932, he left Germany for good. In
the interim, he lived through a world war. The Empire disintegrated. His own
worldwide renown began in 1919, the time of the uncertain rise of the Weimar
republic. At the time he left Germany, the republic, too, was doomed.
Fame attracts envy and hatred. Einstein's was no exception. In this instance,
these hostile responses were particularly intensified because of his exposed position
in a turbulent environment. During the 1920s, he was a highly visible personality,
not for one but for a multitude of reasons. He was the divine man. He was a
scientific administrator and an important spokesman for the German establish-
ment. He traveled extensively—through Europe, to Japan, to Palestine, through
the Americas. And he was a figure who spoke out on nonestablishment issues,
such as pacifism and the fate of the Jews.
In the first instance, Einstein's role within the establishment was dictated by
his obligations, many of them administrative, to science. He fulfilled all these
duties conscientiously, some of them with pleasure. As a member of the renowned
Preussische Akademie der Wissenschaften, he published frequently in its Pro-
ceedings, faithfully attended the meetings of its physics section as well as the plen-
ary sessions, often served on its committees, and refereed dubious communications
submitted to its Proceedings [K2]. On May 5, 1916, he succeeded Planck as pres-
ident of the Deutsche Physikalische Gesellschaft. Between then and May 31,
1918, when Sommerfeld took over, he chaired eighteen meetings of this society
and addressed it on numerous occasions. On December 30, 1916, he was
appointed by imperial decree to the Kuratorium of the Physikalisch Technische
Reichsanstalt, a federal institution, and participated in the board's deliberations
on the choice of experimental programs [K3]. He held this position until he left
Germany. In 1917 he began his duties as director of the Kaiser Wilhelm Institut
fur Physik, largely an administrative position, the initial task of the institute being
to administer grants for physics research at various universities.* (It became a
*In the early years, only the astronomer Freundlich held an appointment as scientific staff member
of the institute. Freundlich caused Einstein and others a certain amount of trouble [K4].
'THE SUDDENLY FAMOUS DOCTOR EINSTEIN' 313
research institute only after Einstein left Germany.) In 1922 the Akademie
appointed him to the board of directors of the astrophysical laboratory in Potsdam
[K4j. In that year he was also nominated president of the Einstein Stiftung, a
foundation for the promotion of work on experimental tests of general relativity.
This Stiftung was eventually housed in a somewhat bizarre-looking new building,
the Einstein Turm, situated on the grounds of the astrophysical laboratory in
Potsdam. Its main piece of equipment, the Einstein Teleskop, was designed espe-
cially for solar physics experiments. Einstein had no formal duties at the Univer-
sity of Berlin. Nevertheless, he would occasionally teach and conduct seminars.
He also felt a moral obligation to Zurich, an obligation he fulfilled by giving a
series of lectures at its university from January to June 1919.
Einstein held one additional professorial position, this one in Holland. By royal
decree of June 24, 1920, a special chair in Leiden was created for him, enabling
him to come to that university for short periods of his choosing. On October 27,
1920, Einstein began his new position with an inaugural address on aether and
relativity theory.* He came back to Leiden in November 1921, May 1922, Octo-
ber 1924, February 1925, and April 1930, and lectured on several of these occa-
sions. He was comfortable there, walking around in his socks and sweater [Ul].
The initial term of appointment was for three years, but kept being extended until
it was formally terminated on September 23, 1952 [B2].
Einstein's physics of the 1920s was not only an exercise in administration and
the holding of professorships, however. It was also play. With Miihsam he mea-
sured the diameter of capillaries; with Goldschmidt he invented a hearing aid; and
with Szilard several refrigerating devices.** (for more on these topics, see Chapter
29). But above everything else his prime interest remained with the questions of
principle in physics. I shall return to this subject in the next section. First some
remarks on Einstein's other activities during the Berlin period.
In the early days of the First World War, Einstein had for the first time pub-
licly advocated the cause of pacifism. He continued to do so from then on. Reaction
to this stand was hostile. During the war, the chief of staff of the military district
Berlin wrote to the president of police of the city of Berlin, pointing out the dan-
gers of permitting pacifists to go abroad. The list of known pacifists appended to
the letter included Einstein's name [K5]. After the war, Einstein the outspoken
supranationalist became a figure detested by the growing number of German
chauvinists.
Einstein regarded his pacifism as an instinctive feeling rather than the result of
"The printed version of this lecture [E39] gives an incorrect date for its delivery. By aether Einstein
meant the gravitational field (one may wonder if this new name was felicitously chosen). 'The aether
of the general theory of relativity is a medium without mechanical and kinematic properties, but
which codetermines mechanical and electromagnetic events.'
**Jointly with a Dutch firm, the N.V. Nederlandsche Technische Handelsmaatschappy 'Giro,' Ein-
stein also held a patent for a gyrocompass (Deutsches Reichs Patent 394677) [M2]. He did the work
on this device in the mid-1920s.
314 THE LATER JOURNEY
an intellectual theory [N8]. In the early years, one of his main ideals was the
establishment of a United States of Europe. For that reason, he had become an
active member of the Bund Neues Vaterland (later renamed the German League
for Human Rights), an organization that had advocated European union since its
founding in 1914; in 1928 he joined its board of directors. In 1923 he helped found
the Freunde des Neuen Russland [K6]. Though mainly interested in cultural
exchanges, this group did not fail to interest the police [K7]. In the late 1920s, his
pacifism became more drastic as he began expressing himself in favor of the prin-
ciple of unconditionally refusing to bear arms. Among the numerous manifestos
he signed were several that demanded universal and total disarmament. In a mes-
sage to a meeting of War Resisters' International in 1931, he expressed the opin-
ion that the people should take the issue of disarmament out of the hands of pol-
iticians and diplomats [N9].
Writing to Hadamard, Einstein remarked that he would not dare to preach his
creed of war resistance to a native African tribe, 'for the patient would have died
long before the cure could have been of any help to him' [E40]. It took him rather
a long time to diagnose the seriousness of Europe's ailments. (In this regard, he
was no rare exception.) It is true that in 1932 he signed an appeal to the Socialist
and Communist parties in Germany, urging them to join forces in order to stave
off Germany's 'terrible danger of becoming Fascist' [K8], but as late as May 1933,
three months after Hitler came to power, Einstein still held to an unqualified
antimilitarist position. Thereafter he changed his mind, as will be described in
Section 25b.
Einstein's active interest in the fate of the Jews also began in the Berlin period.
To him this concern was never at variance with his supranational ideals. In
October 1919 he wrote to the physicist Paul Epstein, 'One can be internationally
minded without lacking concern for the members of the tribe' [E41]. In December
he wrote to Ehrenfest, 'Anti-Semitism is strong here and political reaction is vio-
lent' [E42]. He was particularly incensed about the German reaction to Jews who
had recently escaped worse fates in Poland and Russia.* 'Incitement against these
unfortunate fugitives . . . has become an effective political weapon, employed with
success by every demagogue' [E42a]. Einstein knew of their plight especially well,
since a number of these refugees literally came knocking at his door for help. To
him supranationalism could wait so far as the hunted Jew was concerned. It was
another case where the patient would have been dead (and often was) before the
cure.
There was another irritant. 'I have always been annoyed by the undignified
assimilationist cravings and strivings which I have observed in so many of my
[Jewish] friends. . .. These and similar happenings have awakened in me the
Jewish national sentiment' [E43]. I am sure that Einstein's strongest source of
"Their influx was particularly noticeable in Berlin. In 1900, 11 000 out of the 92 000 Berlin Jews
were 'Ostjuden.' In 1925 these numbers were 43 000 out of 172 000 [Gl].
THE SUDDENLY FAMOUS DOCTOR EINSTEIN 315
identity, after science, was to be a Jew, increasingly so as the years went by. That
allegiance carried no religious connotation. In 1924 he did become a dues-paying
member of a Jewish congregation in Berlin, but only as an act of solidarity. Zion-
ism to him was above all else a form of striving for the dignity of the individual.
He never joined the Zionist organization.
There was one person who more than anyone else contributed to Einstein's
awakening: Kurt Blumenfeld, from 1910 to 1914 secretary general of the Exec-
utive of World Zionist Organizations, which then had its seat in Berlin, and from
1924 to 1933 president of the Union of German Zionists. Ben Gurion called him
the greatest moral revolutionary in the Zionist movement. He belonged to the
seventh generation of emancipated German Jewry. In a beautiful essay, Blumen-
feld has written of his discussions with Einstein in 1919, of his efforts 'to try to
get out of a man what is hidden in him, and never to try to instill in a man what
is not in his nature' [B3]. It was Blumenfeld whom Einstein often entrusted in
later years with the preparation of statements in his name on Zionist issues. It
was also Blumenfeld who was able to convince Einstein that he ought to join
Weizmann on a visit to the United States (April 2-May 30, 1921) in order to
raise funds for the planned Hebrew University. Blumenfeld understood the man
he was dealing with. After having convinced Einstein, he wrote to Weizmann, 'As
you know, Einstein is no Zionist, and I beg you not to make any attempt to prevail
on him to join our organization.... I heard . .. that you expect Einstein to give
speeches. Please be quite careful with that. Einstein ... often says things out of
naivete which are unwelcome to us' [B4].* As to his relations with Weizmann,
Einstein once said to me, 'Meine Beziehungen zu dem Weizmann waren, wie der
Freud sagt, ambivalent.'**
The extraordinary complexity of Einstein's life in the 1920s begins to unfold,
the changes in midlife are becoming clear. Man of research, scientific administra-
tor, guest professor, active pacifist, spokesman for a moral Zionism, fund-raiser
in America. Claimed by the German establishment as one of their most prominent
members, though nominally he is Swiss.f Suspected by the establishment because
of his pacifism. Target for anti-Semitism from the right. Irritant to the German
assimilationist Jews because he'would not keep quiet about Jewish self-expres-
sion. It is not very surprising that under these circumstances Einstein occasionally
experienced difficulty in maintaining perspective, as two examples may illustrate.
One of these concerns the 1920 disturbances, the other the League of Nations.
On February 12, 1920, disturbances broke out in the course of a lecture given
by Einstein at the University of Berlin. The official reason given afterward was
that there were too few seats to accommodate everyone. In a statement to the press,
Einstein noted that there was a certain hostility directed against him which was
*Part of this letter (dated incorrectly) is reproduced in [B3J. The full text is in [B5J.
**As F. would say, my relations to W. were ambivalent.
f See especially the events surrounding the awarding of the Nobel prize to Einstein, Chapter 30.
316 THE LATER JOURNEY
not explicitly anti-Semitic, although it could be interpreted as such [K9]. On
August 24, 1920, a newly founded organization, the Arbeitsgemeinschaft
deutscher Naturforscher, organized a meeting in Berlin's largest concert hall for
the purpose of criticizing the content of relativity theory and the alleged tasteless
propaganda made for it by its author.* Einstein attended. Three days later he
replied in the Berliner Tageblatt [E44], noting that reactions might have been
otherwise had he been 'a German national with or without swastika instead of a
Jew with liberal international convictions,' quoting authorities such as Lorentz,
Planck, and Eddington in support of his work, and grossly insulting Lenard on
the front page. One may sympathize. By then, Lenard was already on his way to
becoming the most despicable of all German scientists of any stature. Nevertheless,
Einstein's article is a distinctly weak piece of writing, out of style with anything
else he ever allowed to be printed under his name. On September 6 the German
minister of culture wrote to him, expressing his profound regrets about the events
of August 24 [K10]. On September 9 Einstein wrote to Born, 'Don't be too hard
on me. Everyone has to sacrifice at the altar of stupidity from time to time .. . and
this I have done with my article' [E45].
From September 19 to 25, the Gesellschaft der deutschen Naturforscher und
Arzte met in Bad Nauheim. Einstein and Lenard were present. The official record
of the meeting shows only that they engaged in useless but civilized debate on
relativity [E46]. However, Born recalls that Lenard attacked Einstein in malicious
and patently anti-Semitic ways [B6], while Einstein promised Born soon after-
ward not again to become as worked up as he had been in Nauheim [E46a]. The
building in which the meeting was held was guarded by armed police [F4], but
there were no incidents.
It would, of course, have been easy for Einstein to leave Germany and find an
excellent position elsewhere. He chose not to do so because 'Berlin is the place to
which I am most closely tied by human and scientific connections' [E46b].
Invited by the College de France, Einstein went to Paris in March 1922 to
discuss his work with physicists, mathematicians, and philosophers. Relations
between France and Germany were still severely strained, and the trip was
sharply criticized by nationalists in both countries. In order to avoid demonstra-
tions, Einstein left the train to Paris at a suburban station [L6]. Shortly after this
visit, he accepted an invitation to become a member of the Committee on Intellec-
tual Cooperation of the League of Nations. Germany did not enter the League
until 1926, and so Einstein was once again in an exposed position. On June 24
Walter Rathenau, who had been foreign minister of Germany for only a few
months, a Jew and an acquaintance of Einstein's, was assassinated. On July 4
Einstein wrote to Marie Curie that he must resign from the committee, since the
murder of Rathenau had made it clear to him that strong anti-Semitism did not
make him an appropriate member [E47]. A week later he wrote to her of his
intention to give up his Akademie position and to settle somewhere as a private
This organization later published a book entitled 700 Autoren Gegen Einstein [12].
'THE SUDDENLY FAMOUS DOCTOR EINSTEIN' 317
individual [E48]. Later that same month he cited 'my activity in Jewish causes
and, more generally, my Jewish nationality' as reasons for his resignation [E49].
He was persuaded to stay on, however. In March 1923, shortly after French and
Belgian troops occupied the Ruhrgebiet, he resigned again, declaring that the
League had neither the strength nor the good will for the fulfillment of its great
task [E50]. In 1924 he rejoined, since he now felt that 'he had been guided by a
passing mood of discouragement rather than by clear thinking' [E51].*
Evidently Einstein's life and moods were strongly affected by the strife and
violence in Germany in the early 1920s. On October 8, 1922, he left with his wife
for a five-month trip abroad. 'After the Rathenau murder, I very much welcomed
the opportunity of a long absence from Germany, which took me away from tem-
porarily increased danger' [Kll]. After short visits to Colombo, Singapore, Hong
Kong, and Shanghai, they arrived in Japan for a five-week stay. En route, Ein-
stein received word that he had been awarded the Nobel prize.** On the way
back, they spent twelve days in Palestine, then visited Spain, and finally returned
to Berlin in February 1923. Another trip in May/June 1925 took them to Argen-
tina, Brazil, and Uruguay. Wherever they came, from Singapore to Montevideo,
they were especially feted by local Jewish communities.
It was, one may say, a full life. There came a time when Einstein had to pay.
Early in 1928, while in Zuoz in Switzerland, he suffered a temporary physical
collapse brought on by overexertion. An enlargement of the heart was diagnosed.
As soon as practicable, he was brought back to Berlin, where he had to stay in bed
for four months. He fully recuperated but remained weak for almost a year.
'Sometimes ... he seemed to enjoy the atmosphere of the sickroom, since it per-
mitted him to work undisturbed' [Rl].
During that period of illness—on Friday, April 13, 1928, to be precise—Helen
Dukas began working for Einstein. She was to be his able and trusted secretary
for the rest of his life and became a member of the family.
In the summer of 1929, Einstein bought a plot of land in the small village of
Gaputh, near Berlin, a few minutes' walk from the broad stream of the Havel.
On this site a small house was built for the family. It was shortly after his fiftieth
birthday,| an<l several friends joined to celebrate this event by giving him a sail-
boat. Sailing on the Havel became one of his fondest pleasures.
Not long after his recovery, Einstein was on the road again. He was at Cal
Tech from December 1930 till March 1931, and again from December 1931 till
March 19324 Those were the years when things began to look bad in Germany.
*In 1927, Einstein, Curie, and Lorentz prepared a report for the committee, dealing with an inter-
national bureau of meteorology [E52]. Einstein's final resignation from the committee came in April
1932 [D2].
"See Chapter 30.
fThe city of Berlin intended to present him with a summer house, but after many altercations, not
all of them funny, this plan fell through [Rl].
:f This was principally the doing of Millikan, who since 1924 had been urging Einstein to spend part
of his time in Pasadena [M3].
3l8 THE LATER JOURNEY
In December 1932 the Einsteins left once again for California. As they closed
their house in Caputh, Einstein turned to Elsa and said, 'Dreh dich um. Du
siehst's nie wieder,' Turn around. You will never see it again. And so it was.
What happened thereafter will be described in Section 25b.
I conclude the story of the Berlin days with an anecdote told by Harry, Count
Kessler, the chronicler of life in Berlin in the Weimar years. Some time in 1930
the sculptor Maillol came to Berlin. Einstein was one of the guests invited for a
lunch in his honor. When Einstein came in Maillol observed, 'Une belle tele; c'est
un poete?' And, said Kessler, 'I had to explain to him who Einstein was; he had
evidently never heard of him' [K12].
16e. The Later Writings
1. The Man of Culture. All the papers Einstein published before finishing his
work on the formulation of general relativity deal either directly with research or
with reviews of research, with minor exceptions: a note in honor of Planck written
in 1913 [E53] and reviews of booklets on relativity by Brill and by Lorentz
[E53a]. Thereafter, the writings change, very slowly at first. From 1916 to 1920
we find the early eulogies—to Mach, Schwarzschild, Smoluchowski, Leo Arons—
and a few more reviews of others' work—of Lorentz's Paris lectures [E54], of
Helmholtz's lectures on Goethe [E55], of Weyl's book on relativity [E56]. After
1920 there is a far more noticeable change as he starts writing on public affairs,
political issues, education. The more important of these contributions have been
reprinted in various collections of Einstein essays. I shall not discuss them here.
After 1920 Einstein wrote fairly often on scientific personalities. He was, of
course, an obvious candidate for contributions commemorating Kepler [E57],
Newton [E57a], and Maxwell [E58]. In these essays he emphasized points of
general principle. On other occasions he clearly enjoyed writing about technical
issues, whether of a theoretical or an experimental nature, as, for example, his
pieces on Kelvin [E59] and Warburg [E60]. He spoke at Lorentz's grave and
commemorated him on other occasions as well [E61]. He wrote tributes [E62] to
Ehrenfest, Marie Curie, Nernst, Langevin, and Planck; also to Julius [E63],
Edison [E64], Michelson [E65], and Noether [E66]. He wrote in praise of Arago
[E67] and Newcomb [E68] and of his friend Berliner [E69]. As I have mentioned
before, these portraits show Einstein's keen perception of people and thereby con-
tribute to a composite portrait of Einstein himself. In addition, they make clear
that his interest in physics ranged far beyond his own immediate research.
Einstein had a lifelong interest in philosophy. As a schoolboy, he had read Kant.
With his friends in Bern he had studied Spinoza's ethics, Hume's treatise of
human nature, Mill's system of logic, Avenarius's critique of pure experience, and
other philosophical works. As I already remarked in Chapter 1, calling Einstein
a philosopher sheds as much light on him as calling him a musician. 'Is not all of
philosophy as if written in honey? It looks wonderful when one contemplates it,
but when one looks again it is all gone. Only mush remains,' he once said [R2].
THE SUDDENLY FAMOUS DOCTOR EINSTEIN' 319
Even though Einstein's interest in and impact on philosophy were strong, he
himself never wrote articles that may be called philosophical in a technical sense.
After 1920 he wrote occasional reviews of or introductions for philosophical
works, however. His reviews of books on epistemology by Weinberg [E70] and
Winternitz [E71] show his familiarity with Kant. So does the record of his dis-
cussions with French philosophers in 1922. When one of these referred to a pos-
sible connection between Einstein's ideas and those of Kant, Einstein replied:
In regard to Kant's philosophy, I believe that every philosopher has his own
Kant. . . . Arbitrary concepts are necessary in order to construct science; as to
whether these concepts are given a priori or are arbitrary conventions, I can
say nothing. [E72]
From Einstein's introduction to a new translation of Galileo's Dialogue [E73], we
see that he had read Plato. He wrote an introduction to a new German translation
of Lucretius's De Rerum Natura [E74]. He was familiar with Bertrand Russell's
theory of knowledge [E75]. His philosophical interests are also manifest in his
review of Emile Meyerson's La Deduction Relativiste [E76] and his introductions
to books by Planck [E77] and Frank [E78]. Among the oriental philosophers, he
appreciated Confucius. Once, in Princeton, he fell asleep during a lecture on Zen
Buddhism. Perhaps he was tired that evening.
Einstein continued to consider philosophy ennobling in his later years. In 1944
he wrote to Benedetto Croce, 'I would not think that philosophy and reason itself
will be man's guide in the foreseeable future; however, they will remain the most
beautiful sanctuary they have always been for the select' [E79].
Among the many contributions that show Einstein as a man of culture, I select
two for brief additional comments.
The first is his appreciation of Maxwell [E58], one of his precursors. In Ein-
stein's opinion, Maxwe'i was a revolutionary figure. The purely mechanical
world picture was upset by 'the great revolution forever linked with the names
Faraday, Maxwell, and Hertz. The lion's share in this revolution was Max-
well's. . . . Since Maxwell's time, physical reality has been thought of as repre-
sented by continuous fields. . . . This change in the conception of reality is the most
profound and the most fruitful that physics has experienced since the time of New-
ton.' Elsewhere Einstein wrote of Maxwell, 'Imagine his feelings when the dif-
ferential equations he had formulated proved to him that electromagnetic fields
spread in the form of polarized waves and with the speed of light!' [E80].
The second comment deals with the views on religion [E81]. 'A religious person
is devout in the sense that he has no doubt of the significance of those superper-
sonal objects and goals which neither require nor are capable of rational founda-
tion.' Thus, according to Einstein, 'a legitimate conflict between science and reli-
gion cannot exist. . .. Science without religion is lame, religion without science is
blind.' By his own definition, Einstein himself was, of course, a deeply religious
man.
2. The Man of Science. With the formulation of the field equations of grav-
32O THE LATER JOURNEY
itation in November 1915, classical physics (that is, nonquantum physics) reached
its perfection and Einstein's scientific career its high point. His oeuvre does not
show anything like an abrupt decline thereafter. Despite much illness, his years
from 1916 to 1920 were productive and fruitful, both in relativity and in quantum
theory. A gentle decline begins after 1920. There is a resurgence toward the end
of 1924 (the quantum theory of the monatomic gas). After that, the creative period
ceases abruptly, though scientific efforts continue unremittingly for another thirty
years.
Who can gauge the extent to which the restlessness of Einstein's life in the
1920s was the cause or the effect of a lessening of creative powers? Many influ-
ences were obviously beyond his volition: age, illness, many of his administrative
obligations, wordly fame, the violence of the early Weimar period. At the same
time, I perceive in his writings after 1916 a natural diminution of creative tension.
His activities in public affairs were no doubt the result of a combination of strong
inner urges and of those demands on him which are part of the burdens of fame.
It is less clear to me to what extent he would have responded to these pressures
if physics had been as all-consuming to him as it was in earlier days. It is my
impression that, after 1916, Einstein finally had some energy to spare for the
world in which he lived. Kessler's chronicles [K12] and Kayser's biography [Rl]
indicate that participation in Berlin's social life gave him pleasure. So did conver-
sations with statesmen like Rathenau, Stresemann, and Briand, and later Church-
ill and Roosevelt. Letters (not in the Princeton Archives) written by Einstein in
the early 1920s, showing that for several years he had a strong attachment to a
younger woman, express emotions for which, perhaps, he had no energy to spare
in his marriages. This interlude ended late in 1924, when he wrote to her that he
had to seek in the stars what was denied him on earth. That line was written only
months before the discovery of quantum mechanics, the time at which a younger
generation of physicists took over the lead while Einstein went his own way.
I return to Einstein's physics. Two major items remain to be discussed, unified
field theory and quantum theory. I deal with Einstein's work on unified field
theory first, since it is a direct outgrowth of general relativity, the last scientific
topic treated before the present long digression on the suddenly famous Doctor
Einstein. Then I turn to Einstein and the quantum theory, begining once again
with events in the year 1905 and continuing from there until his final days.
A line from a letter in 1928 from Einstein to Ehrenfest may serve as an epi-
graph to the later writings:
I believe less than ever in the essentially statistical nature of events and have
decided to use the little energy still given to me in ways that are independent of
the current bustle. [E82]
References
Al. Algemeen Handelsblad, November 10, 1919.
Bl. B. Bertotti, D. Brill, and R. Krotkov in Gravitation (L. Witten, Ed.), p. 1. Wiley,
New York, 1962.
'THE SUDDENLY FAMOUS DOCTOR EINSTEIN 321
B2. A. M. Bienfait-Visser, letter to A. Pais, February 12, 1980.
B3. K. Blumenfeld in Helle Zeit, dunkle Zeit, p. 74. Europa Verlag, Zurich, 1956.
B4. , letter to C. Weizmann, March 15, 1921; ETH Bibl. Zurich Hs. 304,
201-4.
B5. , Im Kampfum den Zionismus, p. 66. Deutsches Verlag Anst, Stuttgart,
1968.
B6. M. Born in Einstein-Born Briefwechsel, p. 60. Nympenburger, Munich, 1969.
Cl. C. Chaplin, My Autobiography, p. 346, The Bodley Head, London, 1964.
Dl. F. W. Dyson, M. N. Roy. Astr. Soc. 77, 445 (1917).
D2. A. Dufour, letter to A. Einstein, April 23, 1932.
El. A. Einstein, letter to M. Besso, December 10, 1915; EB, p. 59.
E2. —, letter to P. Ehrenfest, February 14, 1917.
E3. , letter to H. A. Lorentz, April 23, 1917.
E4. , letter to H. Zangger, March 10, 1917.
E5. , letter to M. Besso, May 13, 1917; EB, p. 114.
E6. , letter to M. Besso, September 3, 1917; EB, p. 121.
E7. , letter to H. Zangger, December 6, 1917.
E8. —, letter to P. Ehrenfest, November 12, 1917.
E9. , letter to M. Besso, January 5, 1918; EB, p. 124.
E10. , letter to D. Hilbert, undated, April 1918.
Ell. , letter to H. Zangger, undated, early 1918.
E12. , letter to P. Ehrenfest, May 8, 1918.
E13. , letter to M. Besso, August 20, 1918; EB, p. 132.
E14. , letter to P. Ehrenfest, December 6, 1918.
E15. , letter to M. Besso, December 4, 1918; EB, p. 145.
El6. , letter to C. Seelig, May 5, 1952.
E17. , letter to P. Ehrenfest, September 12, 1919.
E18. , letter to M. Besso, July 26, 1920; EB, p. 151.
El9. E. Einstein, letter to P. Ehrenfest, April 5, 1932.
E20. A. Einstein, letter to M. Born undated, probably 1937; Einstein-Born Briefwech-
sel, p. 177. Nymphenburger, Munich, 1969.
E21. , Lettres a Maurice Solovine, p. 134. Gauthier-Villars, Paris, 1956.
E22. , letter to V. Besso, March 21, 1955; EB, p. 537.
E23. , letter to P. Winteler and family, undated, May 1919.
E24. E. Einstein, letter to P. Ehrenfest, December 10, 1919.
E25. A. Einstein, letter to H. Zangger, undated, January 1920.
E26. , letter to H. Zangger, undated, March 1920.
E27. , postcard to P. Einstein, September 27, 1919.
E28. , Naturw. 7, 776 (1919).
E29. , letter to M. Besso, undated, March 1914; EB. p. 52.
E30. , PAW, 1915, p. 831.
E31. , letter to A. Sommerfeld, November 28, 1915.
E32. J. Barman and C. Glymour, Hist. St. Phys. Set. 11, 49 (1980).
E33. A. S. Eddington, Report on the Relativity Theory of Gravitation. Fleetway Press,
London, 1918.
E34. , M. N. Roy. Astr. Soc. 77, 377 (1917).
E35. , Observatory 42, 119 (1919).
E36. A. Einstein, letter to C. Stumpf, November 3, 1919.
322 THE LATER JOURNEY
E37. A. S. Eddington, letter to A. Einstein, December 1, 1919.
E38. A. Einstein, Die Vossische Zeitung, April 26, 1914.
E39. , Aether und Relativitdtstheorie. Springer, Berlin, 1920.
E40. , letter to J. Hadamard, Sept. 24, 1929.
E41. , letter to P. Epstein, October 5, 1919.
E42. , letter to P. Ehrenfest, December 4, 1919.
E42a. , About Zionism (L. Simon, Tran.), p. 40. Macmillan, New York, 1931.
E43. ,[E42a], pp. 41,43.
E44. , Berliner Tageblatt, August 27, 1920.
E45. , letter to M. Born, September 9, 1920.
E46. and P. Lenard, Phys. Zeitschr. 21, 666 (1921).
E46a. , letter to M. Born, undated, autumn 1920.
E46b. —, letter to K. Haenisch, September 8, 1920; [Kl], Vol. 1, p. 204.
E47. , letter to M. Curie, July 4, 1921.
E48. , letter to M. Curie, July 11, 1921.
E49. —, letter to G. Murray, July 25, 1922.
E50. , letter to the Committee on Intellectual Cooperation, March 21,1923; New
York Times, June 28, 1923.
E51. —, letter to G. Murray, May 30, 1924.
E52. —-, M. Curie, and H. A. Lorentz, Science 65, 415 (1927).
£53. , Naturw. 1, 1077 (1913).
E53a. , Naturw. 2, 1018 (1914).
E54. , Naturw. 4, 480(1916).
£55. , Naturw. 5, 675 (1917).
E56. , Nature. 6, 373 (1918).
E57. , Frankfurter Zeitung, November 9, 1930.
E57a. , see Refs. [E8]-[E11] in Chap. 1.
E58. ——, in James Clerk Maxwell, p. 66. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
1931.
E59. , Naturw. 12, 601 (1924).
E60. , Naturw. 10, 823 (1922).
E61. , Mein Weltbild, pp. 32, 35, 39. Europa, Zurich, 1953.
E62. , Out of My Later Years, Philosophical Library, New York, 1950.
R63- , Astrophys. J. 63, 196 (1926).
E64. , Science, 74, 404(1931).
E65. , Z. Angew. Chemie 44, 658 (1931).
E66. , New York Times, May 4, 1935.
E67. , Naturw. 17, 363 (1929).
E68. , Science 69, 249 (1929).
E69. , Naturw. 20, 913 (1932).
E70. , Naturw. 18, 536 (1930).
E71. , Deutsche Literaturzeitung, Heft 1, p. 20, 1924.
E72. , Bull. Soc. Fran. Philosophie 22, 91 (1922).
E73. , foreword to Galileo's Dialogue (S. Drake, Tran.). University of California
Press, Berkeley, 1967.
E74. , introduction to Lukrez, Von der Natur (H. Diels, Tran.). Weidmann, Ber-
lin, 1924.
'THE SUDDENLY FAMOUS DOCTOR EINSTEIN' 323
E75. , in The Philosophy of Bertrand Russell (P. A. Schilpp, Ed.), p. 277. Tudor,
New York, 1944.
E76. , Rev. Phil. France 105, 161 (1928).
E77. , prologue to M. Planck, Where Is Science Going? Norton, New York, 1932.
E78. , foreword to P. Frank, Relativity, a Richer Truth. Beacon Press, Boston,
1950.
E79. , letter to B. Croce, June 7, 1944.
E80. , Science 91, 487 (1940).
E81. , Nature 146, 605 (1941).
E82. , letter to P. Ehrenfest, August 23, 1928.
Fl. P. Frank, Einstein, His Life and Times, p. 124. Knopf, New York, 1953.
F2. —.—, Einstein, Sein Leben und Seine Zeit, p. 106. Vieweg, Braunschweig, 1979.
F3. , [F2], p. 290.
F4. , [F2], p. 275.
Gl. P. Gay, Freud, Jews and Other Germans, p. 172. Oxford University Press, New
York, 1978.
HI. F. Herneck, Einstein Privat, p. 29. Der Morgen, Berlin, 1978.
11. J. Ishiwara, Einstein ko en roku, p. 193. Tokyo-Tosho, Tokyo, 1978.
12. H. Israel, E. Ruckhaber, and R. Weinmann (Eds.), 100 Autoren Gegen Einstein.
Voigtlander, Leipzig, 1931.
Kl. C. Kirsten and H. J. Treder, Einstein in Berlin, Vol. 1, documents 148-60.
Akadamie Verlag, Berlin, 1979.
K2. , [Kl], Vol. 1, documents 59-68.
K3. , [Kl], Vol. 1, documents 81-7.
K4. ^, [Kl], Vol. 1, pp. 22, 54, 58.
K5. ,[Kl],Vol. l,p. 198.
K6. ,[Kl],Vol. l,p. 215.
K7. —, [Kl], Vol. l,p. 219.
K8. —, [Kl], Vol. l,p. 223.
K9. , [Kl], Vol. 1, p. 202.
K10. ,[Kl],Vol. l,p. 210.
Kll. , [Kl], Vol. l,p. 231.
K12. H. Kessler, In the Twenties, p. 396. Holt, Rinehart and Winston, New York,
1976.
LI. H. A. Lorentz, letter to A. Einstein, March 22, 1917.
L2. , telegram to A. Einstein, September 27, 1919.
L3. —, letter to P. Ehrenfest, September 22, 1919.
L4. —, telegram to A. Einstein, November 10, 1919.
L5. London Times, June 14, 1921.
L6. J. Langevin, Cahiers Fundamenta Scientiae, No. 93, 1979.
Ml. D. F. Moyer in On the Path of Albert Einstein, p. 55. Plenum Press, New York,
1979.
M2. K. von Mayrhauser, letter to A. Einstein, October 11, 1926.
M3. R. Millikan, letter to A. Einstein, October 2, 1924.
Nl. New York Times, August 16, 1914.
N2. Nature 94, 66 (1914).
N3. New Catholic Encyclopedia, McGraw-Hill, New York, 1967.
324 THE LATER JOURNEY
N3a. Nieuwe Rotterdamsche Courant, November 9 and 11, 1919.
N4. New York Times, December 21, 1919.
N5. New York Times, December 3, 1919.
N6. New York Times, November 16, 1919.
N7. New York Times, January 28, 1928.
N8. O. Nathan and M. Norden, Einstein on Peace, p. 98. Schocken, New York, 1968.
N9. , [N8], p. 141.
01. Observatory, 42, 256 (1919).
02. Observatory, 42, 389 (1919); see also, Proc. Roy. Soc 96A, i (1919).
Rl. A. Reiser, Albert Einstein. Boni, New York, 1930.
R2. I. Rosenthal-Schneider, Reality and Scientific Truth, p. 62. Wayne State Univer-
sity Press, Detroit, 1980.
51. N. Saz, Forschungen d. Pad. Hochsch. 'Karl Liebknecht,' Naturw. Reihe B, No.
14, p. 59.
52. W. de Sitter, Observatory 39, 412 (1916).
53. , M. N. Roy. Astr. Soc. 76, 699 (1916); 77, 155, 481 (1917); 78, 3, 341
(1917).
54. C. Stumpf, letter to A. Einstein, October 22, 1919.
Tl. J. J. Thomson, Proc. Roy Soc. 96 A, 311 (1919).
T2. M. Talmey, The Relativity Theory Simplified, p. 164. Falcon Press, New York,
1932.
Ul. G. E. Uhlenbeck in Some Strangeness in the Proportion (H. Woolf, Ed.), p. 524.
Addison-Wesley, Reading, Mass., 1980.
