7
The New Kinematics
7a. June 1905: Special Relativity Defined,
Lorentz Transformations Derived
7. Relativity's Aesthetic Origins. Without a carrying medium, light can as little
be seen as sound can be heard. Such was the sensible prejudice of nineteenth cen-
tury physics. The better light was understood, the more circumscribed became the
properties of its medium, the aether. The best of all possible aethers, it appeared,
was one which blows through man and his planet as they speed through this
absolutely immobile medium. When light turned out to be a transverse wave phe-
nomenon, the aether had to be declared quasi-rigid.
The special theory of relativity divested the aether of its principal mechanical
property, absolute rest, and thereby made the aether redundant. As Einstein put
it in the introduction to his June 1905 paper (referred to in this chapter as the
June paper), 'the introduction of a "light-aether" will prove to be superfluous
since, according to the view to be developed [here], neither will a "space in abso-
lute rest" endowed with special properties be introduced nor will a velocity vector
be associated with a point of empty space in which electromagnetic processes take
place' [El].* Special relativity represents the abandonment of mechanical pictures
as an aid to the interpretation of electromagnetism. The one preferred coordinate
system in absolute rest is forsaken. Its place is taken by an infinite set of preferred
coordinate systems, the inertial frames. By definition, any two of these are in uni-
form motion with respect to each other. The preference for uniformity of relative
motion makes this version of relativity a special one.
In the spring of 1905, even before the completion of the relativity paper, Ein-
stein had written to his friend Conrad Habicht, 'The fourth work [i.e., El, the
fourth paper Einstein published in 1905] is available only in draft form and is an
electrodynamics of moving bodies in which use is made of a modification of the
tenets about space and time; the purely kinematic part of this work will surely
interest you' [E2]. Small wonder that Einstein would draw his friend's attention
to the kinematic part. In its entirety, the June paper consists of an introduction,
five sections on kinematics followed by five sections on electrodynamics, no refer-
ences, and one acknowledgment. The kinematic part contains the complete first
principles of the special relativity theory.
*For an English translation of this paper, see [SI].
138
THE NEW KINEMATICS 139
As indicated in Chapter 6, special relativity was born after a decade of gestation.
However, the crucial kinematic insights which underlie this theory dawned on its
author not more than five or six weeks before the actual completion of the paper
under discussion. We know this from the talk given by Einstein in Kyoto, in
December 1922, which also reveals that this climactic period was preceded by a
year of struggle which had led him nowhere. I quote once again from the Kyoto
address [Ol]:
'I took into consideration Fizeau's experiment, and then attempted to deal with
the problems on the assumption that Lorentz's equations concerning the electron
should hold as well in the case of our system of coordinates being defined on the
moving bodies as defined in vacuo. At any rate, at that time I felt certain of the
truth of the Maxwell-Lorentz equations in electrodynamics. All the more, it
showed to us the relations of the so-called invariance of the velocity of light that
those equations should hold also in the moving frame of reference. This invariance
of the velocity of light was, however, in conflict with the rule of addition of veloc-
ities we knew of well in mechanics.
'I felt a great difficulty to resolve the question why the two cases were in conflict
with each other. I had wasted time almost a year in fruitless considerations, with
a hope of some modification of Lorentz's idea, and at the same time I could not
but realize that it was a puzzle not easy to solve at all.
'Unexpectedly a friend of mine in Bern then helped me. That was a very beau-
tiful day when I visited him and began to talk with him as follows:
' "I have recently had a question which was difficult for me to understand. So
I came here today to bring with me a battle on the question." Trying a lot of
discussions with him, I could suddenly comprehend the matter. Next day I visited
him again and said to him without greeting: "Thank you. I've completely solved
the problem." My solution was really for the very concept of time, that is, that
time is not absolutely defined but there is an inseparable connection between time
and the signal velocity. With this conception, the foregoing extraordinary difficulty
could be thoroughly solved. Five weeks after my recognition of this, the present
theory of special relativity was completed.'
The friend in Bern was Besso, close to Einstein since the student days in Zurich,
colleague at the patent office since 1904. Thus the Kyoto address makes clear what
was the substance of the 'loyal assistance of my friend M. Besso,' to which Einstein
devoted the acknowledgment in his June paper. As to the completion of the work
in five weeks, since the paper was received by the Annalen der Physik on June
30, Einstein's total concentration on relativity followed immediately upon the
relief of his having finished three major projects in statistical physics: the paper
on the light-quantum, his thesis, and the paper on Brownian motion, completed
on March 17, April 30, and around May 10, respectively.
In 1905 Einstein's belief in 'the truth of the Maxwell-Lorentz equations' was
not unqualified, as we shall see later. It was strong enough, however, for him to
perceive the conflict between the constancy of the velocity of light (in the vacuum)
140 RELATIVITY, THE SPECIAL THEORY
and the relativity principle of classical mechanics. This principle, already long
known by then, states that all mechanical laws should be the same in any two
coordinate systems (x,y,z,t) and (x',y',z',t') related by*
x' = x - vt y' = y z' = z t' = t (7.1)
Since 1909 these transformations have been called Galilean transformations.**
(Recall that in 1905 there existed as yet no evidence against the general validity
of Galilean invariance in pure mechanics.) The conflict arises if one attempts to
elevate Galilean invariance to a universal principle. An aether at absolute rest
hardly fits this scheme of things. Some physicists believed therefore that the very
foundations of electrodynamics should be revised.f Einstein opted for the alter-
native: 'The phenomena of electrodynamics and mechanics possess no properties
corresponding to the idea of absolute rest' [El]. In the June paper, he gave two
concrete reasons for this view: first, the absence of experimental evidence for an
aether drift and second, the existence of 'asymmetries which do not appear to be
inherent in the phenomena.' As an example of such an asymmetry, he considered
a system consisting of a magnet and a conductor. If the magnet moves in the pres-
ence of a resting conductor, then an electric field is generated which induces a
current in the conductor. If, on the other hand, the conductor moves in the pres-
ence of the resting magnet, then an electromotive force (proportional to ~u X H)
is generated, which again causes a current. Transcribed rather freely, one might
say that Einstein cared for neither the logical disconnectedness of electricity and
magnetism nor the asymmetry between the two coordinate systems just described.
I argued in Chapter 6 that Einstein rejected the nineteenth century explanations
of the first-order aether drift effects as unconvincing and artificial and that the
second-order Michelson-Morley paradox was to some extent secondary to him.
Add to this his remark that 'Maxwell's electrodynamics—as usually understood
at the present time—when applied to moving bodies, leads to asymmetries which
are not inherent in the phenomena' and one has the motivation for the June paper:
Einstein was driven to the special theory of relativity mostly by aesthetic argu-
ments, that is, arguments of simplicity. This same magnificent obsession would
stay with him for the rest of his life. It was to lead him to his greatest achievement,
general relativity, and to his noble failure, unified field theory.
2. The Two Postulates. The new theory is based in its entirety on two pos-
tulatesf [El]:
*As in the previous chapter, I shall, for simplicity, consider relative motions in the x direction only.
**This term was introduced by Philipp Frank [Fl].
fFor details, see Section 3 of Pauli's encyclopedia article, in German [PI], or in its English trans-
lation [P2].
^1 do not copy Einstein verbatim. The term inertial frame gained currency only some time later, as
did the terms Galilean invariance and Lorentz invariance, which I freely use from now on.
THE NEW KINEMATICS 14!
1. The laws of physics take the same form in all inertial frames.
2. In any given inertial frame, the velocity of light c is the same whether the light
be emitted by a body at rest or by a body in uniform motion.
FitzGerald and Lorentz had already seen that the explanation of the Michel-
son-Morley experiment demanded the introduction of a new postulate, the con-
traction hypothesis. Their belief that this contraction is a dynamic effect (molec-
ular forces in a rod in uniform motion differ from the forces in a rod at rest) was
corrected by Einstein: the contraction of rods is a necessary consequence of his two
postulates and is for the very first time given its proper observational meaning in
the June paper.
What is so captivating about the Einstein of 1905 is the apparent ease and the
fraicheur with which he introduces new ideas. If free radiation consists of light-
quanta, then the emission and absorption of light should also go by discrete steps;
if van't Hoff's law holds for solutions, then it should also hold for suspensions; if
the velocity of light does not seem to depend on the velocity of the emitter, then
why not make that into a postulate? Steps like these were the result of very hard
thinking, yet the final product has that quality of greatness of looking easy if not
obvious.
The big question was, of course, the compatibility of the two postulates, about
which Einstein had the following to say in his review article of 1907 [E3]: 'Sur-
prisingly, it turned out that it was only necessary to formulate the concept of time
sufficiently precisely to overcome the first-mentioned difficulty [i.e., the Michel-
son-Morley result, which Einstein did mention for the first time in this 1907
paper]. All that was needed was the insight that an auxiliary quantity introduced
by H. A. Lorentz and denoted by him as "local time" can be defined as "time",
pure and simple.'
There are as many times as there are inertial frames. That is the gist of the
June paper's kinematic sections, which rank among the highest achievements of
science, in content as well as in style. If only for enjoyment, these sections ought
to be read by all scientists, whether or not they are familiar with relativity. It also
seems to me that this kinematics, including the addition of velocity theorem, could
and should be taught in high schools as the simplest example of the ways in which
modern physics goes beyond everyday intuition.* (If only I could make a similar
recommendation for the case of quantum theory. .. .)
I briefly recapitulate the content of the new kinematics.** In a given inertial
frame an observer A measures his position xk relative to the origin by means of
rigid rods, using (as Einstein states explicitly) 'the methods of Euclidean geome-
try.' A second observer B does likewise for *B. Then A's clock at JA is synchronized
with B's clock at JB by means of light signals. If A's clock is synchronous with
*See, for example, the excellent popular yet rigorous account by Born [Bl].
"More details are found in standard texts, e.g., [Ml] and [P3].
142 RELATIVITY, THE SPECIAL THEORY
B's, and B's with that of a third observer C, then A's is synchronous with C's.
Synchronicity is therefore fully defined within any one inertial frame. Because of
the second postulate, the use of light signals remains a valid tool for the compar-
ison of the A and B clocks even if, after initial synchronization in the common
inertial frame, B and his clock start moving with uniform velocity relative to A,
that is, if B joins another inertial frame.
[Remark. In an unpublished manuscript,f written in 1921, Einstein spells out
three additional assumptions which are made in this reasoning: (1) Homogeneity:
the properties of rods and clocks depend neither on their position nor on the time
at which they move, but only on the way in which they move. (2) Isotropy: the
properties of rods and clocks are independent of direction. (3) These properties
are also independent of their history.]
The time of an event is defined as the reading of a clock coincident with the
event and at rest relative to it. Events which are simultaneous in one inertial frame
are not simultaneous in another. Einstein's example: two identical rods R, and R2
are coincident in a given inertial frame in which two observers O, and O2 have
synchronized their respective clocks. Observer O, stays with R, in this frame, O2
moves with R2 into another inertial frame. Three durations are measured: Oj
measures the time i, for a light ray to move from one end of R, to the other and
back, and O2 does the same for R2, finding a time /2. Observer O, also measures
the duration t\ for light to move from one end of R2 to the other and back. Then
i, = t2, in accordance with the first postulate, but £, ¥= t(: 'We see that we cannot
attach absolute meaning to the concept of simultaneity.'
The two postulates of special relativity have physical content only if the exper-
imental prescriptions for measuring position and time (and, therefore, for velocity)
are added. The postulates together with these prescriptions fully specify Einstein's
theory of special relativity.
3. From the Postulates to the Lorentz Transformations. Let us continue with
the example of the two rods. Physics would be incomplete if the inequality £, ^
t\ could not be sharpened into a specific relation between these two durations.
Einstein obtained this relation by deriving the Lorentz transformation from his
postulates. In essence, his argument runs as follows. Consider two inertial frames,
(x,y,z,t) and (x',y',z',tr), the second moving with a velocity v in the x direction
relative to the first. At t = t' = 0, the two frames coincide. At that moment a
spherical light wave is emitted from the joint origin, t seconds later the wave is
spread over the sphere
The compatibility of the two postulates demands that the wave be equivalently
spread over
t This is the Morgan manuscript, the origins of which are described in Chapter 9.
THE NEW KINEMATICS 143
The relations between the two sets of coordinates implied by these two equations
are assumed to be linear, in accordance with the homogeneity of space and time.
Then simple arithmetic yields
where « is an arbitrary scale factor depending on v only. Since the product of this
transformation and its inverse should yield the identity, one has
Symmetry demands that the transformations on y and z should not change if v
—>• — v, and hence
Thus (.(v) = 1 (since e(0) = 1) and
In Chapter 6, we encountered Eqs. 7.4-7.8 in the discussion of papers by Lorentz
and Poincare. The derivation of the Lorentz transformations (Eq. 7.8) from first
principles occurs for the first time in Einstein's paper, however.*
Einstein also pointed out that transformations of the type shown in Eq. 7.8 form
a group, Vie dies sein muss,' as it should be**: two successive transformations
with velocities w,,u2 in the same direction result in a new transformation of the
form of Eq. 7.8 with a velocity v given by
Twenty years later, Einstein heard something about the Lorentz group that
greatly surprised him. It happened while he was in Leiden. In October 1925
George Eugene Uhlenbeck and Samuel Goudsmit had discovered the spin of the
electron [Ul] and thereby explained the occurrence of the alkali doublets, but for
a brief period it appeared that the magnitude of the doublet splitting did not come
out correctly. Then Llewellyn Thomas supplied the missing factor, 2, now known
as the Thomas factor [Tl]. Uhlenbeck told me that he did not understand a word
of Thomas's work when it first came out. 'I remember that, when I first heard
about it, it seemed unbelievable that a relativistic effect could give a factor of 2
instead of something of order v/c. . . . Even the cognoscenti of the relativity theory
(Einstein included!) were quite surprised' [U2]. At the heart of the Thomas
precession lies the fact that a Lorentz transformation with velocity y, followed by
a second one with a velocity ~v2 m a different direction does not lead to the same
*See [Rl] for interesting comments on the roles of postulates and observations in the special theory
of relativity.
**He did not expand on this cryptic statement.
144 RELATIVITY, THE SPECIAL THEORY
inertial frame as one single Lorentz transformation with the velocity v, + v2
[Kl]. (It took Pauli a few weeks before he grasped Thomas's point.*)
4. Applications. In his June paper, Einstein put his postulates to use in ways
which are now standard textbook material. No derivations will therefore be given
in what follows next. (For Einstein's own derivations, see [SI].)
a) From the postulates to the Lorentz transformations, as already discussed.
b) From the Lorentz transformations to the FitzGerald-Lorentz contraction of
rods and the dilation of time:
e) The transformation law for light frequencies:
*See the correspondence between Pauli, Bohr, and Kramers between February 26 and March 12,
1926 [P4].
**See Section 6a for the meaning of the various symbols. For comments by Einstein on the drag in
dispersive media, see [E5a].where /0 and t0 are, respectively, a length and a duration in the rest frame.
The kinematic origins of these relations were not at once generally understood.
In 1911 Einstein still had to explain: 'The question whether the Lorentz con-
traction does or does not exist is confusing. It does not "really" exist in so far
as it does not exist for an observer who moves [with the rod]; it "really" exists,
however, in the sense that it can as a matter of principle be demonstrated by
a resting observer' [E4].
c) The addition of velocities, already mentioned.
d) The relativistic expression of the aberration from the zenith:
where <t> is the angle between a monochromatic light ray with frequency v and
the x direction. Thus Einstein is the discoverer of the transverse Doppler effect:
i/ differs from v even if the motion of the light source is perpendicular to the
direction of observation. In 1907 he published a brief note about the experi-
mental detectability of the transverse effect [E5].
f) Not found in the June paper is a derivation of the Fresnel formula**
THE NEW KINEMATICS 145
which is an immediate consequence of Eq. 7.9: let y, = c/n, v2 = v and
expand to the first order in vlv2/c2. I find the absence of this derivation in the
June paper more remarkable than the absence of any mention of Michelson
and Morley. The labor involved is not excessive, the Fizeau experiment had
been very important for Einstein's thinking, and a successful aether-free der-
ivation might have pleased even a man like Einstein, who was not given to
counting feathers in his cap. The honor of the first derivation (in 1907) goes
to Max von Laue, who pointed out that 'according to the relativity principle,
light is completely dragged along by the body [i.e., the streaming fluid], but
just because of that its velocity relative to an observer who does not participate
in the motion of the body does not equal the vector sum of its velocity relative
to the body and [the velocity] of the body relative to the observer' [LI]. As was
noted in Chapter 6, for small v/c it is possible to derive Eq. 7.13 by means of
a dynamic calculation that does not explicitly involve relativity [P5]. The
kinematic derivation just given does not mean that such a calculation is incor-
rect, but rather that it is not necessary. Lorentz invariance suffices to obtain
the desired result.
g) Einstein rather casually mentioned that if two synchronous clocks G, and C2
are at the same initial position and if C2 leaves A and moves along a closed
orbit, then upon return to A, C2 will run slow relative to C,, as often observed
since in the laboratory. He called this result a theorem and cannot be held
responsible for the misnomer clock paradox, which is of later vintage. Indeed,
as Einstein himself noted later [E6], "no contradiction in the foundations of
the theory can be constructed from this result" since C2 but not C, has expe-
rienced acceleration.
h) Covariance of the electrodynamic equations. Using a horrible but not uncom-
mon notation in which each component of the electric and magnetic field has
its own name,* Einstein proved the Lorentz covariance of the Maxwell-
Lorentz equations, first for the source-free case, then for the case with sources.
He also discussed the equations of motion of an electrically charged particle
with charge e and mass m in an external electromagnetic field. In a frame
(x,t) in which the particle is instantaneously at rest, these equations are
Applying the transformations (Eq. 7.8), he found that in a frame with velocity
v in the x direction:
* Hertz, Planck, and Poincare did likewise. Lorentz used three-vector language.
146 RELATIVITY, THE SPECIAL THEORY
and thus obtained what he called a 'new manner of expression' for the Lorentz
force: whereas in 1895 Lorentz [L2] had introduced Eq. 7.16 as a new
assumption (see Eq. 6.13), Einstein obtained this force kinematically from the
purely electric force acting on a charged particle that is instantaneously at rest.
He also gave an expression for the kinetic energy W of the particle for the case
where accelerations are small and therefore no energy is given off in the form
of radiation. In that case,
a relation which led him to comment: 'When v = c, W becomes infinite.
Velocities greater than light have ... no possibilities of existence.' (During
1907 Einstein had a correspondence with W. Wien on this question.)
[Remark. This conclusion is perhaps not quite correct. The precise statement
is: If a particle moves with a velocity smaller (larger) than c in one inertial frame,
then it moves with a velocity smaller (larger) than c in all inertial frames. (The
relative velocity of inertial frames is < c by definition.) Thus c is a velocity bar-
rier in two respects. According to Eq. 7.9, c is the upper (lower) limit for a particle
moving with sublight (superlight) velocity. Several physicists have speculated
about the weird properties of 'tachyons,' the name coined by Gerald Feinberg [F2]
for hypothetical superlight-velocity particles.* Tachyons can appear in our cosy
sub-c world only if they are produced in pairs. Tachyon physics is therefore nec-
essarily a topic in quantum field theory. The quantum theory of free tachyons has
been developed to some extent [F2]. The theoretical description of interactions
involving tachyons is thus far an open problem.]
5. Relativity Theory and Quantum Theory. The June paper also contains the
transformation law for the energy £ of a light beam:
(where 4> is defined as in Eq. 7.12) as well as the following comment by Einstein
on the similarities between Eqs. 7.12 and 7.18: 'It is remarkable that the energy
and the frequency of a light complex vary with the state of motion of the observer
in accordance with the same law.'
Three months earlier, Einstein had completed a paper which contains the
relation
E = hv (7.19)
between the energy and the frequency of a light-quantum [E7]. It is therefore of
interest that Einstein would call the similarities in transformation properties of E
*See, e.g., [B2] and [F2] also for references to earlier literature.
THE NEW KINEMATICS 147
and v remarkable without referring to his own quantum relation between the
energy and the frequency of light, which must have been fresh in his mind.
Remarkable though this silence may be, it is not inexplicable. As I have already
intimated, Einstein's belief in the validity of the Maxwell-Lorentz electrody-
namics was strong but not unqualified. As he put it in his light-quantum paper,
'The wave theory of light which operates with continuous functions of space vari-
ables has proved itself an excellent tool for the description of purely optical phe-
nomena. ... [However] it is conceivable that [this] theory may lead to conflicts
with experiment when one applies it to the phenomena of the generation and
conversion of light' [E7]. He considered the Maxwell-Lorentz theory of the free
electromagnetic field to be so good that 'it will probably never be replaced by
another theory'; but he had his doubts about this theory where the interaction of
light and matter was concerned. Also, he rightly regarded his own quantum
hypotheses of 1905 more of a new phenomenological description than a new the-
ory, in sharp contrast to his relativity theory, which he rightly regarded as a true
theory with clearly defined first principles. Thus it is not surprising that he would
derive Eqs. 7.12 and 7.18 separately, without appeal to Eq. 7.19.
Not just in 1905 but throughout his life Einstein considered quantum theory as
a preliminary to a true theory and relativity as the royal road toward such a the-
ory. But that is a subject that will have to wait until Chapter 26.
6. 7 Could Have Said That More Simply.' In the fall of 1943 Einstein
received a visit from Julian Boyd, then the librarian of the Princeton University
library. The purpose of Boyd's call was to ask Einstein to give the manuscript of
the June paper to the Book and Authors War Bond Committee as a contribution
to the sale of war bonds. Einstein replied that he had discarded the original man-
uscript after its publication but added that he was prepared to write out a copy of
its text in his own hand. This offer was gladly accepted. Einstein completed this
task on November 21, 1943. Under the auspices of the committee, this manuscript
was auctioned at a sale in Kansas City on February 3, 1944, sponsored by the
Kansas City Women's City Club and the Women's Division of the Kansas City
War Finance Committee. The winning bid of six and a half million dollars was
made by the Kansas City Life Insurance Company. On that same occasion, an
original incomplete manuscript by Einstein and Valentin Bargmann, entitled 'Das
Bi-Vektor Feld,' was auctioned for five million dollars.* Soon after these events
both manuscripts were given to the Library of Congress [B3].
Helen Dukas told me how the copy of the June paper was produced. She would
sit next to Einstein and dictate the text to him. At one point, Einstein laid down
his pen, turned to Helen and asked her whether he had really said what she had
just dictated to him. When assured that he had, Einstein said, 'Das hatte ich ein-
facher sagen konnen.'
"This paper was published in English in 1944 [E8].
148 RELATIVITY, THE SPECIAL THEORY
7b. September 1905: About E = me2
'The mass of a body is a measure of its energy content,' Einstein, technical expert
third class at the patent office in Bern, concluded in September 1905 [E9]. 'The
law of conservation of mass is a special case of the law of conservation of energy,'
Einstein, technical expert second class, wrote in May 1906 [E10]. 'In regard to
inertia, a mass m is equivalent to an energy content ... me2. This result is of
extraordinary importance since [it implies that] the inertial mass and the energy
of a physical system appear as equivalent things,' he stated in 1907 [Ell]. For
special cases the equivalence of mass and energy had been known for about
twenty-five years.* The novelty of 1905 was the generality of this connection.
Einstein's proof of 1905** for the relation
Now, Einstein said, note that Eq. 7.21 for the energy differential is identical in
structure to Eq. 7.17 for the kinetic energy differential of a particle, so that 'if a
body gives off the energy L in the form of radiation, its mass diminishes by L/c2.
The fact that the energy withdrawn from the body becomes energy of radiation
evidently makes no difference.'
This brief paper of September 1905 ends with the remark that bodies 'whose
energy content is variable to a high degree, for example, radium salts,' may per-
haps be used to test this prediction. But Einstein was not quite sure. In the fall of
1905 he wrote to Habicht, 'The line of thought is amusing and fascinating, but
*See Section 7e on electromagnetic mass. Also before September 1905, Fritz Hasenohrl had discov-
ered that the kinetic energy of a cavity increases when it is filled with radiation, in such a way that
the mass of the system appears to increase [HI].
**He gave two proofs in later years. In 1934 he gave the Gibbs lecture in Pittsburgh and deduced
Eq. 7.20 from the validity in all inertial frames of energy and momentum conservation for a system
of point particles [El2]. In 1946 he gave an elementary derivation in which the equations for the
aberration of light and the radiation pressure are assumed given [E13].runs as follows. Consider a body with energy E{ at rest in a given inertial frame.
The body next emits plane waves of light with energy L/2 in a direction making
an angle (j> with the x axis and an equal quantity of light in the opposite direction.
After these emissions the body has an energy Es, so that A£ = E, — E, = L.
Consider this same situation as seen from an inertial frame moving with a velocity
v in the x direction. According to Eq. 7.18, A.E1' = E[ — E'f = yL indepen-
dently of $. Thus
or, to second orderTHE NEW KINEMATICS 149
I cannot know whether the dear Lord doesn't laugh about this and has played a
trick on me' (. . . mich an der Nase herumgefiihrt hat) [El4]. In his 1907 review
he considered it 'of course out of the question' to reach the experimental precision
necessary for using radium as a test [El5]. In another review, written in 1910, he
remarked that 'for the moment there is no hope whatsoever' for the experimental
verification of the mass-energy equivalence [E16].
In all these instances, Einstein had in mind the loss of weight resulting from
radioactive transformations. The first to remark that the energy-mass relation
bears on binding energy was Planck. In 1907 he estimated the mass equivalent of
the molecular binding energy for a mole of water [P6]. This amount (about 10~8
g) was of course too small to be observed—but at least it could be calculated. A
quarter of a century had to pass before a similar estimate could be made for
nuclear binding energy. Even that question did not exist until 1911, the year the
nuclear model of the atom was published. Two years later, Paul Langevin had an
idea: 'It seems to me that the inertial mass of the internal energy [of nuclei] is
evidenced by the existence of certain deviations from the law of Prout' [L3]. That
was also the year in which J. J. Thomson achieved the first isotope separation.
Langevin's interesting thought did not take account of the influence of isotopic
mixing and therefore overrated nuclear binding effects. Next came the confusion
that the nucleus was supposed to consist of protons and electrons—no one had the
right constituents yet. Still, Pauli was correct in surmising—we are now in
1921 —that 'perhaps the law of the inertia of energy will be tested at some future
time [my italics] by observations on the stability of nuclei' [P7]. In 1930 it was
written in the bil>!e of nuclear physics of the day that one can deduce from the
binding energy of the alpha particle that a free proton weighs 6.7 MeV more than
a proton bound in a helium nucleus [R2]. What else could one say in terms of a
proton-electron model of the nucleus?
Nuclear binding energy and its relation to E = me2 came into its own in the
1930s. In 1937 it was possible to calculate the velocity of light from nuclear reac-
tions in which the masses of the initial and final products and also the energy
release in the reaction were known. The resulting value for c was accurate to
within less than one half of one per cent [B4]. When in 1939 Einstein sent his
well-known letter to President Roosevelt, it is just barely imaginable that he might
have recalled what he wrote in 1907: 'It is possible that radioactive processes may
become known in which a considerably larger percentage of the mass of the initial
atom is converted into radiations of various kinds than is the case for radium'
[E15].
7c. Early Responses
Maja Einstein's biographical sketch gives a clear picture of her brother's mood
shortly after the acceptance of his June paper by the Annalen der Physik: 'The
young scholar imagined that his publication in the renowned and much-read jour-
150 RELATIVITY, THE SPECIAL THEORY
nal would draw immediate attention. He expected sharp opposition and the
severest criticism. But he was very disappointed. His publication was followed by
an icy silence. The next few issues of the journal did not mention his paper at all.
The professional circles took an attitude of wait and see. Some time after the
appearance of the paper, Albert Einstein received a letter from Berlin. It was sent
by the well-known Professor Planck, who asked for clarification of some points
which were obscure to him. After the long wait this was the first sign that his
paper had been at all read. The joy of the young scientist was especially great
because the recognition of his activities came from one of the greatest physicists of
that time' [M2]. Maja also mentioned that some time thereafter letters began to
arrive addressed to 'Professor Einstein at the University of Bern.'
The rapidity with which special relativity became a topic of discussion and
research is largely due to Planck's early interest. In his scientific autobiography,
Planck gave his reasons for being so strongly drawn to Einstein's theory: 'For me
its appeal lay in the fact that I could strive toward deducing absolute, invariant
features following from its theorems' [P7a]. The search for the absolute—forever
Planck's main purpose in science—had found a new focus. 'Like the quantum of
action in the quantum theory, so the velocity of light is the absolute, central point
of the theory of relativity.' During the winter semester of 1905-6, Planck pre-
sented Einstein's theory in the physics colloquium in Berlin. This lecture was
attended by his assistant von Laue. As a result von Laue became another early
convert to relativity, published in 1907 the pretty note [LI] on the Fizeau exper-
iment, did more good work on the special theory, and became the author of the
first monograph on special relativity [L4]. Planck also discussed some implications
of the 'Relativtheorie' in a scientific meeting held in September 1906 [P8]. The
first PhD thesis on relativity was completed under his direction [M3].
The first paper bearing on relativity but published by someone other than Ein-
stein was by Planck [P6], as best I know. Among his new results I mention the
first occasion on which the momentum-velocity relation
of relativistic point mechanics were written down. Planck derived Eq. 7.23 from
the action of an electromagnetic field on a charged point particle, rewriting Eqs.
the trandformation laws
and the varational principleTHE NEW KINEMATICS 151
7.15, 7.16 as d(myx')/dt' — K'. The straightforward derivation of Eq. 7.23 via
the energy-momentum conservation laws of mechanics was not found until 1909
[L5].
Among other early papers on relativity, I mention one by Ehrenfest in 1907
[El7], in which is asked for the first time the important question: How does one
apply Lorentz transformations to a rigid body?
Planck was also the first to apply relativity to the quantum theory. He noted
that the action is an invariant, not only for point mechanics, (where it equals the
quantity \Ldt in Eq. 7.25), but in general. From this he deduced that his constant
h is a relativistic invariant. 'It is evident that because of this theorem the signifi-
cance of the principle of least action is extended in a new direction' [P9]—a con-
clusion Einstein might have drawn from his Eqs. 7.13, 7.18, and 7.19.
Not only the theoreticians took early note of the relativity theory. As early as
1906, there was already interest from experimentalists in the validity of the rela-
tinn
*Von Laue had been on an alpine trip before coming to Bern. Einstein delivered himself of the
opinion, 'I don't understand how one can walk around up there' [S3].between the total energy and the velocity of a beta ray, as will be discussed in
Section 7e.
The publication of the 1905 papers on special relativity marked the beginning
of the end of Einstein's splendid isolation at the patent office. From 1906 on, vis-
itors would come to Bern to discuss the theory with him. Von Laue was one of
the first (perhaps the very first) to do so. 'The young man who met me made such
an unexpected impression on me that I could not believe he could be the father of
the relativity theory,' von Laue later recalled [S2].* Other young men came as
well. From Wiirzburg Johann Jakob Laub wrote to Einstein, asking if he could
work with him for three months [L6]; the ensuing stay of Laub in Bern led to
Einstein's first papers published jointly with a collaborator [El8, El9]. Rudolf
Ladenburg, who became a close friend of Einstein in the Princeton years, came
from Breslau (now Wroclaw). Yet in these early years the relativists were few in
number. In July 1907 Planck wrote to Einstein, 'As long as the advocates of the
relativity principle form such a modest-sized crowd, it is doubly important for
them to agree with one another' [P10].
Then, in 1908, came the 'space and time' lecture of Herman Minkowski. In
1902, Minkowski, at one time Einstein's teacher in Zurich, had moved to the
University of Goettingen. There, on November 5, 1907, he gave a colloquium
about relativity in which he identified Lorentz transformations with pseudorota-
tions for which
152 RELATIVITY, THE SPECIAL THEORY
where xl} x2, x3 denote the spatial variables. The most important remarks made
in this colloquium were that the electromagnetic potentials as well as the charge-
current densities are vectors with respect to the Lorentz group, while the electro-
magnetic field strengths form a second-rank tensor (or a Traktor, as Minkowski
then called it). Soon thereafter Minkowski published a detailed paper [M5] in
which for the first time the Maxwell-Lorentz equations are presented in their
modern tensor form, the equations of point mechanics are given a similar treat-
ment, and the inadequacy of the Newtonian gravitation theory from the relativistic
point of view is discussed. Terms such as spacelike vector, timelike vector, light
cone, and world line stem from this paper.
Thus began the enormous formal simplification of special relativity. Initially,
Einstein was not impressed and regarded the transcriptions of his theory into ten-
sor form as 'uberfliissige Gelehrsamkeit,' (superfluous learnedness).* However, in
1912 he adopted tensor methods and in 1916 acknowledged his indebtedness to
Minkowski for having greatly facilitated the transition from special to general
relativity [E20].
Minkowski's semitechnical report on these matters, the 'space and time' lecture
given in Cologne in 1908, began with these words:** 'The views of space and time
which I wish to lay before you have sprung from the soil of experimental physics,
and therein lies their strength. They are radical. Henceforth space by itself, and
time by itself, are doomed to fade away into mere shadows, and only a kind of
union of the two will preserve an independent reality.' He ended as follows: 'The
validity without exception of the world postulate [i.e., the relativity postulates], I
like to think, is the true nucleus of an electromagnetic image of the world, which,
discovered by Lorentz, and further revealed by Einstein, now lies open in the full
light of day' [M6]. It is hardly surprising that these opening and closing state-
ments caused a tremendous stir among his listeners, though probably few of them
followed the lucid remarks he made in the body of the speech. Minkowski did not
live to see his lecture appear in print. In January 1909 he died of appendicitis.
Hilbert called him 'a gift of heaven' when he spoke in his memory [H2].
The rapid growth of Einstein's reputation in scientific circles dates from about
1908. In July 1909 the University of Geneva conferred the title of doctor honoris
causa 'a Monsieur Einstein, Expert du Bureau Federal de la Propriete intellec-
tuelle.' I do not know what citation accompanied this degree. However, Charles
Guye, then professor of experimental physics at Geneva, must have had a hand
in this. Since Guye's interests centered largely on the velocity dependence of beta-
ray energies, it is probable that Einstein received this first of many honors because
of relativity.
* Einstein told this to V. Bargmann, whom I thank for in turn relating it to me.
**The text of this colloquium was prepared for publication by Sommerfeld. It appeared in 1915
[M4j, long after Minkowski's death. This paper is not included in Minkowski collected works (pub-
lished in 1911) [M5].
THE NEW KINEMATICS 153
Early in 1912, Wilhelm Wien, Nobel laureate in physics for 1911, wrote to
Stockholm to make the following recommendation for the year 1912:* 'I propose
to award the prize in equal shares to H. A. Lorentz in Leiden and A. Einstein in
Prague. As my motivation for this proposal, I would like to make the following
observations. The principle of relativity has eliminated the difficulties which
existed in electrodynamics and has made it possible to predict for a moving system
all electromagnetic phenomena which are known for a system at rest.' After enu-
merating some features of the theory he continued, 'From a purely logical point
of view, the relativity principle must be considered as one of the most significant
accomplishments ever achieved in theoretical physics. Regarding the confirmation
of the theory by experiment, in this respect the situation resembles the experi-
mental confirmation of the conservation of energy. [Relativity] was discovered in
an inductive way, after all attempts to detect absolute motion had failed... . While
Lorentz must be considered as the first to have found the mathematical content of
the relativity principle, Einstein succeeded in reducing it to a simple principle.
One should therefore assess the merits of both investigators as being
comparable....'
Then and later the special theory would have its occasional detractors. How-
ever, Wien's excellent account shows that it had taken the real pros a reasonably
short time to realize that the special theory of relativity constituted a major
advance.
7d. Einstein and the Special Theory After 1905
The fifth section of Einstein's review paper on relativity, completed in 1907, deals
with gravitation and contains this statement: 'The principle of the constancy of
the light velocity can be used also here [i.e., in the presence of gravitation] for the
definition of simultaneity, provided one restricts oneself to very small light paths'
[E3]. Einstein already knew then that the special theory was only a beginning
(see Chapter 9). This largely explains why the special theory per se soon faded
from the center of his interests. Also, he was not one to follow up on his main
ideas with elaborations of their detailed technical consequences. In addition, from
1908 until some time in 1911 the quantum theory rather than relativity was
uppermost in his mind (see Chapter 10).
Apart from review articles and general lectures, Einstein's work on the conse-
quences of the special theory was over by 1909. I shall confine myself to giving a
short chronology of his post-1905 papers on this subject. This work is discussed
and set in context by Pauli [PI, P2].
1906. Discussion of center-of-gravity motion in special relativity [E10] (see
especially [Ml] for a detailed discussion of this subject).
*See Chapter 30.
154 RELATIVITY, THE SPECIAL THEORY
1906. A comment on the possibilities for determining the quantity (1 — v2/c2)
in beta-ray experiments [E21].
1907. A remark on the detectability of the transverse Doppler effect [E5].
1907. Brief remarks on Ehrenfest's query concerning rigid bodies: 'To date both
the dynamics and the kinematics of the rigid body . .. must be considered
unknown' [E22].
1907. Earlier Einstein had derived the expression mc2(y — 1) for the kinetic
energy. Now he introduces the form ymc2 for the total energy. Furthermore, the
transformation of energy and momentum in the presence of external forces (i.e.,
for open systems) is derived.* Further ruminations about the rigid body: 'If rela-
tivistic electrodynamics is correct, then we are still far from having a dynamics for
the translation of rigid bodies' [E23]. In this paper Einstein also expresses an
opinion concerning the bearing of his recent light-quantum hypothesis on the
validity of the free Maxwell equations. It seemed to him that these equations
should be applicable as long as one deals with electromagnetic energy amounts or
energy transfers which are not too small, just as—he notes—the laws of ther-
modynamics may be applied as long as Brownian-motion-type effects (fluctua-
tions) are negligible.
1907. The review paper [E3]. This is the transitional paper from the special to
the general theory of relativity. Among the points discussed and not mentioned in
the foregoing are (1) the remark that the total electric charge of a closed system
is Lorentz invariant, (2) comments on the beta-ray experiments of Kaufmann, a
topic to be discussed in the next section and, (3) a discussion of relativistic
thermodynamics. * *
1908-10. Papers with Laub on the relativistic electrodynamics of ponderable
media [E18, E19] (see [PI] or [P2], Sections 33, 35).
A further comment on this subject appeared in 1909 [E25]. In 1910, Einstein
published a brief note on the nonrelativistic definition of the ponderomotive force
in a magnetic field [E26].
This concludes the brief catalog of Einstein's later contributions to special rel-
ativity. (I have already mentioned that in 1935 [E12] and again in 1946 [E13] he
gave alternative derivations of E = me2.) In later years he reviewed the special
theory on several occasions, starting with the first lecture he gave at a physics
conference [E27], and again in 1910 [E28], 1911 [E29], 1914 [E30], 1915 [E31],
and 1925 [E32]. Special relativity is, of course, discussed in his book The Mean-
ing of Relativity [E33]. The first newspaper article he ever wrote deals largely
with the special theory [E34]; he wrote reviews of books bearing on this subject,
in praise of writings by Brill [E35], Lorentz [E35], and Pauli [E36].
•See [PI] or [P2], Section 43.
**For a discussion of the early contributions to this subject, see [PI] or [P2], Sections 46-49; see
also [E24]. For a subsequent severe criticism of these papers, see [O2]. Since this subject remains
controversial to this day (see, e.g., [L7]), it does not lend itself as yet to historic assessment.
THE NEW KINEMATICS 155
We have now discussed special relativity from its nineteenth century antece-
dents to Einstein's motivation, his paper of 1905 and its sequels, and the early
reactions to the new theory. I shall not discuss the further developments in classical
special relativity. Its impact on modern physics is assessed in papers by Wolfgang
Panofsky [Pll] and Edward Purcell [P12].
Remaining unfinished business, mainly related to the roles of Einstein, Lorentz,
and Poincare, will be discussed in Chapter 8. By way of transition, let us consider
the problem of electromagnetic mass.
7e. Electromagnetic Mass: The First Century*
Long before it was known that the equivalence of energy and inertial mass is a
necessary consequence of the relativity postulates and that this equivalence applies
to all forms of energy, long before it was known that the separate conservation
laws of energy and of mass merge into one, there was a time when dynamic rather
than kinematic arguments led to the notion of electromagnetic mass, a form of
energy arising specifically in the case of a charged particle coupled to its own
electromagnetic field. The electromagnetic mass concept celebrates its first centen-
nial as these lines are written. The investigations of the self-energy problem of the
electron by men like Abraham, Lorentz, and Poincare have long since ceased to
be relevant. All that has remained from those early times is that we still do not
understand the problem.
'A close analogy to this question of electromagnetic mass is furnished by a sim-
ple hydrodynamic problem,' Lorentz told his listeners at Columbia University
early in 1906 [L8]. The problem he had in mind was the motion of a solid, per-
fectly smooth sphere of mass m0 moving uniformly with a velocity ~v in an infinite,
incompressible, ideal fluid. Motions of this kind had been analyzed as early as
1842 by Stokes [S4]. Stokes had shown that the kinetic energy E and the momen-
tum p of the system are given by E = %mv2 and p = mv, where m = m0 + /u.
The parameter fj,—the induced, or hydrodynamic, mass—depends on the radius
of the sphere and the density of the fluid. The analogy to which Lorentz referred
was first noted by J. J. Thomson, who in 1881 had studied the problem 'of a
charged sphere moving through an unlimited space filled with a medium of spe-
cific inductive capacity K. . . . The resistance [to the sphere's motion] . . . must
correspond to the resistance theoretically experienced by a solid in moving through
a perfect fluid' [T2]. Thomson calculated the kinetic energy of the system for small
velocities and found it to be of the form E = %mv2, where m = m0 + fj.: 'The
effect of the electrification is the same as if the mass of the sphere were
*Some of the material of this section was presented earlier in an article on the history of the theory
of the electron [PI3],
156 RELATIVITY, THE SPECIAL THEORY
increased. ...' Thus he discovered the electromagnetic mass /i, though he did not
give it that name. The reader will enjoy repeating the calculation he made for the
H of the earth electrified to the highest potential possible without discharge.
Continuing his Columbia lecture, Lorentz remarked, 'If, in the case of the ball
moving in the perfect fluid, we were obliged to confine ourselves to experiments
in which we measure the external forces applied to the body and the accelerations
produced by them, we should be able to determine the effective mass [m0 + fi],
but it would be impossible to find the values of m0 and [p] separately. Now, it is
very important that in the experimental investigation of the motion of an electron,
we can go one step farther. This is due to the fact that the electromagnetic mass
is not a constant but increases with velocity' [L8].
Not long after Thomson made his calculations, it became clear that the energy
of the charged sphere has a much more complicated form than %mv2 if effects
depending on v/c are included (see, e.g., [H3, S5, S6]). The charged hard-sphere
calculations to which Lorentz referred in his lectures Were those performed in
Goettingen by Max Abraham, whose results seemed to be confirmed by experi-
ments performed by his friend Walter Kaufmann, also in Goettingen.*
There is a tragic touch to the scientific career of both these men. In 1897, Kauf-
mann had done very good cathode-ray experiments which led him to conclude: 'If
one makes the plausible assumption that the moving particles are ions, then e/m
should have a different value for each substance and the deflection [in electric and
magnetic fields] should depend on the nature of the electrodes or on the nature of
the gas [in the cathode tube]. Neither is the case. Moreover, a simple calculation
shows that the explanation of the observed deflections demands that e/m should
be about 107, while even for hydrogen [e/m] is only about 10"' [K2]. Had Kauf-
mann added one conjectural sentence to his paper, completed in April 1897, he
would have been remembered as an independent discoverer of the electron. On
the 30th of that same month, J. J. Thomson gave a lecture on cathode rays before
the Royal Institution in which he discussed his own very similar results obtained
by very similar methods but from which he drew a quite firm conclusion: 'These
numbers seem to favor the hypothesis that the carriers of the charges are smaller
than the atoms of hydrogen' [T3]. It seems to me that Kaufmann's paper deserves
to be remembered even though he lacked Thomson's audacity in making the final
jump toward the physics of new particles.
As for Abraham, he was a very gifted theoretical physicist (Einstein seriously
considered him as his successor when in 1914 he left the ETH for Berlin), but it
was his fate to be at scientific odds with Einstein, in regard both to the special
theory and the general theory of relativity—and to lose in both instances. We shall
encounter him again in Chapter 13.
I return to the electromagnetic mass problem. Kaufmann was the first to study
experimentally the energy-velocity relation of electrons. In 1901 he published a
paper on this subject, entitled 'The Magnetic and Electric Deflectability of Bec-
*For details about this episode, see [Gl].
THE NEW KINEMATICS 157
querel Rays [i.e., /?-rays] and the Apparent Mass of the Electron' [K3]. Stimu-
lated by these investigations, Abraham soon thereafter produced the complete
answers for the electromagnetic energy (Ec[m) and the electromagnetic momentum
(pc\m) °f an electron considered as a hard sphere with charge e and radius a and
with uniform charge distribution (|3 = v/c, fi = 2e2/3ac2):
*As usual, we assume the electron to move in the x direction. Equations 7.33 and 7.34 were first
published in 1911 by von Laue [L10].At the 74th Naturforscherversammlung, held in Karlsbad in September 1902,
Kaufmann presented his latest experimental results [K4]. Immediately after him,
Abraham presented his theory [Al]. Kaufmann concluded that 'the dependence
[of E on v] is exactly represented by Abraham's formula.' Abraham said, 'It now
becomes necessary to base the dynamics of the electrons from the outset on elec-
tromagnetic considerations' (in 1903 he published his main detailed article on the
rigid electron [A2]). One sees what Lorentz meant in his Columbia lectures: if it
would have been true, if it could have been true, that the E-v relation were
experimentally exactly as given by Eq. 7.29, then two things would have been
known: the electron is a little rigid sphere and its mass is purely electromagnetic
in origin.
Such was the situation when in 1904 Lorentz proposed a new model: the elec-
tron at rest is again a little sphere, but it is subject to the FitzGerald-Lorentz
contraction [L9]. This model yields a velocity dependence different from Eqs. 7.29
and 7.30:
where ju0 = 3ju/4, ju, = 5/i/4, and n is as in Eqs. 7.29 and 7.30. Lorentz, aware
of Kaufmann's results and their agreement with Abraham's theory, remarked that
his equations ought to agree 'nearly as well ... if there is not to be a most serious
objection to the theory I have now proposed' and did some data-fitting which led
him to conclude that there was no cause for concern.
In order to understand Lorentz's equations (Eqs. 7.31 and 7.32) and Poincare's
subsequent proposal for a modification of these results, it is helpful to depart
briefly from the historic course of events and derive Lorentz's results from the
transformation properties of the electromagnetic energy momentum tensor density
T,,, [P13]. With the help of that quantity we can write (in the Minkowski
metric)*
where '0' refers to the rest frame. Since T^ is traceless and since the rest frame
is spatially isotropic, these transformation relations at once yield Eqs. 7.31 and
7.32.
Dynamic rather than kinematic arguments had led to the concept of electro-
magnetic mass. Dynamic rather than kinematic arguments led Poincare to modify
Lorentz's model. In his brief paper published in June 1905, Poincare announced,
'One obtains ... a possible explanation of the contraction of the electron by assum-
ing that the deformable and compressible electron is subject to a sort of constant
external pressure the action of which is proportional to the volume variation'
[PI4]. In his July 1905 memoir he added, 'This pressure is proportional to the
fourth power of the experimental mass of the electron' [P15]. In Chapter 6, I
discussed the kinematic part of these two papers. More important to Poincare was
the dynamic part, the 'explanation of the contraction of the electron.' It is not for
nothing that both papers are entitled 'Sur la Dynamique de 1'Electron.'
In modern language, Poincare's dynamic problem can be put as follows. Can
one derive the equations for a Lorentz electron and its self-field from a relativis-
tically invariant action principle and prove that this electron, a sphere at rest,
becomes an ellipsoid when in uniform motion in the way Lorentz had assumed
it did? Poincare first showed that this was impossible. But he had a way out. 'If
one wishes to retain [the Lorentz theory] and avoid intolerable contradictions, one
must assume a special force which explains both the contraction [in the direction
of motion] and the constancy of the two [other] axes' [PI5].
Poincare's lengthy arguments can be reduced to a few lines with the help of
Ty,. Write Eq. 7.31 in the form158 RELATIVITY, THE SPECIAL THEORY
where V = 4va^/3y is the (contracted) volume of the electron and P = 3/uc2/
16ira3 is a scalar pressure. Add a term pPS^, the 'Poincare stress,' to 7^, where
p = 1 inside the electron and zero outside. This term cancels the — PV term in
£dm for all velocities, it does not contribute to Pelm, and it serves to obtain the
desired contraction. Assume further—as Poincare did—that the mass of the elec-
tron is purely electromagnetic. Then n ~ e2/a and P ~ M/«3 ~ M4, his result
mentioned earlier. Again in modern language, the added stress makes the finite
electron into a closed system. Poincare did not realize how highly desirable are the
relations
which follow from his model! (See [M7] for a detailed discussion of the way Poin-
care proceeded.)
THE NEW KINEMATICS 159
Next we must return to Kaufmann. Stimulated by the new theoretical devel-
opments, he refined his experiments and in 1906 announced new results: The
measurements are incompatible with the Lorentz-Einstein postulate. The Abra-
ham equation and the Bucherer equation* represent the observations equally well
...'[K5].
These conclusions caused a stir among the theoretical experts. Planck discussed
his own re-analysis of Kaufmann's data at a physics meeting in 1906 [PI6]. He
could find no flaw, but took a wait-and-see attitude. So did Poincare in 1908
[PI7]. Lorentz vacillated: The experiments 'are decidedly unfavorable to the idea
of a contraction, such as I attempted to work out. Yet though it seems very likely
that we shall have to relinquish it altogether, it is, I think, worthwhile looking
into it more closely ...' [L12]. Einstein was unmoved: 'Herr Kaufmann has
determined the relation between [electric and magnetic deflection] of /3-rays with
admirable care. ... Using an independent method, Herr Planck obtained results
which fully agree with [the computations of] Kaufmann. ... It is further to be
noted that the theories of Abraham and Bucherer yield curves which fit the
observed curve considerably better than the curve obtained from relativity theory.
However, in my opinion, these theories should be ascribed a rather small proba-
bility because their basic postulates concerning the mass of the moving electron
are not made plausible by theoretical systems which encompass wider complexes
of phenomena' [E3]. Soon after this was written, experimental confirmation for
E = myc2 was obtained by Bucherer [B7]. Minkowski was delighted. To intro-
duce a rigid electron into the Maxwell theory, he said, is like going to a concert
with cotton in one's ears [M8]. The issue remained controversial, however. Wien,
in his letter to the Nobel committee, commented early in 1912, 'Concerning the
new experiments on cathode and 0-rays, I would not consider them to have deci-
sive power of proof. The experiments are very subtle, and one cannot be sure
whether all sources of error have been excluded.' The final experimental verdict
in favor of relativity came in the years 1914-16.**
Special relativity killed the classical dream of using the ener-
gy-momentum-velocity relations of a particle as a means of probing the dynamic
origins of its mass. The relations are purely kinematic. The classical picture of a
particle as a finite little sphere is also gone for good. Quantum field theory has
taught us that particles nevertheless have structure, arising from quantum fluc-
tuations. Recently, unified field theories have taught us that the mass of the elec-
tron is certainly not purely electromagnetic in nature.
But we still do not know what causes the electron to weigh.
*Alfred Bucherer [B5] and Langevin [LI 1] had independently invented an extended electron model
with FitzGerald-Lorentz contraction but with constant volume. This model was analyzed further
by Poincare [PI5] and by Ehrenfest [E37]. In 1908 Bucherer informed Einstein that his, Bucherer's,
experiments had led him to abandon his own model in favor of the relativity prediction [B6].
"See [PI] or [P2], Section 29, for detailed references to the experimental literature up to 1918.
160 RELATIVITY, THE SPECIAL THEORY
References
Al. M. Abraham, Phys. Zeitschr. 4, 57 (1902).
A2. , AdP 10, 105 (1903).
Bl. M. Born, Die Relativitatstheorie Einsteins. Springer, Berlin, 1921. Translated as
Einstein's Theory of Relativity (H. L. Brose, Tran.). Methuen, London, 1924.
B2. O. M. Bilaniuk, V. K. Deshpande, and E. C. G. Sudarshan, Am. J. Phys. 30, 718,
(1962).
B3. F. E. Brasch, Library of Congress Quarterly 2 (2), 39 (1945).
B4. W. Braunbeck, Z. Phys. 107, 1 (1937).
B5. A. H. Bucherer, Mathematische Einfiihrung in die Elektronentheorie, pp. 57-8.
Teubner, Leipzig, 1904.
B6. , letters to A. Einstein, September 7, 9, and 10, 1908.
B7. , Phys. Zeitschr. 9, 755 (1908).
El. A. Einstein, AdP 17, 891 (1905).
E2. , letter to C. Habicht, spring 1905, undated.
E3. , Jahrb. Rad. Elektr. 4, 411 (1907).
E4. , Phys. Zeitschr. 12, 509 (1911).
E5. , AdP 23, 197 (1907).
E5a. , Astr. Nachr. 199, 7, 47, (1914).
E6. , PAW, 1916, p. 423; Naturw. 6, 697 (1918).
E7. , AdP 17, 132 (1905).
E8. and V. Bargmann, Ann. Math. 45, 1 (1944).
E9. , AdP 18, 639 (1905).
E10. , AdP 20, 627; footnote on p. 633 (1906).
Ell. ,[E3], p. 442.
El2. , Bull. Am. Math. Soc. 41, 223 (1935).
E13. , TechnionJ. 5, 16 (1946).
El 4. , letter to C. Habicht, fall 1905, undated.
E15. , [E3], p. 443.
E16. , Arch. Sci. Phys. Nat. 29, 5, 125 (1910), see esp. p. 144.
E17. P. Ehrenfest, AdP 23, 204 (1907).
El 8. A. Einstein and J. J. Laub, AdP 26, 532 (1908); corrections in AdP 27, 232 (1908)
and 28, 445 (1909).
E19. , , AdP 26, 541 (1908).
E20. , Die Grundlage der Allgemeinen Relativitatstheorie, introduction. Barth,
Leipzig, 1916.
E21. , AdP 21, 583 (1906).
E22. , AdP 23, 206 (1907).
E23. , AdP 23, 371 (1907).
E24. , Science 80, 358 (1934).
E25. , AdP 26, 885 (1909).
E26. , Arch. Sci. Phys. Nat. 30, 323 (1910).
E27. , Phys. Zeitschr. 10, 817 (1909).
E28. , Arch. Sci. Phys. Nat. 29, 5, 125 (1910).
E29. , Viertelj. Schrift Nattirf. Ges. Ziirich 56, 1 (1911).
E30. , Scientia 15, 337 (1914).
THE NEW KINEMATICS l6l
E31. in Kultur der Gegenwart (E. Lecher, Ed.), Vol.1, p. 251. Teubner, Leipzig,
1915.
E32. , [E31], 2nd edn., Vol. 1, p. 783.
E33. , The Meaning of Relativity; 5th edn. Princeton University Press, Princeton,
N.J, 1956.
E34. , Die Vossische Zeitung, April 26, 1914.
E35. , Naturw. 2, 1018 (1914).
E36. , Naturw. 10, 184 (1922).
E37. P. Ehrenfest, Phys. Zeitschr. 7, 302 (1906).
Fl. P. Frank, Sitz. Ber. Akad. Wiss. Wien. Ha, 118, 373 (1909), esp. p. 382.
F2. G. Feinberg, Phys. Rev. 159, 1089 (1967); D17, 1651 (1978).
Gl. S. Goldberg, Arch. Hist. Ex. Set. 7,1 (1970).
HI. F. Hasenohrl, AdP 15, 344 (1904); 16, 589 (1905).
H2. D. Hilbert in H. Minkowski, Ges. Abh. (see [M5]), Vol. 1. p. xxxi.
H3. O. Heaviside, Phil. Mag. 27, 324 (1889).
Kl. H. A. Kramers, Quantum Mechanics (D. ter Haar, Tran.), Sec. 57. Interscience,
New York, 1957.
K2. W. Kaufmann, AdP 61, 545 (1897).
K3. , Goett. Nachr., 1901, p. 143.
K4. , Phys. Zeitschr. 4, 54 (1902).
K5. , AdP 19, 487 (1906).
LI. M. von Laue, AdP 23, 989 (1907).
L2. H. A. Lorentz, Versuch einer Theorie der Electrischen and Optischen Erscheinun-
gen in Bewegten Kdrpern. Brill, Leiden, 1895. Reprinted in Collected Papers, Vol.
5, p. 1. Nyhoff, the Hague, 1937.
L3. P. Langevin, /. de Phys. 3, 553 (1913).
L4. M. Laue, Das Relativitdtsprinzip. Vieweg, Braunschweig, 1911.
L5. G. N. Lewis and R. Tolman, Phil. Mag. 18, 510 (1909).
L6. J. J. Laub, letter to A. Einstein, February 2, 1908.
L7. P. T. Landsberg, Phys. Rev. Lett. 45, 149 (1980).
L8. H. A. Lorentz, The Theory of Electrons, p. 40. Teubner, Leipzig, 1909.
L9. , Proc. R. Ac. Amsterdam 6, 809 (1904); Collected Papers, Vol. 5, p. 172.
L10. M. von Laue, AdP 35, 124 (1911).
Lll. P. Langevin, Rev. Gen. Sci. 16, 257 (1905).
L12. H. A. Lorentz, [L8], p. 213.
Ml. C. M011er, The Theory of Relativity, Chap. 2. Oxford University Press, Oxford,
1952.
M2. Maja Einstein, Albert Einstein, Beitrag fur sein Lebensbild, Florence, 1924,
unpublished.
M3. K. von Mosengeil, AdP 22, 867 (1907). Reprinted in Planck, Abhandlungen, Vol.
2, p. 138.
M4. H. Minkowski, AdP 47, 927 (1915).
M5. , Goett. Nachr., 1908, p. 53. Reprinted in Gesammelte Abhandlungen von
Herman Minkowski, Vol. 2, p. 352. Teubner, Leipzig, 1911.
M6. , Phys. Zeitschr. 10, 104 (1909); Ges. Abh., Vol. 2, p. 431.
M7. A. I. Miller, Arch. Hist. Ex. Sci. 10, 207 (1973).
M8. H. Minkowski, Phys. Zeitschr. 9, 762 (1908).
l62 RELATIVITY, THE SPECIAL THEORY
01. T. Ogawa, Jap. St. Hist. Sci. 18, 73 (1979).
02. H. Ott, Z. Pftys. 175, 70 (1963).
PI. W. Pauli, Encyklopddie der Mathematischen Wissenschaften, Vol. 5. Part 2, p.
539. Teubner, Leipzig, 1921.
P2. , Theory of Relativity (G. Field, Tran.). Pergamon Press, London, 1958.
P3. W. K. H. Panofsky and M. Phillips, Classical Electricity and Magnetism, Chap.
15. Addison-Wesley, Reading, Mass., 1955.
P4. W. Pauli, Wissenschaftlicher Briejwechsel, Vol. 1, pp. 296-312. Springer, New
York, 1979.
P5. See e.g., [P3], Chap. 11.
P6. M. Planck, Verh. Deutsch. Phys. Ges. 4, 136 (1906); see also PAW, 1907, p. 542;
AdP26, 1 (1908).
P7. W. Pauli, [PI] or [P2], Sec. 41.
P7a. M. Planck, Wissenschaftliche Selbstbiographie. Earth, Leipzig, 1948. Reprinted in
M. Planck, Physikalische Abhandlungen und Vortrdge, Vol. 3, p. 374. Vieweg,
Braunschweig, 1958.
P8. , Phys. Zeitschr. 7, 753 (1906); Abhandlungen, Vol. 2, p. 121.
P9. , [P6], Sec. 12.
P10. , letter to A. Einstein, July 6, 1907.
Pll. W. K. H. Panofsky in Proc. Einstein Centennial Symposium at Princeton, 1979,
p. 94. Addison-Wesley, Reading, Mass., 1980.
P12. E. M. Purcell, [Pll], p. 106.
PI 3. A. Pais in Aspects of Quantum Theory (A. Salam and E. P. Wigner, Eds.), p. 79.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1972.
P14. H. Poincare, C. R. Ac. Sci. Paris 140, 1504 (1905); Oeuvres de Henri Poincare,
Vol. 9, p. 489. Gauihier-Villars, Paris, 1954.
PI 5. , Rend. Circ. Mat. Palermo 21, 129 (1906); Oeuvres, Vol. 9, p. 494; see esp.
Sec. 8.
P16. M. Planck, Phys. Zeitschr. 7, 753 (1906); Abhandlungen, Vol. 2, p. 121.
P17. H. Poincare, Rev. Gen. Sci. 19, 386, 1908; Oeuvres, Vol. 9, p. 551.
Rl. H. P. Robertson, Rev. Mod. Phys. 21, 378 (1949).
R2. E. Rutherford, J. Chadwick, and C. D. Ellis, Radiations From Radioactive Sub-
stances, p. 531. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1930.
51. A. Sommerfeld, Ed., The Principle of Relativity, p. 37. Dover, New York.
52. Se, p. 130.
53. Se, p. 131.
54. G. G. Stokes, Mathematical and Physical Papers, Vol. 1, p. 17. Johnson, New
York, 1966.
55. G. Searle, Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc. 187, 675 (1896).
56. A. Schuster, Phil. Mag. 43, 1 (1897).
Tl. L. H. Thomas, Nature 117, 514 (1926); Phil. Mag. 3, 1 (1927).
T2. J. J. Thomson, Phil. Mag. 11, 229 (1881).
T3. in The Royal Institute Library of Science, Physical Sciences, Vol. 5, p. 36.
Elsevier, New York, 1970.
Ul. G. E. Uhlenbeck and S. Goudsmit, Naturw. 13, 953 (1925).
U2. , Phys. Today 29 (6), 43 (1976).
