6
' Subtle is the Lord...'
6a. The Michelson-Morley Experiment
Maxwell's article Ether, written for the ninth edition of the Encyclopedia Britan-
nica [Ml], begins with an enumeration of the 'high metaphysical .. . [and] mun-
dane uses to be fulfilled by aethers' and with the barely veiled criticism that, even
for scientific purposes only, 'all space had been filled three or four times over with
aethers.' This contribution by Maxwell is an important document for numerous
reasons. To mention but three, it shows us that, like his contemporaries, Maxwell
was deeply convinced of the reality of some sort of aether: 'There can be no doubt
that the interplanetary and interstellar spaces are not empty but are occupied by
a material substance or body, which is certainly the largest, and probably the most
uniform, body of which we have any knowledge'; it tells us of an unsuccessful
attempt by Maxwell himself to perform a terrestrial optical experiment aimed at
detecting the influence of an aether drag on the earth's motion; and it informs us
of his opinion that effects of the second order in v/c (v = velocity of the earth
relative to the aether, c = velocity of light) are too small to be detectable. This
last comment was prompted by his observation that 'all methods ... by which it
is practicable to determine the velocity of light from terrestrial experiments
depend on the measurement of the time required for the double journey from
one station to the other and back again,' leading to an effect at most of
0((u/c)2) = 0(10-8).
However, Maxwell still hoped that first-order effects might be astronomically
observable. The example he gave was the determination of the velocity of light
from the eclipses of Jupiter's satellites when Jupiter is seen from the earth at
nearly opposite points of the ecliptic. If one defines the aether* in the sense of
Maxwell, or, which is the same thing, in the sense of Augustin Jean Fresnel—a
medium in a state of absolute rest relative to the fixed stars, in which light is
propagated and through which the earth moves as if it were transparent to it—
then one readily sees that the Jupiter effect, if it exists at all, is of first order in
the velocity of the solar system relative to this aether.
*For a review of aether theories and aether models, see especially [LI] and [SI]. Some speak of
aether, others of ether. I prefer the former. In quotations I follow the predilections of the original
authors, however.
Ill
112 RELATIVITY, THE SPECIAL THEORY
Maxwell requested and received data on the Jovian system from David Peck
Todd, Director of the Nautical Almanac Office in Washington, D.C. On March
19, 1879, Maxwell sent a letter of thanks in which he referred Todd to his ency-
clopedia article and in particular reiterated his remark on the second-order nature
of terrestrial experiments. This letter (not reproduced in his collected papers) was
written when Maxwell had less than eight months to live and Einstein was five
days old. After Maxwell's death, the letter was forwarded to the secretary of the
Royal Society, who saw to its publication in the January 29,1880, issue of Nature
[M2].
A year and a half later, in August 1881, there appeared an article in an issue
of the American Journal of Science, authored by Albert A. (for Abraham)
Michelson, Master, U.S. Navy [M3]. Michelson, then on leave from the Navy
and doing post-graduate work in Helmholtz's laboratory in Berlin, had read
Maxwell's 1879 letter. Being already an acknowledged expert on measurements
of the velocity of light (he had by then published three papers on the subject [L2]),
he had concluded that Maxwell had underrated the accuracy with which terres-
trial experiments could be performed. The instrument he designed in Berlin in
order to measure Maxwell's second-order effect is known as the Michelson inter-
ferometer. In order not to be bothered by urban vibrations, Michelson performed
his experiments at the astrophysical observatory in nearby Potsdam. The method
he used was to compare the times it takes for light to travel the same distance
either parallel or transversely to the earth's motion relative to the aether. In his
arrangement a stationary aether would yield a time difference corresponding to
about an extra 1 /25 of a wavelength of yellow light traveling in the parallel direc-
tion, an effect that can be detected by letting the transverse and parallel beams
interfere. For easily accessible details of the experiment I refer the reader to text-
books* and state only Michelson's conclusion: there was no evidence for an aether
wind. 'The result of the hypothesis of a stationary aether is thus shown to be
incorrect, and the necessary conclusion follows that the hypothesis is erroneous,'
[M3].
Early in 1887 Michelson wrote to Rayleigh** that he was 'discouraged at the
slight attention the work received' [M4], a statement which perhaps was justified
if one counts the number of those who took note, but not if one considers their
eminence. Kelvin and Rayleigh, both of whom Michelson had met at Johns Hop-
kins University in 1884 [S3] certainly paid attention. So did Lorentz, who found
an error in Michelson's theory of the experiment [L3] and who was dubious about
the interpretation of the results [ L4]. Lorentz's misgivings and Rayleigh's urgings
contributed to Michelson's decision—he was now at the Case School of Applied
Science in Cleveland—to repeat his experiment, this time in collaboration with
Edward Williams Morley, a chemist from next-door Western Reserve University.
'See, e.g., [PI].
**For details of the Michelson-Rayleigh correspondence, see especially [S2] and [HI].
SUBTLE IS THE LORD 113
Proceeding along the same general lines used in the Potsdam experiments, they
built a new interferometer. Great care was taken to minimize perturbative influ-
ences. In August 1887, Michelson wrote to Rayleigh that again a null effect had
been found [M5]. The paper on the Michelson-Morley experiment came out the
following November [M6]. Understandably, the negative outcome of this experi-
ment was initially a disappointment, not only to its authors, but also to Kelvin,
Rayleigh, and Lorentz.
However, more important, the experimental result was accepted. There had to
be a flaw in the theory. In 1892 Lorentz queried Rayleigh: 'Can there be some
point in the theory of Mr Michelson's experiment which had as yet been over-
looked?' [L5]. In a lecture before the Royal Institution on April 27, 1900, Kelvin
referred to the experiment as 'carried out with most searching care to secure a
trustworthy result' and characterized its outcome as a nineteenth century cloud
over the dynamic theory of light [Kl]. In 1904 he wrote in the preface to his
Baltimore lectures: 'Michelson and Morley have by their great experimental work
on the motion of the ether relatively to the earth raised the one and only serious
objection against our dynamical explanations. . ..' [K2].
In later years, Michelson repeated this experiment several times, for the last
time in 1929 [M7]. Others did likewise, notably Dayton Clarence Miller, at one
time a junior colleague of Michelson's at Case. In 1904, Morley and Miller were
the first to do a hilltop experiment: 'Some have thought that [the Michelson-Mor-
ley] experiment only proves that the ether in a certain basement room is carried
along with it. We desire therefore to place the apparatus on a hill to see if an
effect can there be detected' [M8].* Articles in 1933 [M9] and 1955 [S4] give
many technical and historical details of these experiments. No one has done more
to unearth their history than Robert S. Shankland, whose papers are quoted
extensively in this section. For the present purposes, there is no need to discuss
these later developments, except for one interlude which directly involved Einstein.
On April 2, 1921, Einstein arrived for the first time in the United States, for
a two-month visit. In May, he gave four lectures on relativity theory at Princeton
University [El]. While he was there, word reached Princeton that Miller had
found a nonzero aether drift during preliminary experiments performed (on April
8-21 [S4]) at Mount Wilson observatory. Upon hearing this rumor, Einstein
commented: 'Raffiniert ist der Herr Gott, aber boshaft ist er nicht,' Subtle is the
Lord, but malicious He is not. Nevertheless, on May 25, 1921, shortly before his
departure from the United States, Einstein paid a visit to Miller in Cleveland,
where they talked matters over [S5].
There are two postscripts to this story. One concerns transitory events. On April
28, 1925, Miller read a paper before the National Academy of Sciences in Wash-
ington, D.C., in which he reported that an aether drift had definitely been estab-
* Michelson had pointed out earlier that perhaps the aether might be trapped in the basements in
which he had done his experiments [M4].
114 RELATIVITY, THE SPECIAL THEORY
lished [M10]. Later that year, he made the same claim in his retiring address in
Kansas City as president of the American Physical Society [Mil]. The outcome
of all this was that Miller received a thousand dollar prize for his Kansas City
paper from the American Association for the Advancement of Science [L6]—pre-
sumably in part an expression of the resistance to relativity which could still be
found in some quarters [Bl]—while Einstein got flooded with telegrams and let-
ters asking him to comment. The latter's reactions to the commotion are best seen
from a remark he made in passing in a letter to Besso: 'I have not for a moment
taken [Miller's results] seriously' [E2].* As to present times, quantum field theory
has drastically changed our perceptions of the vacuum, but that has nothing to do
with the aether of the nineteenth century and earlier, which is gone for good.**
The second postscript to the Miller episode concerns a lasting event. Oswald
Veblen, a professor of mathematics at Princeton, had overheard Einstein's com-
ment about the subtlety of the Lord. In 1930 Veblen wrote to Einstein, asking his
permission to have this statement chiseled in the stone frame of the fireplace in the
common room of Fine Hall, the newly constructed mathematics building at the
university [VI]. Einstein consented.! The mathematics department has since
moved to new quarters, but the inscription in stone has remained in its original
place, Room 202 in what once was Fine Hall.
Let us now move back to the times when Einstein was still virtually unknown
and ask how Michelson reacted to Einstein's special theory of relativity and what
influence the Michelson-Morley experiment had on Einstein's formulation of
that theory in 1905.
The answer to the first question is simple. Michelson, a genius in instrumen-
tation and experimentation, never felt comfortable with the special theory. He was
the first American scientist to receive a Nobel prize, in 1907. The absence of any
mention of the aether wind experiments in his citation^ is not surprising. Rela-
tivity was young; even fifteen years later, relativity was not mentioned in Ein-
stein's citation. It is more interesting that Michelson himself did not mention these
experiments in his acceptance speech [Nl]—not quite like Einstein, who
responded to the award given him in 1922 for the photoelectric effect by delivering
a lecture on relativity [E4]. Truly revealing, however, is Michelson's verdict on
relativity given in 1927 in his book Studies in Optics [Ml2]. He noted that the
*In 1927 Einstein remarked that the positive effect found by Miller could be caused by tiny tem-
perature differences in the experimental equipment [E2a].
**In 1951 Dirac briefly considered a return to the aether [Dl].
fin his reply to Veblen, Einstein gave the following interpretation of his statement. 'Die Natur
verbirgt ihr Geheimnis durch die Erhabenheit ihres Wesens, aber nicht durch List,' Nature hides
its secret because of its essential loftiness, but not by means of ruse [E3]. In June 1966 Helen Dukas
prepared a memorandum about this course of events [D2].
HThe citation reads 'For his optical precision instruments and the spectroscopical and metrological
investigations carried out with their aid' [Nl].
SUBTLE IS THE LORD 115
theory of relativity 'must be accorded a generous acceptance' and gave a clear
expose of Lorentz transformations and their consequences for the Michelson -
Morley experiment and for the experiment of Armand Hippolyte Louis Fizeau
on the velocity of light in streaming water. Then follows his summation: 'The
existence of an ether appears to be inconsistent with the theory.. .. But without
a medium how can the propagation of light waves be explained? . . . How explain
the constancy of propagation, the fundamental assumption (at least of the
restricted theory) if there be no medium?'
This is the lament not of a single individual but of an era, though it was an era
largely gone when Michelson's book came out. Michelson's writings are the per-
fect illustration of the two main themes to be developed in this and the next two
chapters. The first one is that in the early days it was easier to understand the
mathematics of special relativity than the physics. The second one is that it was
not a simple matter to assimilate a new kinematics as a lasting substitute for the
old aether dynamics.
Let us turn to the influence of the Michelson-Morley experiment on Einstein's
initial relativity paper [E5]. The importance of this question goes far beyond the
minor issue of whether Einstein should have added a footnote at some place or
other. Rather, its answer will help us to gain essential insights into Einstein's
thinking and will prepare us for a subsequent discussion of the basic differences
in the approaches of Einstein, Lorentz, and Poincare.
Michelson is mentioned neither in the first nor in any of Einstein's later
research papers on special relativity. One also looks in vain for his name in Ein-
stein's autobiographical sketch of 1949 [E6], in which the author describes his
scientific evolution and mentions a number of scientists who did influence him.
None of this should be construed to mean that Einstein at any time underrated
the importance of the experiment. In 1907 Einstein was the first to write a review
article on relativity [E7], the first paper in which he went to the trouble of giving
a number of detailed references. Michelson and Morley are mentioned in that
review, in a semipopular article Einstein wrote in 1915 [E8], again in the Prince-
ton lectures of 1921 [El], and in the book The Meaning of Relativity [E9] (which
grew out of the Princeton lectures), where Einstein called the Michelson-Morley
experiment the most important one of all the null experiments on the aether drift.
However, neither in the research papers nor in these four reviews does Einstein
ever make clear whether before 1905 he knew of the Michelson-Morley experi-
ment. Correspondence is of no help either. I have come across only one letter,
written in 1923, by Michelson to Einstein [M13] and none by Einstein to
Michelson. In that letter, Michelson, then head of the physics department at the
University of Chicago, offers Einstein a professorship at Chicago. No scientific
matters are mentioned. The two men finally met in Pasadena. There was great
warmth and respect between them, as Helen Dukas (who was with the Einsteins
in California) told me. On January 15, 1931, at a dinner given in Einstein's honor
at the Atheneum of Cal Tech, Einstein publicly addressed Michelson in person
Il6 RELATIVITY, THE SPECIAL THEORY
for the first and last time: 'I have come among men who for many years have been
true comrades with me in my labors. You, my honored Dr Michelson, began with
this work when I was only a little youngster, hardly three feet high. It was you
who led the physicists into new paths, and through your marvelous experimental
work paved the way for the development of the theory of relativity. You uncovered
an insidious defect in the ether theory of light, as it then existed, and stimulated
the ideas of H. A. Lorentz and FitzGerald out of which the special theory of
relativity developed' [E10]. One would think that Einstein might have associated
himself explicitly with Lorentz and FitzGerald had he believed that the occasion
warranted it. He was worldly enough to know that this would be considered an
additional compliment to Michelson rather than a lack of modesty.
Michelson was very ill at the time of that festive dinner and died four months
later. On July 17, 1931, Einstein, back in Berlin, gave a speech in Michelson's
memory before the Physikalische Gesellschaft of Berlin [Ell]. The talk ended
with a fine anecdote. In Pasadena, Einstein had asked Michelson why he had
spent so much effort on high-precision measurements of the light velocity.
Michelson had replied, 'Weil es mir Spass macht,' Because I think it is fun. Ein-
stein's main remark about the Michelson-Morley experiment was, 'Its negative
outcome has much increased the faith in the validity of the general theory of rel-
ativity.' Even on this most natural of occasions, one does not find an acknowl-
edgement of a direct influence of Michelson's work on his own development.
Nevertheless, the answers to both questions—did Einstein know of Michelson's
work before 1905? did it influence his creation of the special theory of
relativity?—are, yes, unquestionably. We know this from discussions between
Shankland and Einstein in the 1950s and from an address entitled 'How I Created
the Relativity Theory' given by Einstein on December 14, 1922, at Kyoto Uni-
versity (and referred to in what follows as the Kyoto address). Let us first note
two statements made by Einstein to Shankland, recorded by Shankland soon after
they were made, and published by him some time later [S6], as well as part of a
letter which Einstein wrote to Shankland [S7].*
a) Discussion on February 4, 1950. 'When I asked him how he had learned of
the Michelson-Morley experiment, he told me that he had become aware of it
through the writings of H. A. Lorentz, but only after 1905 [S. 's italics] had it
come to his attention! "Otherwise," he said, "I would have mentioned it in my
paper." He continued to say that experimental results which had influenced him
most were the observations on stellar aberration and Fizeau's measurements on
the speed of light in moving water. "They were enough," he said' [S6].
b) Discussion on October 24, 1952. 'I asked Professor Einstein when he had
first heard of Michelson and his experiment. He replied, "This is not so easy, I
"This letter, written at Shankland's request, was read before the Cleveland Physics Society on the
occasion of the centenary of Michelson's birth.
SUBTLE IS THE LORD 117
am not sure when I first heard of the Michelson experiment. I was not conscious
that it had influenced me directly during the seven years that relativity had been
my life. I guess I just took it for granted that it was true." However, Einstein said
that in the years 1905-1909, he thought a great deal about Michelson's result, in
his discussion with Lorentz and others in his thinking about general relativity. He
then realized (so he told me) that he had also been conscious of Michelson's result
before 1905 partly through his reading of the papers of Lorentz and more because
he had simply assumed this result of Michelson to be true' [S6].
c) December 1952, letter by Einstein to Shankland. 'The influence of the crucial
Michelson-Morley experiment upon my own efforts has been rather indirect. I
learned of it through H. A. Lorentz's decisive investigation of the electrodynamics
of moving bodies (1895) with which I was acquainted before developing the spe-
cial theory of relativity. Lorentz's basic assumption of an ether at rest seemed to
me not convincing in itself and also for the reason that it was leading to an inter-
pretation of the Michelson-Morley experiment which seemed to me artificial'
[S7].
What do we learn from these three statements?
First, that memory is fallible. (Einstein was not well in the years 1950-2 and
already knew that he did not have much longer to live.) There is an evident incon-
sistency between Einstein's words of February 1950 and his two later statements.
It seems sensible to attach more value to the later comments, made upon further
reflection, and therefore to conclude that Einstein did know of Michelson and
Morley before 1905. One also infers that oral history is a profession which should
be pursued with care and caution.
Second, there is Einstein's opinion that aberration and the Fizeau experiment
were enough for him. This is the most crucial statement Einstein ever made on
the origins of the special theory of relativity. It shows that the principal argument
which ultimately led him to the special theory was not so much the need to resolve
the conflict between the Michelson-Morley result and the version of aether theory
prevalent in the late nineteenth century but rather, independent of the Michelson-
Morley experiment, the rejection of this nineteenth century edifice as inherently
unconvincing and artificial.
In order to appreciate how radically Einstein departed from the ancestral views
on these issues, it is necessary to compare his position with the 'decisive investi-
gation' published by Lorentz in 1895 [L4]. In Section 64 of that paper, we find
the following statement, italicized by its author: 'According to our theory the
motion of the earth will never have any first-order [in v/c] influence whatever on
experiments with terrestrial light sources.' By Einstein's own account, he knew
this 1895 memoir in which Lorentz discussed, among other things, both the aber-
ration of light and the Fizeau experiment. Let us briefly recall what was at stake.
Because of the velocity v of the earth, a star which would be at the zenith if the
earth were at rest is actually seen under an angle a with the vertical, where
where n is the refractive index of the liquid (assumed a nondispersive medium).
Fresnel derived this result from the assumption that light imparts elastic vibrations
to the aether it traverses. According to him, the presence of the factor 1 — \/n2
(now known as Fresnel's drag coefficient) expresses the fact that light cannot
acquire the full additional velocity v since it is partially held back by the aether
in the tube. In 1851 Fizeau had sent light from a terrestrial source into a tube
filled with a moving fluid and had found reasonable experimental agreement with
Eq. 6.2 [F2].
Lorentz discussed both effects from the point of view of electromagnetic theory
and gave a dynamic derivation of the Fresnel drag in terms of the polarization
induced in a medium by incident electromagnetic waves.* Throughout this paper
of 1895, the Fresnel aether is postulated explicitly. In rejecting these explanations
of aberration and the Fizeau experiment, Einstein therefore chose to take leave of
a first-order terra firma which had been established by the practitioners, limited
in number but highly eminent and influential, of electromagnetic theory. I shall
leave for the next chapter a discussion of his reasons for doing so. Note, however,
that it was easy to take the Michelson-Morley experiments for granted (as Ein-
stein repeatedly said he did) once a new look at the first-order effects had led to
the new logic of the special theory of relativity. Note also that this experiment was
discussed at length in Lorentz's paper of 1895 and that Einstein was familiar with
this paper before 1905!
Finally, there is the Kyoto address. It was given in German and translated into
Japanese by Jun Ishiwara** [II]. Part of the Japanese text was retranslated into
English [Ol]. I quote a few lines from this English rendering:
As a student I got acquainted with the unaccountable result of the Michelson
experiment and then realized intuitively that it might be our incorrect thinking
*For a calculation along these lines, see the book by Panofsky and Phillips [P2].
**From 1912 to 1914, Ishiwara studied physics in Germany and in Switzerland. He knew Einstein
personally from those days. He also translated a number of Einstein's papers into Japanese.Il8 RELATIVITY, THE SPECIAL THEORY
The concept of an aether at absolute rest, introduced in 1818 by Fresnel in his
celebrated letter to Dominique Francois Jean Arago [Fl], served the express pur-
pose of explaining this aberration effect (which would be zero if the aether moved
along with the earth). As to the Fizeau effect, Fresnel had predicted that if a liquid
is moving through a tube with a velocity v relative to the aether and if a light
beam traverses the tube in the same direction, then the net light velocity c' in the
laboratory is given by
'SUBTLE is THE LORD' 119
to take account of the motion of the earth relative to the aether, if we recognized
the experimental result as a fact. In effect, this is the first route that led me to
what is now called the special principles of relativity. ... I had just a chance to
read Lorentz's 1895 monograph, in which he had succeeded in giving a com-
prehensive solution to problems of electrodynamics within the first approxi-
mation, in other words, as far as the quantities of higher order than the square
of the velocity of a moving body to that of light were neglected. In this connec-
tion I took into consideration Fizeau's experiment. . . .
In his first paper on relativity, Einstein mentions 'the failed attempts to detect
a motion of the earth relative to the "light-medium" ' without specifying what
attempts he had in mind.* Neither Michelson nor Fizeau is mentioned, though he
knew of both. Einstein's discontent with earlier explanations of first-order effects
may have made the mystery of Michelson and Morley's second-order null effect
less central to him. Yet this 'unaccountable result' did affect his thinking and thus
a new question arises: Why, on the whole, was Einstein so reticent to acknowledge
the influence of Michelson on him? I shall return to this question in Chapter 8.
6b. The Precursors
1. What Einstein Knew. Historical accounts of electromagnetism in the late
nineteenth century almost invariably cite a single phrase written by that excellent
experimental and theoretical physicist, Heinrich Rudolf Hertz: 'Maxwell's theory
is Maxwell's system of equations.'** By itself, this is a witty, eminently quotable,
and meaningless comment on the best that the physics of that period had to offer.
The post-Maxwell, pre-Einstein attitude which eventually became preponderant
was that electrodynamics is Maxwell's equations plus a specification of the charge
and current densities contained in these equations plus a conjecture on the nature
of the aether.
Maxwell's own theory placed the field concept in a central position. It did not
abolish the aether, but it did greatly simplify it. No longer was 'space filled three
or four times over with ethers,' as Maxwell had complained [Ml]. Rather, 'many
workers and many thinkers have helped to build up the nineteenth century school
of plenum, one ether for light, heat, electricity, magnetism', as Kelvin wrote in
1893 [K3]. However, there still were many nineteenth century candidates for this
one aether, some but not all predating Maxwell's theory. There were the aethers
of Fresnel, Gauchy, Stokes, Neumann, MacCulIagh, Kelvin, Planck, and proba-
bly others, distinguished by such properties as degree of homogeneity and com-
*In a thoughtful article on Einstein and the Michelson-Morley experiment, Holton [H2] raised the
possibility that Einstein might have had in mind other null effects known by then, such as the absence
of double refraction [B2, Rl] and the Trouton-Noble experiment [Tl].
**See the second volume of Hertz's collected works [H3], which is also available in English trans-
lation [H4],
120 RELATIVITY, THE SPECIAL THEORY
pressibility, and the extent to which the earth dragged the aether along. This
explains largely (though not fully) why there was such a variety of post-Max-
wellian Maxwell theories, the theories of Hertz, Lorentz, Larmor, Wiechert,
Cohn, and probably others.
Hertz was, of course, aware of these options [Ml4]. After all, he had to choose
his own aether (the one he selected is dragged along by the earth). Indeed, his
dictum referred to earlier reads more fully: 'Maxwell's theory is Maxwell's system
of equations. Every theory which leads to the same system of equations, and there-
fore comprises the same possible phenomena, I would consider as being a form or
special case of Maxwell's theory.'
The most important question for all these authors of aethers and makers of
Maxwell theories was to find a dynamic understanding of the aberration of light,
of Fresnel drag, and, later, of the Michelson-Morley experiment. In a broad
sense, all these men were precursors of Einstein, who showed that theirs was a
task both impossible and unnecessary. Einstein's theory is, of course, not just a
Maxwell theory in the sense of Hertz. Rather s Einstein's resolution of the diffi-
culties besetting the electrodynamics of moving bodies is cast in an all-embracing
framework of a new kinematics. Going beyond Lorentz and Poincare, he based
his theory on the first of the two major re-analyses of the problem of measurement
which mark the break between the nineteenth and the twentieth centuries (the
other one being quantum mechanics).
It is not the purpose of this section on precursors to give a detailed discussion
of the intelligent struggles by all those men named above. Instead I shall mainly
concentrate on Lorentz and Poincare, the precursors of the new kinematics. A
final comparison of the contributions of Einstein, Lorentz, and Poincare will be
deferred until Chapter 8. Nor shall I discuss Lorentz's finest contribution, his
atomistic interpretation of the Maxwell equations in terms of charges and currents
carried by fundamental particles (which he called charged particles in 1892, ions
in 1895, and, finally, electrons in 1899), even though this work represents such a
major advance in the development of electrodynamics. Rather, I shall confine
myself largely to the evolution and the interpretation of the Lorentz
transformation:
which relates one set of space-time coordinate systems (x',y',2?,t') to another,
(x,y,z,t), moving with constant velocity v relative to the first. (For the purpose of
this section, it suffices to consider only relative motion in the x direction.)
The main characters who will make their appearance in what follows are:
Voigt, the first to write down Lorentz transformations; FitzGerald, the first to
propose the contraction hypothesis; Lorentz himself; Larmor, the first to relate the
contraction hypothesis to Lorentz transformations; and Poincare. It should also be
mentioned that before 1900 others had begun to sense that the aether as a material
'SUBTLE is THE LORD' 121
medium might perhaps be dispensed with. Thus Paul Drude wrote in 1900: 'The
conception of an ether absolutely at rest is the most simple and the most natural—
at least if the ether is conceived to be not a substance but merely space endowed
with certain physical properties' [D3]; and Emil Cohn in 1901, 'Such a medium
fills every element of our space; it may be a definite ponderable system or also the
vacuum' [Cl].
Of the many papers on the subject treated in this section, the following in par-
ticular have been of great help to me: Tetu Hirosige on the aether problem [H5],
McCormmach on Hertz [Ml4], Bork [B3] and Brush [B4] on FitzGerald, and
Miller [M15] on Poincare.
As to Einstein himself, in his first relativity paper he mentions only three phys-
icists by name: Maxwell, Hertz, and Lorentz. As he repeatedly pointed out else-
where, in 1905 he knew Lorentz's work only up to 1895. It follows—as we shall
see—that in 1905 Einstein did not know of Lorentz transformations. He invented
them himself. Nor did he know at that time those papers by Poincare which deal
in technical detail with relativity issues.
2. Voigt. It was noted in 1887 [V2] by Woldemar Voigt that equations of the
type
retain their form if one goes over to the new space-time variables
These are the Lorentz transformations (Eq. 6.3) up to a scale factor. Voigt
announced this result in a theoretical paper devoted to the Doppler principle. As
an application of Eq. 6.7, he gave a derivation of the Doppler shift, but only for
the long-familiar longitudinal effect of order v/c. His new method has remained
standard procedure to this day: he made use of the invariance of the phase of a
propagating plane light wave under Eq. 6.7 [P3]. Since the Doppler shift is a
purely kinematic effect (in the relativistic sense), it is irrelevant that Voigt's argu-
ment is set in the dynamic framework of the long-forgotten elastic theory of light
propagation, according to which light is propagated as a result of oscillations in
an elastic incompressible medium.
Lorentz was familiar with some of Voigt's work. In 1887 or 1888, the two men
corresponded—about the Michelson-Morley experiment [V3]. However, for a
long time Lorentz seems not to have been aware of the Voigt transformation (Eq.
6.7). Indeed, Lorentz's Columbia University lectures, given in 1906 and published
in book form in 1909, contain the following comment: 'In a paper . . . published
in 1887 . .. and which to my regret has escaped my notice all these years, Voigt
has applied to equations of the form [of Eq. 6.5] a transformation equivalent to
[Eq. 6.3]. The idea of the transformations [Eq. 6.3] .. . might therefore have been
122 RELATIVITY, THE SPECIAL THEORY
borrowed from Voigt and the proof that it does not alter the form of the equations
for the free ether is contained in his paper' [L7]. (Although these lines were writ-
ten after Einstein's work of 1905, they still contain a reference to the aether. So
does the second edition of Lorentz's book, published in 1915. I shall have more to
say on this subject in Chapter 8.)
At a physics meeting in 1908, Minkowski drew attention to Voigt's 1887 paper
[M16]. Voigt was present. His response was laconic: ' . . . already then [in 1887]
some results were found which later were obtained from the electromagnetic the-
ory' [V4].
3. FitzGerald. The collected papers of the Irish physicist George Francis
FitzGerald, edited by his friend Joseph Larmor [L8], show that FitzGerald
belonged to that small and select group of physicists who participated very early
in the further development of Maxwell's theory. (In 1899, he was awarded a
Royal Medal for his work in optics and electrodynamics by the Royal Society, of
which he was a member.) However, this handsome volume does not contain the
very brief paper for which FitzGerald is best remembered, the one dealing with
the hypothesis of the contraction of moving bodies. This paper appeared in 1889
in the American journal Science [F3] under the title 'The Ether and the Earth's
Atmosphere.' It reads, in full:
I have read with much interest Messrs. Michelson and Morley's wonderfully
delicate experiment attempting to decide the important question as to how far
the ether is carried along by the earth. Their result seems opposed to other
experiments showing that the ether in the air can be carried along only to an
inappreciable extent. I would suggest that almost the only hypothesis that can
reconcile this opposition is that the length of material bodies changes, according
as they are moving through the ether or across it, by an amount depending on
the square of the ratio of their velocities to that of light. We know that electric
forces are affected by the motion of the electrified bodies relative to the ether,
and it seems a not improbable supposition that the molecular forces are affected
by the motion, and that the size of a body alters consequently. It would be very
important if secular experiments on electrical attractions between permanently
electrified bodies, such as in a very delicate quadrant electrometer, were insti-
tuted in some of the equatorial parts of the earth to observe whether there is
any diurnal and annual variation of attraction—diurnal due to the rotation of
the earth being added and subtracted from its orbital velocity, and annual sim-
ilarly for its orbital velocity and .the motion of the solar system.
Here for the first time appears the proposal of what now is called the Fitz-
Gerald-Lorentz contraction. The formulation is qualitative and distinctly prere-
lativistic. Consider the statement '.. . the length of material bodies changes,
according as they are moving through the aether. ...' First of all, there is (of
course) still an aether. Second, the change of length is considered (if I may borrow
a later phrase of Einstein's) to be objectively real; it is an absolute change, not a
change relative to an observer at rest. Consider next the statement about the
'SUBTLE is THE LORD' 123
molecular forces being affected by the motion. The author clearly has in mind a
dynamic contraction mechanism which presses the molecules together in their
motion through the aether.
FitzGerald's hypothesis was referred to several times in lectures (later pub-
lished) by Oliver Joseph Lodge [B3]. Larmor, too, properly credited FitzGerald
in the introduction to the latter's collected works: 'He [F.] was the first to suggest
. . . that motion through the aether affects the dimensions of solid molecular aggre-
gations' [L9]. Elsewhere in that same book, we find FitzGerald himself mention-
ing the contraction hypothesis, in 1900. In that year, Larmor's essay Aether and
Matter [L10] had come out. In a review of this book, FitzGerald wrote that in the
analysis of the Michelson-Morley experiment 'he [Larmor] has to assume that
the length of a body depends on whether it is moving lengthwise or sideways
through the ether' [Lll], without referring, however, to his own suggestion made
more than ten years earlier!
FitzGerald's curious silence may perhaps be explained in part by what he once
wrote to his friend Oliver Heaviside: 'As I am not in the least sensitive to having
made mistakes, I rush out with all sorts of crude notions in hope that they may
set others thinking and lead to some advance' [ F4]. Perhaps he was also held back
by an awareness of those qualities of his which were described by Heaviside soon
after FitzGerald's death: 'He had, undoubtedly, the quickest and most original
brain of anybody. That was a great distinction; but it was, I think, a misfortune
as regards his scientific fame. He saw too many openings. His brain was too fertile
and inventive. I think it would have been better for him if he had been a little
stupid—I mean not so quick and versatile but more plodding. He would have
been better appreciated, save by a few' [O2].
Lorentz was one of those few who appeciated FitzGerald the way he was.
4. Lorentz. The first paper by Lorentz relevant to the present discussion is
the one of 1886—that is, prior to the Michelson-Morley experiment—in which
he criticized Michelson's theoretical analysis of the 1881 Potsdam experiment
[L3]. The main purpose of Lorentz's paper was to examine how well Fresnel's
stationary aether fitted the facts. He therefore reexamined the aberration and
Fizeau effects and noted in particular another achievement (not yet mentioned) of
Michelson and Morley: their repetition of the Fizeau experiment with much
greater accuracy, which bore out Fresnel's prediction for the drag coefficient in a
much more quantitative way than was known before [M17]. Since at that time
Lorentz had a right to be dubious about the precision of the Potsdam experiment,
he concluded that there was no particular source for worry: 'It seems doubtful in
my opinion that the hypothesis of Fresnel has been refuted by experiment' [L3].
We move to 1892, the year in which Lorentz publishes his first paper on his
atomistic electromagnetic theory [L12]. The Michelson-Morley experiment has
meanwhile been performed, and Lorentz is now deeply concerned (as was noted
before): 'This experiment has been puzzling me for a long time, and in the end I
have been able to think of only one means of reconciling it with Fresnel's theory.
Today we call Eq. 6.8 the FitzGerald-Lorentz contraction up to second order in
v/c. In order to interpret this result, Lorentz assumed that molecular forces, like
electromagnetic forces, 'act by means of an intervention of the aether' and that a
contraction effect O(v2/c2) cannot be excluded on any known experimental
grounds.
These conclusions agree in remarkable detail with FitzGerald's earlier pro-
posal: save the aether by its dynamic intervention on the action of molecular forces.
In 1892, Lorentz was still unaware of FitzGerald's earlier paper, however.
The fall of 1894. Lorentz writes to FitzGerald, telling him that he has learned
of the latter's hypothesis via an 1893 paper by Lodge, informing FitzGerald that
he had arrived at the same idea in his own paper of 1892, and asking him where
he has published his ideas so that he can refer to them [LI4]. A few days later,
FitzGerald replies: His paper was sent to Science, 'but I do not know if they ever
published it. ... I am pretty sure that your publication is prior to any of my
printed publications'(l) [F5]. He also expresses his delight at hearing that Lorentz
agrees with him, 'for I have been rather laughed at for my view over here.'
From that time on, Lorentz used practically every occasion to point out that he
and FitzGerald had independently arrived at the contraction idea. In his memoir
of 1895, he wrote of 'a hypothesis ... which has also been arrived at by Mr
FitzGerald, as I found out later' [LI5]. This paper also marks the beginning of
Lorentz's road toward the Lorentz transformations, our next subject.
In the paper of 1895, Lorentz proved the following 'theorem of corresponding
states.' Consider a distribution of nonmagnetic substances described in a coordi-
nate system x,t at rest relative to the aether. Denote by E, H, D, the electric,
magnetic, and electric displacement fields, respectively. D = E + P; P is the
electric polarization. Consider a second coordinate system x',t' moving with veloc-
ity v relative to the (x,t) system. Then to first order in v/c, there is a correspond-
ing state in the second system in which E', H', P' are the same functions of x',t'
as E, H, P are of x,t, where124 RELATIVITY, THE SPECIAL THEORY
It consists in the supposition that the line joining two points of a solid body, if at
first parallel to the direction of the earth's motion, does not keep the same length
when it is subsequently turned through 90°' [L13]. If this length be / in the latter
position, then, Lorentz notes, Fresnel's aether hypothesis can be maintained if the
length in the former position /' were
'SUBTLE is THE LORD' 125
Like Voigt before him, Lorentz regarded the transformations (Eqs. 6.9 and
6.10) only as a convenient mathematical tool for proving a physical theorem, in
his case that to O(v/c) terrestrial optical experiments are independent of the
motion of the earth, a result already mentioned in Section 6a. Equation 6.9 was
obviously familiar to Lorentz, but the novel Eq. 6.10 led him to introduce signif-
icant new terminology. He proposed to call t the general time and t' the local time
[L16]. Although he did not say so explicitly, it is evident that to him there was,
so to speak, only one true time: t. At this stage, Lorentz's explanation for the
absence of any evidence for a stationary aether was hybrid in character: to first
order he had derived the null effects from electrodynamics; to second order he had
to introduce his ad hoc hypothesis expressed by Eq. 6.8.
One last remark on the 1895 paper. It contains another novelty, the assumption
that an 'ion' with charge e and velocity v is subject to a force K:
the Lorentz force (Lorentz called it the electrische Kraft [L17]).
As has been noted repeatedly, in 1905 Einstein knew of Lorentz's work only
up to 1895. Thus Einstein was aware of no more and no less than the following:
Lorentz's concern about the Michelson-Morley experiment, his 'first-order
Lorentz transformation,' Eqs. 6.9 and 6.10, his proof of the first-order theorem
for optical phenomena, his need to supplement this proof with the contraction
hypothesis, and, finally, his new postulate of the Lorentz force, Eq. 6.13.
As a conclusion to the contributions of Lorentz prior to 1905, the following
three papers need to be mentioned.
1898. Lorentz discusses the status of his work in a lecture given in Diisseldorf
[LI8]. It is essentially a summary of what he had written in 1895.
1899. He gives a 'simplified version' of his earlier theory [L19]. Five years
later, he characterized this work as follows. 'It would be more satisfactory if it
were possible to show, by means of certain fundamental assumptions, and without
neglecting terms of one order of magnitude or another, that many electromagnetic
actions are entirely independent of the motion of the system. Some years ago [in
1899] I had already sought to frame a theory of this kind' [L20]. In 1899 he wrote
down the transformations
which are the Lorentz transformations (Eq. 6.3) up to a scale factor €. He noted
among other things that 'the dilatations determined by [Eqs. 6.14 and 6.15] are
precisely those which I had to assume in order to explain the experiment of Mr
Michelson'! Thus the reduction of the FitzGerald-Lorentz contraction to a con-
126 RELATIVITY, THE SPECIAL THEORY
sequence of Lorentz transformations* is a product of the nineteenth century.
Lorentz referred to tf defined by Eq. 6.16 as a modified local time. Concerning
the scale factor e, he remarked that it had to have a well-defined value which one
can determine only 'by a deeper knowledge of the phenomena.' Note that it is, of
course, not necessary for the interpretation of the Michelson-Morley experiment
to know what e is. (As for all optical phenomena in free space, one may allow not
only for Lorentz invariance but also for scale invariance, in fact, for conformal
invariance.) In 1899 Lorentz did not examine whether his theorem of correspond-
ing states could be adapted to the transformations represented by Eqs. 6.14-6.16.
1904. Lorentz finally writes down the transformations (Eqs. 6.3-6.4) [L20].
He fixes e to be equal to unity from a discussion of the transformation properties
of the equation of motion of an electron in an external field. This time he attempts
to prove a theorem of corresponding states (that is, Lorentz covariance) for the
inhomogeneous Maxwell-Lorentz equations. He makes an error in the transfor-
mation equations for velocities ([L20], Eq. 8). As a result, he does not obtain the
covariance beyond the first order in v/c (compare Eqs. 2 and 9 in [L20]).
I shall return to this 1904 paper in the next chapter. However, as far as the
history of relativistic kinematics is concerned, the story of Lorentz as precursor to
Einstein is herewith complete.
5. Larmor. Larmor's prize-winning essay Aether and Matter [L10] was
completed in 1898 and came out in 1900. It contains not only the exact transfor-
mations (Eqs. 6.3 and 6.4) but also the proof that one arrives at the FitzGerald-
Lorentz contraction with the help of these transformations [L21]. Larmor was
aware of Lorentz's paper of 1895 and quoted it at length, but he could not have
known the 1899 paper.
It is true that Larmor's reasonings are often obscured by his speculations (of no
interest here) about dynamic interrelations between aether and matter. However,
there is no doubt that he gave the Lorentz transformations and the resulting con-
traction argument before Lorentz independently did the same. It is a curious fact
that neither in the correspondence between Larmor and Lorentz** nor in
Lorentz's papers is there any mention of this contribution by Larmor.
The first time I became aware of Larmor's work was in the early 1950s, when
Adriaan Fokker told me that it was known in Leiden that Larmor had the Lorentz
transformations before Lorentz. Alas, I never asked Fokker (an ex-student of
Lorentz's) what Lorentz himself had to say on that subject.
6. Poincare. In 1898 there appeared an utterly remarkable article by Poin-
care entitled 'La Mesure du Temps' [P5].+ In this paper, the author notes that
'we have no direct intuition about the equality of two time intervals. People who
*For the simple mathematics of this reduction, see standard textbooks, e.g., [P4j.
**This correspondence is deposited in the Ryksarchief in the Hague. I am grateful to A. Kox for
information related to this correspondence.
fThis essay is available in English as Chapter 2 in The Value of Science [P6].
SUBTLE IS THE LORD 127
believe they have this intuition are the dupes of an illusion' (the italics are Poin-
care's). He further remarks, 'It is difficult to separate the qualitative problems of
simultaneity from the quantitative problem of the measurement of time; either one
uses a chronometer, or one takes into account a transmission velocity such as the
one of light, since one cannot measure such a velocity without measuring a time.'
After discussing the inadequacies of earlier definitions of simultaneity, Poincare
concludes, 'The simultaneity of two events or the order of their succession, as well
as the equality of two time intervals, must be defined in such a way that the state-
ments of the natural laws be as simple as possible. In other words, all rules and
definitions are but the result of an unconscious opportunism.' These lines read
like the general program for what would be given concrete shape seven years later.
Other comments in this paper indicate that Poincare wrote this article in response
to several other recent publications on the often-debated question of the measure-
ment of time intervals. The new element which Poincare injected into these dis-
cussions was his questioning of the objective meaning of simultaneity.
In 1898 Poincare did not mention any of the problems in electrodynamics. He
did so on two subsequent occasions, in 1900 and in 1904. The style is again pro-
grammatic. In these works, the aether questions are central. 'Does the aether
really exist?' he asked in his opening address to the Paris Congress of 1900 [P7].*
'One knows where our belief in the aether stems from. When light is on its way
to us from a far star ... it is no longer on the star and not yet on the earth. It is
necessary that it is somewhere, sustained, so to say, by some material support.' He
remarked that in the Fizeau experiment 'one believes one can touch the aether
with one's fingers.' Turning to theoretical ideas, he noted that the Lorentz theory
'is the most satisfactory one we have.'** However, he considered it a drawback
that the independence of optical phenomena from the motion of the earth should
have separate explanations in first and in second order. 'One must find one and
the same explanation for one and for the other, and everything leads us to antic-
ipate that this explanation will be valid for higher-order terms as well and that
the cancellation of the [velocity-dependent] terms will be rigorous and absolute.'
His reference to cancellations would seem to indicate that he was thinking about
a conspiracy of dynamic effects.
In 1904 he returned to the same topics, once again in a programmatic way, in
his address to the International Congress of Arts and Science at St. Louis [P9].f
'What is the aether, how are its molecules arrayed, do they attract or repel each
other?' He expressed his unease with the idea of an absolute velocity: 'If we suc-
ceed in measuring something we will always have the freedom to say that it is not
*This address is available in English as Chapters 9 and 10 in Science and Hypothesis [P8j.
"'During the period 1895 to 1900, Poincare considered it a flaw of the theory that it did not satisfy
momentum conservation in the Newtonian sense, that is, conservation of momentum for matter only.
He withdrew this objection soon afterward.
-(•This address is available in English as Chapters 7 to 9 in The Value of Science [P6].
128 RELATIVITY, THE SPECIAL THEORY
the absolute velocity, and if it is not the velocity relative to the aether, it can always
be the velocity relative to a new unknown fluid with which we would fill space.'
He gently chides Lorentz for his accumulation of hypotheses, and then he goes
beyond Lorentz in treating local time as a physical concept. He considers two
observers in uniform relative motion who wish to synchronize their clocks by
means of light signals. 'Clocks regulated in this way will not mark the true time,
rather they mark what one may call the local time.' All phenomena seen by one
observer are retarded relative to the other, but they all are retarded equally (Poin-
care points out) and 'as demanded by the relativity principle [the observer] cannot
know whether he is at rest or in absolute motion.' Poincare is getting close. But
then he falters: 'Unfortunately [this reasoning] is not sufficient and complemen-
tary hypotheses are necessary [my italics]; one must assume that bodies in motion
suffer a uniform contraction in their direction of motion.' The reference to com-
plementary hypotheses makes clear that relativity theory had not yet been
discovered.
Poincare concluded this lecture with another of his marvelous visions: 'Perhaps
we must construct a new mechanics, of which we can only catch a glimpse,... in
which the velocity of light would become an unpassable limit.' But, he added, 'I
hasten to say that we are not yet there and that nothing yet proves that [the old
principles] will not emerge victoriously and intact from this struggle.'
The account of Einstein's precursors ends here, on a note of indecision. Lorentz
transformations had been written down. Simultaneity had been questioned. The
velocity of light as a limiting velocity had been conjectured. But prior to 1905 there
was no relativity theory. Let us now turn to what Poincare did next, not as a
precursor to Einstein but essentially simultaneously with him.
6c. Poincare in 1905
All three papers just mentioned are qualitative in character. Poincare, one of the
very few true leaders in mathematics and mathematical physics of his day, knew,
of course, the electromagnetic theory in all its finesses. He had published a book
on optics in 1889 [P10] and one on electromagnetic theory in 1901 [Pll]. In 1895
he had written a series of papers on Maxwellian theories [P12]. From 1897 to
1900 he wrote several articles on the theory of Lorentz [PI3]. All this work cul-
minated in his two papers completed in 1905. Both bear the same title: 'Sur la
Dynamique de 1'Electron.' The occurrence of the term dynamics is most signifi-
cant. So is the following sequence of dates:
June 5, 1905. Poincare communicates the first of these two papers to the Aca-
demic des Sciences in Paris [PI4].
June 30, 1905. Einstein's first paper on relativity is received by the Annalen
der Physik.
July, 1905. Poincare completes his second paper, which appears in 1906 [PI5].
The first of the Poincare papers is in essence a summary of the second, much
'SUBTLE is THE LORD' 129
longer one. The content of his articles is partly kinematic, partly dynamic. Here
I shall discuss only their kinematic part, leaving the remainder until the next
chapter.
The June paper begins with the remark that neither the aberration of light and
related phenomena nor the work of Michelson reveals any evidence for an absolute
motion of the earth. 'It seems that this impossibility of demonstrating absolute
motion is a general law of nature.' Next Poincare refers to the contraction hypoth-
esis and to Lorentz's paper of 1904 [L20] in which—as he has it—Lorentz had
succeeded in modifying the hypothesis 'in such a way as to bring it in accordance
with the complete impossibility of determining absolute motion.' This statement
is not quite correct, since (as was mentioned earlier) Lorentz had not succeeded
in proving the covariance of the inhomogeneous Maxwell-Lorentz equations.
Poincare was to return to this point in July. However, in June he already had the
correct transformation properties of the velocities, the point Lorentz had missed.
'I have been led to modify and complete [Lorentz's analysis] in certain points of
detail.'
Poincare then turns to the transformations (Eqs. 6.14-6.16), 'which I shall
name after Lorentz,' and continues, 'The ensemble of all these transformations,
together with the ensemble of all spatial rotations must form a group; but in order
for this to be so it is necessary that* e = 1; one is thus led to assume that « = 1,
a result which Lorentz had obtained in another way.'
The final topic discussed in this paper concerns gravitation. Following
Lorentz's dynamic picture, Poincare reasons in a more general and abstract way
that all forces should transform in the same way under Lorentz transformations.
He concludes that therefore Newton's laws need modification and that there
should exist gravitational waves which propagate with the velocity of light!
Finally, he points out that the resulting corrections to Newton's law must be
O(v2/c2) and that the precision of astronomical data does not seem to rule out
effects of this order.
The July paper of Poincare gives many more details. Its Section 1, entitled
'Lorentz Transformation,' contains the complete proof of covariance of electrody-
namics. 'It is here that I must point out for the first time a difference with Lorentz'
[PI6]. Section 4 contains a discussion of 'a continuous group which we shall call
the Lorentz group.' Poincare explains his argument for € = 1: starting from Eqs.
6.14-6.16, consider the inverse of these transformations, that is, replace v by —v.
Clearly,
Moreover, from a rotation of 180° around the y axis it follows that
*I use the notation of Eqs. 6.14-6.16; Poincare used the symbol / instead of e.
He did, of course, not know that a few weeks earlier someone else had inde-
pendently noted the group properties of Lorentz transformations and had derived
Eqs. 6.19-6.21 by an almost identical argument.
I shall return later to the efforts by Lorentz in 1904 and by Poincare in 1905
to give a theory of the electron. However, I believe I have presented at this point
all the evidence that bears on the role of Lorentz and of Poincare in the develop-
ment of relativity theory. I shall now let their case rest until the discussion of
Einstein's first two papers on the subject has been completed. Thereafter an
attempt will be made to compare the contributions of all three men.
As a last step preparatory to the account of Einstein's discovery of relativity, I
should like to mention what little we know about his thoughts on the subject prior
to 1905.
6d. Einstein before 1905
Einstein's curiosity in electromagnetic theory goes back at least to his Pavia days
of 1895, which followed his escape from the hated high school in Munich. The
following brief and rather disconnected remarks bear on his interest in electro-
dynamics during the decade preceding his creation of the special theory of
relativity.
7. The Pavia Essay.* In 1895 Einstein sent a manuscript entitled Uber die
Untersuchung des Atherzustandes im magnetischen Felde (On the Examination
of the State of the Aether in a Magnetic Field) to his uncle Caesar Koch in Bel-
gium. This paper—which Einstein never published—was accompanied by a cov-
ering letter in which he wrote: '[The manuscript] deals with a very special theme
and is ... rather naive and incomplete, as can be expected from a young fellow.'
*In 1950, Einstein dated this manuscript to be from 1894 or 1895. It was sent to Caesar Koch in
1895, since in its covering letter Einstein tells of his intent to go to the ETH and adds, 'In the next
letter I shall write you what may come of this.' Both the essay and its covering letter were reproduced
in a paper by Mehra [Ml8].130 RELATIVITY, THE SPECIAL THEORY
SO that
Once it is settled that « = 1, the Lorentz transformations have the property that
In showing the group property of Lorentz transformations, Poincare remarked
that the 'product' of two transformations (Eq. 6.3), one with velocity w,, the other
with v2, results in another Lorentz transformation with velocity v given by
'SUBTLE is THE LORD' 131
In the opening lines of the essay, he asks the reader's forbearance: 'Since I com-
pletely lacked the material for penetrating deeper into the subject, I beg that this
circumstance will not be interpreted as superficiality.'
The main questions raised in the essay are, How does a magnetic field, gen-
erated when a current is turned on, affect the surrounding aether? How, in turn,
does this magnetic field affect the current itself? Evidently Einstein believed in an
aether at that time. He regarded it as an elastic medium and wondered in partic-
ular how 'the three components of elasticity act on the velocity of an aether wave'
which is generated when the current is turned on. He came to the following main
conclusion. 'Above all, it ought to be [experimentally] shown that there exists a
passive resistance to the electric current's ability for generating a magnetic field;
[this resistance] is proportional to the length of the wire and independent of the
cross section and the material of the conductor.' Thus, the young Einstein discov-
ered independently the qualitative properties of self-induction (a term he did not
use). It seems clear that he was not yet familiar with earlier work on this phe-
nomenon. In his paper he mentions 'the wonderful experiments of Hertz.' I do
not know how he became aware of Hertz's work. At any rate, it is evident that at
that time he already knew that light is an electromagnetic phenomenon but did
not yet know Maxwell's papers.
2. The Aarau Question. In his final autobiographical note [El2], Einstein
wrote, 'During that year [sometime between October 1895 and the early fall of
1896] in Aarau the question came to me: If one runs after a light wave with [a
velocity equal to the] light velocity, then one would encounter a time-independent
wavefield. However, something like that does not seem to exist! This was the first
juvenile thought experiment which has to do with the special theory of relativity'
(and he added, 'Invention is not the product of logical thought, even though the
final product is tied to a logical structure.'). Also, in his more extensive autobio-
graphical notes, published in 1949, Einstein remarked that 'after ten years of
reflection such a principle [special relativity] resulted from [this] paradox upon
which I had already hit at the age of sixteen' [E6].
3. The ETH Student. Since Rudolf Kayser, Einstein's son-in-law and biog-
rapher, was himself not a physicist, it is hard to believe that the following lines
from the biography could have come from anyone but Einstein himself. 'He
encountered at once, in his second year of college [1897-8], the problem of light,
ether and the earth's movement. This problem never left him. He wanted to con-
struct an apparatus which would accurately measure the earth's movement against
the ether. That his intention was that of other important theorists, Einstein did
not yet know. He was at that time unacquainted with the positive contributions,
of some years back, of the great Dutch physicist Hendrik Lorentz, and with the
subsequently famous attempt of Michelson. He wanted to proceed quite empiri-
cally, to suit his scientific feeling of the time, and believed that an apparatus such
as he sought would lead him to the solution of the problem, whose far-reaching
perspectives he already sensed. But there was no chance to build this apparatus.
132 RELATIVITY, THE SPECIAL THEORY
The skepticism of his teachers was too great, the spirit of enterprise too small.
Albert had thus to turn aside from his plan, but not to give it up forever. He still
expected to approach the major questions of physics by observation and experi-
ment' [R2].
As to electromagnetic theory, Einstein was not offered a course on this subject
in his ETH days. As noted in Chapter 3, he learned this theory from Foppl's
textbook.
4. The Winterthur Letter. A letter by Einstein to Grossmann, written in
1901 from Winterthur, informs us that aether drift experiments were still on Ein-
stein's mind: 'A new and considerably simpler method for investigating the motion
of matter relative to the light-aether has occurred to me. If the merciless fates
would just once give me the necessary quiet for its execution!' [E13]. Since there
are no preliminaries to this statement, one gains the impression that Grossmann
knew something about a previous method which Einstein must have had in mind
when they were together at the ETH.
This letter also shows that Einstein still believed in an aether as late as 1901.
5. The Bern Lecture. On the evening of December 5, 1903, Albert Einstein,
technical expert third class with provisional appointment, held a lecture in the
conference room of the Hotel Storchen in Bern before the Naturforschende
Gesellschaft Bern. He had been elected to membership of this society on May 2,
1903. The subject of his December lecture was 'Theorie der elektromagnetischen
Wellen' [F6]. It would obviously be extraordinarily interesting to know what Ein-
stein said that evening. However, to the best of my knowledge, no record of his
talk exists.
6. The Kyoto Address. Finally I quote another part of the translation from
German to Japanese to English of the Kyoto address that Einstein gave in 1922.
Before doing so, I should point out that I do not know what times are referred to
in the statements 'I then thought .. .' and 'In those days .. .'.
'I then thought I would want to prove experimentally to myself in any way the
flow of the aether to the earth, that is to say, the motion of the earth. In those days
when this problem arose in my mind, I had no doubt as to the existence of the
aether and the motion of the earth in it. Meanwhile I had a plan to try to test it
by means of measuring the difference of heats which were to appear in a ther-
mocouple according as the direction along or against which the light from a single
source was made to reflect by suitable mirrors, as I presupposed there should be
a difference between the energies of reflected lights in the opposite directions. This
idea was similar to the one in the Michelson experiment, but I had not carried out
the experiment yet to obtain any definite result' [Ol].
7. Summary. In the same lecture Einstein remarked, 'It is never easy to talk
about how I got to the theory of relativity because there would be various con-
cealed complexities to motivate human thinking and because they worked with
different weights' [Ol]. Even with this admonition in mind, it would seem that
the following is a fair summary of Einstein's work and thoughts on electrody-
namics prior to 1905.
'SUBTLE is THE LORD' 133
Einstein's first important creative act dates from his high school days, when he
independently discovered self-induction, a contribution which should, of course,
not be associated with his name. At least twice he had an idea for a new experi-
mental method to measure the aether drift. He intended to perform these exper-
iments himself but did not succeed in doing so, either because his teachers would
not let him [R2] or because he did not have enough free time [El3]. He believed
in an aether at least until 1901 [El3]. Sometime during 1895 or 1896, the thought
struck him that light cannot be transformed to rest [El2]. He knew of the
Michelson-Morley experiment which, however, was not as crucial to his formu-
lation of special relativity as were the first-order effects, the aberration of light,
and the Fresnel drag [S6, Ol]. He knew the 1895 paper of Lorentz in which the
Michelson-Morley experiment is discussed at length. He did not know the Lor-
entz transformations. He did not know any of those writings by Poincare which
deal with physics in technical detail.
It is virtually certain, however, that prior to 1905 Einstein was aware of the
1900 Paris address by Poincare and that he had also read Poincare's remark of
1898 concerning the lack of intuition about the equality of two time intervals.
Before 1905 Einstein, together with his friends of the Akademie Olympia, did
indeed read some of Poincare's general essays on science: 'In Bern I had regular
philosophical reading and discussion evenings, together with K. Habicht and
Solovine, during which we were mainly concerned with Hume. .. . The reading
of Hume, along with Poincare and Mach, had some influence on my development'
[E14].
The four collections of Poincare essays—La Science et I'Hypothese, La Valeur
de la Science, Science et Methode, and Dernieres Pensees—first appeared in 1902,
1905, 1908, and 1913, respectively. All three programmatic papers by Poincare
mentioned in Section 6b are contained in one or another of these volumes. His
1898 article, in which he questioned the naive use of simultaneity, and his
St. Louis address of 1904 are found in La Valeur de la Science, his Paris address
of 1900 in La Science et I'Hypothese. This last book, the only one of the four to
appear before 1905, is the one Einstein and his friends read in Bern. I therefore
believe that, prior to his own first paper on relativity, Einstein knew the Paris
address in which Poincare suggested that the lack of any evidence for motion rel-
ative to the aether should hold generally to all orders in v/c and that 'the cancel-
lation of the [velocity-dependent] terms will be rigorous and absolute.' But there
is more. In La Science et I'Hypothese, there is a chapter on classical mechanics in
which Poincare writes, 'There is no absolute time; to say that two durations are
equal is an assertion which has by itself no meaning and which can acquire one
only by convention.. .. Not only have we no direct intuition of the equality of two
durations, but we have not even direct intuition of the simultaneity of two events
occurring in different places; this I have explained in an article entitled "La
Mesure du Temps".' I stress that Einstein and his friends did much more than
just browse through Poincare's writings. Solovine has left us a detailed list of books
which the Akademie members read together. Of these, he singles out one and only
134 RELATIVITY, THE SPECIAL THEORY
one, La Science et I'Hypothese, for the following comment: '[This] book pro-
foundly impressed us and kept us breathless for weeks on end' [E15]!
I must say more about Einstein and Poincare and shall do so in Chapter 8 after
having discussed Einstein's creation of special relativity in the next chapter.
References
Bl. Cf. W. L. Bryan (Ed.), A Debate on the Theory of Relativity. Open Court, Chi-
cago, 1927.
B2. D. B. Brace, Phil. Mag. 7, 317 (1904).
B3. A. M. Bork, his 57, 199 (1966).
B4. S. G. Brush, his 58, 230 (1967).
Cl. E. Cohn, Goett. Nachr., 1901, p. 74.
Dl. P. A. M. Dirac, Nature 168, 906 (1951); 169, 702 (1951).
D2. H. Dukas, memorandum to V. Hobson, secretary to Professor J. R. Oppenheimer,
June 21, 1966.
D3. P. Drude, The Theory of Optics (C. R. Mann and R. A. Millikan, Trans.), p.
457. Dover, New York, 1959.
El. A. Einstein, The Meaning of Relativity (E. P. Adams Tran.). Princeton University
Press, Princeton, N.J., 1921.
E2. —, letter to M. Besso, December 23, 1925; EB, p. 215.
E2a. , Forschungen und Fortschritte 3, 36 (1927).
E3. —, letter to O. Veblen, April 30, 1930.
E4. , Grundgedanken und Probleme der Relativitatstheorie. Imprimerie Royale,
Stockholm, 1923. English translation in [Nl], p. 482.
E5. , AdP 17, 891 (1905).
E6. in Albert Einstein: Philosopher-Scientist (P. A. Schilpp, Ed.). Tudor, New
York, 1949.
E7. , Jahrb. Rod. Elektr. 4, 411 (1907).
E8. , in Kultur der Gegenwart (E. Lecher, Ed.), Vol. 3, Sec. 3. Teubner, Leipzig,
1915.
E9. , The Meaning of Relativity (5th edn.). Princeton University Press, Princeton,
N.J., 1955.
E10. , Science 73, 375 (1931).
Ell. , Z. Angew. Chemie 44, 685 (1931).
El2. in Helle Zeit, Dunkle Zeit (C. Seelig, Ed.). Europa Verlag, Zurich, 1956.
E13. , letter to M. Grossmann, 1901, undated.
E14. , letter to M. Besso, March 6, 1952; EB, p. 464.
El 5. , Lettres d Maurice SoLovine, p. VIII. Gauthier-Villars, Paris 1956.
Fl. A. Fresnel, letter to F. Arago, September 1818. Reprinted in Oeuvres d'Augustin
Fresnel, Vol. 2, p. 627. Imprimerie Royale, Paris, 1868.
F2. A. Fizeau, C. R. Ac. Sci. Paris 33, 349 (1851).
F3. G. F. FitzGerald, Science 13, 390 (1889).
F4. , letter to O. Heaviside, quoted in A. M. Bork, Dictionary of Scientific Biog-
raphy, Vol. 5, p. 15. Scribner's, New York, 1972.
F5. , letter to H. A. Lorentz, November 10, 1894. Reprinted in [B4].
'SUBTLE is THE LORD' 135
F6. M. Fluckiger, Albert Einstein in Bern, pp. 71-6. Paul Haupt Verlag, Bern, 1974.
HI. J. N. Howard, his 58, 88 (1967).
H2. G. Holton, I sis 60, 133 (1969).
H3. H. Hertz, Gesammelte Werke (2nd edn.), Vol. 2, p. 23. Earth, Leipzig, 1894.
H4. H. Hertz, Electric Waves (D. E. Jones, Tran.), p. 21. Dover, New York, 1962.
H5. T. Hirosige, Hist. St. Phys. Sci. 7, 3 (1976).
II. J. Ishiwara, Einstein Koen-Roku, Tokyo-Tosho, Tokyo, 1977.
Kl. Kelvin, Baltimore Lectures, Appendix B. Clay, London, 1904.
K2. , [Kl], p. vi.
K3. , [H4], p. xv.
LI. H. A. Lorentz, Lectures on Theoretical Physics, Vol. 1, p. 3. McMillan, London,
1927.
L2. D. M. Livingston, The Master of Light, Chap. 3. Scribner's, New York, 1973.
L3. H. A. Lorentz, Arch. Neerl. 21,103 (1886). Reprinted in H. A. Lorentz, Collected
Papers, Vol. 4, p. 153. Nyhoff, the Hague, 1936.
L4. , Versuch Einer Theorie der Electrischen und Optischen Erscheinungen in
Bewegten Korpern, Collected Papers, Vol. 5, p. 1. Brill, Leiden, 1895.
L5. , letter to Lord Rayleigh, August 18, 1892. Reprinted in [S2].
L6. B. E. Livingston, Science 63, 105 (1926).
L7. H. A. Lorentz, The Theory of Electrons, Sec. 169. Teubner, Leipzig, 1909.
L8. J. Larmor (Ed.), The Scientific Writings of the Late George Francis FitzGerald.
Longmans Green, London, 1902.
L9. , [L8], p. Iviii.
L10. , Aether and Matter. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1900.
Lll. , [L8],p. 514.
L12. H. A. Lorentz, Arch. Neerl. 25, 363 (1892); Collected Papers, Vol. 2, p. 164.
L13. , Versl. K. Ak. Amsterdam 1, 74 (1892); Collected Papers, Vol. 4, p. 219.
L14. , letter to G. F. FitzGerald, November 10, 1894. Reprinted in [B4].
L15. , [L4],Sec. 89.
L16. , [L4],Sec. 31.
L17. , [L4], Sec. 12.
L18. , Verh. Ges. Deutsch. Naturf. Arzte 70, 56 (1898); Collected Papers, Vol. 7,
p. 101.
L19. , Versl. K. Ak. Amsterdam 10, 793 (1902); Collected Papers, Vol. 5, p. 139.
L20. , Proc. K. Ak. Amsterdam 6, 809 (1904); Collected Papers, Vol. 5, p. 172.
L21. J. Larmor, [L10], Chap. 11.
Ml. J. C. Maxwell, Encyclopedia Britannica, 9th edn., Vol. 8, 1878. Reprinted in The
Scientific Papers of James Clerk Maxwell, Vol. 2, p. 763. Dover, New York.
M2. , Nature 21, 315 (1880).
M3. A. A. Michelson, Am. J. Sci. 22, 120 (1881).
M4. , letter to Lord Rayleigh, March 6, 1887. Reprinted in [S2],
M5. , letter to Lord Rayleigh, August 17, 1887. Reprinted in [S2].
M6. and E. W. Morley, Am. J. Sci. 34, 333 (1887).
M7. , F. G. Pease, and F. Pearson, Nature 123, 88 (1929); /. Opt. Soc. 18, 181
(1929).
M8. E. W. Morley and D. C. Miller, Phil. Mag, 9, 680 (1905).
M9. D. C. Miller, Rev. Mod. Phys. 5, 203 (1933).
.136 RELATIVITY, THE SPECIAL THEORY
M10. , Proc. Nat. Ac. Sci. 11, 306 (1925); Science 61, 617 (1925).
Mil. , Science 63, 433 (1926).
Ml2. A. A. Michelson, Studies in Optics, Chap. 14. University of Chicago Press, Chi-
cago, 1927.
Ml3. , letter to A. Einstein, December 5, 1923.
M14. R. McCormmach in Dictionary of Scientific Biography, Vol. 6, p. 340. Scribner's,
New York, 1972.
Ml5. A. I. Miller, Arch. Hist. Ex. Sci. 10, 207 (1973).
M16. H. Minkowski, Phys. Zeitschr. 9, 762 (1908).
M17. A. A. Michelson and E. W. Morley, Am. ]. Sci. 31, 377 (1886).
M18. J. Mehra, Phys. Blatt. 27, 385 (1971); University of Texas at Austin, Report
CPT-82, 1971.
Nl. Nobel Lectures in Physics 1901-1921, pp. 159ff. Elsevier, New York, 1967.
01. T. Ogawa, Jap. St. Hist. Sci. 18, 73 (1979).
02. O. Heaviside, letter quoted in [L8], p. xxvi.
PI. W. K. H. Panofsky and M. Phillips, Classical Electricity and Magnetism, Addi-
son-Wesley, Reading, Mass., 1955.
P2. , [PI], p. 174.
P3. , [PI], p. 347.
P4. , [PI], Chap. 15.
P5. H. Poincare, Rev. Metaphys. Morale 6, 1 (1898).
P6. , The Value of Science. Reprinted in The Foundations of Science (G. R.
Halsted, Tran.). Science Press, New York, 1913.
P7. , Report of the International Physics Congress (C. Guillaume and L. Poin-
care, Eds.), Vol. 1, p. 1. Gauthier-Villars, Paris, 1900.
P8. , Science and Hypothesis. Dover, New York, 1952.
P9. , Bull. Sci. Math. 28, 302 (1904).
P10. , Theorie Mathematique de la Lumiere. Carre, Paris, 1889.
Pll. , Electricite et Optique. Carre and Naud, Paris, 1901.
P12. , Oeuvres, Vol. 9, pp. 369-426. Gauthier-Villars, Paris, 1954.
P13. , Oeuvres, Vol. 9. pp. 427-88.
P14. , C. R. Ac. Set. Pans 140, 1504 (1905); Oeuvres, Vol. 9, p. 489.
P15. , Rend. Circ. Mat. Palermo 21, 129 (1906); Oeuvres, Vol. 9, p. 494.
PI 6. , Oeuvres, Vol. 9, p. 500.
Rl. Rayleigh, Phil. Mag. 4, 678 (1902).
R2. A. Reiser, Albert Einstein, p. 52. Boni, New York, 1930.
51. L. S. Swenson, The Ethereal Aether, p. 194. University of Texas Press, Austin,
1972.
52. R. S. Shankland, I sis 58, 86 (1967).
53. , Am. J. Phys. 32, 16 (1964).
54. , S. W. McCuskey, F. C. Leone, and G. Kuerti, Rev. Mod. Phys. 27, 167
(1955).
55. R. S. Shankland, Biography Quarterly, Vol. 2, No. 3. University of Hawaii Press,
Honolulu, 1979.
56. , Am. J. Phys. 31, 47 (1962); 41, 895 (1973).
57. , Am. J. Phys. 32, 16 (1964).
'SUBTLE is THE LORD' 137
Tl. F. T. Trouton and H. R. Noble, Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc. A202, 165 (1903).
VI. O. Veblen, letter to A. Einstein, April 17, 1930.
V2. W. Voigt, Goett. Nachr., 1887, p. 41.
V3. W. Voigt, AdP 35, 370, see footnote on p. 390 (1888).
V4. W. Voigt, Phys. Zeitschr. 9, 762 (1908).
