4
Entropy and Probability
4a. Einstein's Contributions at a Glance
Einstein's activities related to thermodynamics, statistical mechanics, and kinetic
theory begin with his very first paper, completed at the end of 1900, and span a
quarter of a century, during which time he wrote close to forty articles bearing in
varying degree on these subjects. The first of the vintage years was 1905, when he
developed theoretically three independent methods for finding Avogadro's number.
In an autobiographical sketch published in 1949, Einstein's comments on his
contributions to statistical physics are relatively brief. The main message is con-
tained in the following phrases: 'Unacquainted with the investigations of Boltz-
mann and Gibbs which had appeared earlier and which in fact had dealt exhaus-
tively with the subject, I developed statistical mechanics and the molecular-kinetic
theory of thermodynamics based on it. My main purpose for doing this was to
find facts which would attest to the existence of atoms of definite size' [El]. Here
he is referring to his three papers published* in the period 1902-4, in which he
made 'a rediscovery of all essential elements of statistical mechanics' [Bl]. At that
time, his knowledge of the writings of Ludwig Boltzmann was fragmentary and
he was not at all aware of the treatise by Josiah Willard Gibbs [Gl]. In 1910,
Einstein wrote that had he known of Gibbs's book, he would not have published
his own papers on the foundations of statistical mechanics except for a few com-
ments [E2]. The influential review on the conceptual basis of statistical mechanics
completed in that same year by his friends and admirers Paul Ehrenfest and
Tatiana Ehrenfest-Affanasjewa refers to these Einstein articles only in passing,
in an appendix [E3]. It is true that Einstein's papers of 1902-4 did not add much
that was new to the statistical foundations of the second law of thermodynamics.
It is also true that, as Einstein himself pointed out [E4], these papers are no pre-
requisite for the understanding of his work of 1905 on the reality of molecules.
Nevertheless, this early work was of great importance for his own further scientific
development. In particular, it contains the germ of the theory of fluctuations which
he was to apply with unmatched skill from 1905 until 1925.
It would be entirely beside the mark, however, to consider Einstein's main con-
*In 1901, he had sent the first of these papers to Zurich in the hope that it might be accepted as his
doctoral thesis; see Chapter 3.
55
56 STATISTICAL PHYSICS
tributions to statistical physics and kinetic theory as neither more nor less than
extremely ingenious and important applications of principles discovered indepen-
dently by him but initially developed by others. Take, for example, his treatment
of Brownian motion. It bristles with new ideas: particles in suspension behave like
molecules in solution; there is a relation between diffusion and viscosity, the first
fluctuation-dissipation theorem ever noted; the mean square displacement of the
particles can be related to the diffusion coefficient. The final conclusion,* that
Avogadro's number can essentially be determined from observations with an
ordinary microscope, never fails to cause a moment of astonishment even if one
has read the paper before and therefore knows the punch line. After 1905, Ein-
stein would occasionally mention in conversation that 'it is puzzling that Boltz-
mann did not himself draw this most perspicuous consequence [i.e., the explana-
tion of Brownian motion], since Boltzmann had laid the foundations for the whole
subject' [SI]. However, it is hard to imagine the embattled Boltzmann evincing
the serious yet playful spirit with which Einstein handled the problem of molec-
ular reality.
Even more profoundly novel are Einstein's applications of statistical ideas to
quantum physics. In his first paper on this subject, the light-quantum hypothesis
is arrived at by a statistical argument. This work was completed two months
before his paper on Brownian motion. After 1905, Einstein did occasionally return
to classical statistical physics, but in those later years all his main work on statis-
tical problems was in the domain of the quantum theory. In fact, a stronger state-
ment can be made: all of Einstein's principal contributions to the quantum theory
are statistical in origin. They include his work on specific heats, on particle-wave
duality, on the particle nature of the light-quantum, on spontaneous and induced
radiative processes, and on a new derivation of the blackbody radiation formula.
His last encounter with statistics occurred as an aside—as he put it [S2]—late in
1924 and early in 1925, when he was already working hard on unified field the-
ory. The three papers produced at that time brought him to the very threshold of
wave mechanics.
Since Einstein's papers on statistical physics cover so much ground, it may be
helpful to preface a more detailed discussion of their main points with a brief
chronology.
1901-2. Thermodynamics of liquid surfaces [E5] and of electrolysis [E6]. In
these papers, Einstein was looking for experimental support for a hypothesis con-
cerning molecular forces. Making an analogy with gravitation, he conjectured that
the potential between two molecules of species i and j is of the form CjCj$(r), where
the c's are characteristic for the species and 0( r) is a universal function of distance.
In a further analogy with gravitation, he assumed that each c-, is of the form Sca,
where ca is a number characteristic for the ath atom in the molecule of kind i. He
was able to relate the c's to the specific volume and to the surface tension and its
"This reasoning will be discussed in detail in Chapter 5.
ENTROPY AND PROBABILITY 57
temperature derivative. Using known data, he could check his hypothesis, which,
he found, actually worked fairly well for a limited range of carbon compounds
(with molecular weights mainly of the order of 100) but not for lighter molecules,
such as water.
Einstein's hypothesis is, of course, incorrect. As is now well known, even in the
simplest semiphenomenological models (such as the Lennard-Jones potential),
the intermolecular forces not only have a characteristic strength constant but also
depend on the molecular size. This first paper by Einstein is of interest only in
that it shows how from the start he was groping for universal principles, in the
present case for a relation between molecular forces and gravitation. 'It should be
noted,' he remarked, 'that the constants c increase in general but not always with
increasing weight; however, this increase is not linear. Therefore the question if
and how our forces are related to gravitational forces must for the time being be
kept completely open' [E5]. The purpose of his second paper [E6] was likewise to
obtain information on his conjectured force law. Here, no comparison data were
available. The paper concludes with an apology by Einstein for not being in a
position to contribute personally to the experimental clarification of his theoretical
ideas.
That Einstein was quite taken with the concept of a universal molecular force
is seen from a letter to Grossmann in 1901. 'I am certain now that my theory of
the attractive forces .. . can be extended to gases .. . Then the decision about the
question of the close relation of molecular forces with the Newtonian forces acting
at a distance will come a big step nearer' [E7]. Then follows a lyrical passage: 'It
is a wonderful feeling to recognize the unifying features of a complex of phenom-
ena which present themselves as quite unconnected to the direct experience of the
senses.'
In December 1907, Einstein wrote to Stark: 'I am sending you ... all my pub-
lications except for my worthless first two papers [E8]. And so we meet for the
first time a trait typical of Einstein throughout his life. He could be very enthu-
siastic about his own ideas and then, when necessary, drop them some time later,
without any pain, as being of no consequence.
I have dwelt at disproportionate length on these first two papers simply because
by doing so I shall have no need to return to them. Two final comments about
them: (1) one thermodynamic relation contained in the first paper did survive;*
and (2) in 1911 Einstein briefly returned one more time to the molecular theory
of liquid surface phenomena.**
'Let / be the heat capacity at constant pressure p of a liquid held in a container, <o the liquid surface,
and a the surface tension. Einstein derived the relation [E5]
This result is discussed by Schottky [S3].
**In a short note on the Eotvbs relation between surface tension, specific volume, and temperature
[E9].
58 STATISTICAL PHYSICS
1902-4. The three studies on the foundations of statistical mechanics. The
first paper deals with the definitions of temperature and entropy for thermal equi-
librium conditions and with the equipartition theorem [E10], the second one with
irreversibility [Ell], the third one with fluctuations and new ways to determine
the magnitude of the Boltzmann constant [El2]. Einstein published a brief com-
ment on these papers in 1911 [E2].
March 1905. Introduction of the light-quantum hypothesis with the help of
an argument based on Boltzmann statistics [El3]. The first correct application of
equipartition to radiation.
April 1905. Completion of the PhD thesis on a new determination of molec-
ular dimensions [El4]. A correction to this paper was published in 1911 [E15]
and a minor comment in 1920 [E16].
1905-8. Several papers on Brownian motion. The first and most important
dates from May 1905 [El7]. A sequel in 1906 includes the discussion of rotatory
Brownian motion [El8]. A brief comment on the interpretation of mean velocity
was published in 1907 [El9] and a semipopular account of the whole subject in
1908 [E20].
1906. Quantum theory of specific heats of solids [E21]. With this paper, solid
state quantum theory begins.
7907. Voltage fluctuations in a condenser as a means of measuring Boltz-
mann's constant [E22]. Relativistic transformation of thermodynamic quantities
[E23].*
1909. Two papers containing details of the energy fluctuations of electromag-
netic radiation around thermal equilibrium and the first statement in history of
particle-wave duality, arrived at by the interpretation of these fluctuation for-
mulae. Discussion of the Brownian motion exhibited by a mirror moving uni-
formly through a radiation field [E24, E25].
1910. Statistical aspects of the motion of resonator in a radiation field [E26,
E27]; a further comment in 1915 [E28]. The theory of critical opalescence [E29J.
1911. Two additional comments on the specific heat paper of 1906 [E21]: an
attempt to relate the specific heat of solids to their elastic properties [E30] and an
attempt to refine his assumption, made earlier for reasons of simplicity, that lattice
vibrations can be treated as approximately monochromatic [E31].
1912-13. The thermodynamics of photochemical processes [E32, E33].
1914. An abortive attempt to explain anomalies in the specific heat of gases
[E34].
1916-17. Three overlapping but nonidentical papers dealing with sponta-
neous and induced radiative processes (A and B coefficients), a new derivation of
the blackbody radiation law, and the Brownian motion of a molecular gas in equi-
librium with radiation, from which the momentum properties of a light-quantum
are deduced [E35, E36, E37].
7924. A qualitative discussion of thermal conductivity in gases for the case
"This last topic is not yet ripe for historic assessment [LI].
ENTROPY AND PROBABILITY 59
where the mean free path of the molecules is small compared with the linear
dimensions of the container [E38]. At that time it was believed by some that the
motion of foils in a radiometer was somehow induced by radiation pressure. Ein-
stein's paper, which complements earlier work by Knudsen, was a contribution
toward the elimination of this incorrect idea.
1924-5. Three papers on the quantum theory of a molecular gas; discovery
of the condensation phenomenon named after Einstein and also after Rose; Ein-
stein's last application of fluctuation theory, which leads him to particle-wave
duality for matter by a route independent of the one taken earlier by de Broglie
[E39, E40, E41].
Reviews. In 1911 Einstein summarized the status of the specific heat problem
before the first Solvay conference [E42]. In 1915 he wrote a semipopular review
on kinetic problems [E43].
This concludes the introductory summary of Einstein's work on statistical phys-
ics and related subjects. I shall, of course, return in more detail to the main topics
mentioned in this chronology. Sections 4c and 4d deal with the 1902-4 papers and
with Einstein's subsequent involvement with Boltzmann's principle. Chapter 5,
which opens with introductory remarks on the highly complex subject of molec-
ular reality in the nineteenth century, is devoted mainly to Einstein's doctoral
thesis, Brownian motion, and critical opalescence. All the principal papers men-
tioned above that belong to the area of quantum physics will be discussed in Chap-
ters 19 to 24.
At the beginning of this section, I remarked that Einstein devoted some but not
much attention to his contributions to statistical physics when, at age seventy, he
looked back on his work. At that time, he had much more to say about his rela-
tivity theories and devoted more space to his critique of quantum mechanics than
to all the work summarized above [El]. It is an additional purpose of the foregoing
chronology to make clear that in doing so he did not fully convey the breadth of
his life's work.
Einstein's position regarding questions of principle in statistical mechanics is
best explained by first reviewing briefly the contributions of Maxwell and, espe-
cially, of Boltzmann. Gibbs will not enter into this review because he did not
influence Einstein and also because, as Lorentz noted in Einstein's presence, the
Einstein and Gibbs approaches are different [L2]. Einstein did not disagree.
Indeed, in responding to Lorentz's remark, he observed, '[My] point of view is
characterized by the fact that one introduces the probability of a specific state in
a phenomenological manner. In that way one has the advantage of not interposing
any particular theory, for example, any statistical mechanics' [E44]. His critical
attitude to Boltzmann's approach, implied by this statement, will be discussed in
Section 4d. One of the aims of this chapter is to explain what Einstein had in
mind with his phenomenological approach.
In concluding this introduction, I note that the period of Einstein's activities
60 STATISTICAL PHYSICS
concerning the foundations of statistical mechanics preceded the appearance of the
first papers in which it was noted that all was not well with Boltzmann's ergodic
hypothesis. In what follows, I shall therefore have no occasion to make reference
to ergodic theory.
4b. Maxwell and Boltzmann*
Boltzmann's grave, in the Central Cemetery in Vienna, is marked by a monument
on which the formula
is carved. 'It is immaterial that Boltzmann never wrote down the equation in this
form. This was first done by Planck. ... The constant k was also first introduced
by Planck and not by Boltzmann' [S4]. Indeed, k is a twentieth century symbol
which was used for the first time in the formula
proposed on December 14, 1900, by Planck [PI] for the thermal equilibrium dis-
tribution of blackbody radiation.** The quantity p(v, T)dv is the radiative energy
per unit volume in the frequency interval v to v + dv at temperature T. Equation
4.1, or rather (and better)
is also found for the first time in a paper by Planck, one completed a few weeks
later [P3]. Lorentz referred to k as Planck's constant as late as 1911 [L3]. Nor
was he the only one to do so at that time [Jl].
The essence of Eq. 4.3, the insight that the second law of thermodynamics can
be understood only in terms of a connection between entropy and probability, is
one of the great advances of the nineteenth century.f It appears that Maxwell was
*In writing this section, M. Klein's studies of the work of Maxwell and Boltzmann have served me
as an indispensable guide.
"Planck's discovery will be treated in Chapter 19. An equation equivalent to Eq. 4.2 but in which
h and k do not yet occur explicitly had been proposed by Planck on the preceding October 19 [P2].
•(•Recall that the period of discovery of the first law of thermodynamics (the impossibility of a per-
petuum mobile of the first kind) is approximately 1830 to 1850. Many scientists, from engineers to
physiologists, made this discovery independently [Kl]. The law of conservation of energy for purely
mechanical systems is, of course, much older. The second law was discovered in 1850 [Cl] by Rudolf
Julius Emmanuel Clausius while he was pondering the work of Sadi Carnot. In its original form
(Clausius's principle), the second law said in essence that heat cannot go from a colder to a warmer
body without some other accompanying change. The term entropy was also introduced by Clausius,
in 1865, at which time he stated the two laws as follows: 'The energy of the world is constant, its
entropy strives toward a maximum,' and commented that 'the second law of thermodynamics is much
harder for the mind to grasp than the first' [C2].
ENTROPY AND PROBABILITY 6l
the first to state that the second law is statistical in nature.* In a letter about his
'demons,' probably written early in 1868, he discussed their naming, their char-
acteristics, and their purpose:
'1. Who gave them this name? Thompson.**
2. What were they by nature? Very small but lively beings incapable of doing
work but able to open and shut valves which move without friction or inertia.
3. What was their chief end? To show that the 2nd Law of Thermodynamics
was only a statistical certainty . . .' [M2].
Boltzmann had already begun his attempts to derive the second law when Max-
well wrote these lines, but he did not yet understand its statistical character. The
stated purpose of Boltzmann's first paper on the subject (1866) was 'to give a
completely general proof of the second law of the theory of heat, as well as to
discover the theorem in mechanics that corresponds to it' [B2].f He made a fresh
start when he returned to the problem in 1871-2: 'The problems of the mechan-
ical theory of heat are . .. problems in the theory of probability' [B3]. His new
proof was based on the so-called kinetic method [E3, K3]. In the first of two
papers, he dealt with the equilibrium relation between entropy, heat, and tem-
perature [B4]. The sequel, published in 1872 [B3], is one of his most important
papers. It contains the Boltzmann equation. It also contains the H theorem: there
exists a quantity, later called //, defined in terms of the velocity distribution, with
the property that dH/dt < 0 so that, up to a negative multiplicative constant, H
can be identified with the entropy. Both mechanical and probabilistic arguments
are used in the derivation of this theorem. (In that same period, Boltzmann also
did important work on the equipartition theorem and in 1876 gave the derivation
of the 'law' of Dulong and Petit. The discussion of equipartition and of specific
heats will be deferred to Chapter 20.)
At that time, Boltzmann still did not have it entirely straight, however. He
believed that he had shown that the second law is absolute, that H can never
increase. He made the final step as the result of his reflections^: on a remark by
Johann Joseph Loschmidt [L4] which in modern terms can be phrased as follows.
Consider a large number of particles moving according to fully specified initial
conditions and subject to the standard time-reversal invariant Newtonian laws.
'Maxwell's views on the second law are discussed in more detail by Klein [K2].
**This is William Thomson, later Baron Kelvin of Largs. In December 1867, Maxwell had written
a letter to Peter Guthrie Tail in which he introduced 'a finite being who knows the path and veloc-
ities of all the molecules by simple inspection' [Ml]. Tail had shown this letter to Thomson, who
invented the name demon for Maxwell's finite being.
fA quite similar attempt was made by Clausius in 1871 [C3]. This led to a priority argument
between Boltzmann and Clausius—to the amusement of Maxwell [K2].
$ For the influence of Loschmidt's ideas on Boltzmann, see especially [K3].
t62 STATISTICAL PHYSICS
Suppose that H decreases in the course of time. Then for a second system, which
differs from the first one only in that the initial conditions are time-reversed, H
must increase in the course of time. Thus, the law of increase of entropy cannot
be an absolute law. Boltzmann immediately recognized the importance of this
observation [B5] and in a major paper, published in 1877 [B6], finally arrived at
the modern view: in the approach to equilibrium the increase in entropy is not the
actual but the most probable course of events. Just as Loschmidt's remark guided
Boltzmann, so, twenty years later, did Boltzmann play a similar role for Planck,
who at that time was trying to derive the equilibrium distribution for blackbody
radiation under the assumption that the increase in entropy is an absolute law. In
the course of a polemic between these two men, Boltzmann became the first to
prove the property of time-reversal in electromagnetic theory: the Maxwell equa-
tions are invariant under the joint inversion of the directions of time and of the
magnetic field, the electric field being left unaltered [B7]. More generally, we owe
to Boltzmann the first precise statement that for a time-reversal invariant dynam-
ics, macroscopic irreversibility is due to the fact that in the overwhelming majority
of cases a physical system evolves from an initial state to a final state which is-
almost never less probable.* Boltzmann was also the first to state explicitly that
this interpretation might need reconsideration in the presence of time-asymmetric
dynamic forces.**
I turn next to Boltzmann's definition of the concept of thermodynamic proba-
bility. Actually, one finds two such definitions in his writings. The first one dates
from 1868 [B9]: Consider a system of N structureless particles with fixed total
energy. The evolution in time of this system can be represented as an orbit on a
surface of constant energy in the 6A^-dimensional phase space (later called the F
space [E3]). To a state S,{i = 1,2. ... ) of the system corresponds a point on the
orbit. The state S, shall be specified up to a small latitude, and thus the corre-
sponding point is specified up to a small neighborhood. Observe the system for a
long time r during which it is in S, for a period r,. Then T,/T (in the limit T -*
oo) is defined to be the probability of the system being in the state S,. This we
shall call Boltzmann's first definition of probability.
I alluded earlier to Einstein's critical attitude toward some of Boltzmann's ideas.
That has nothing to do with the first definition of probability. In fact, that very
definition was Einstein's own favorite one. He independently reintroduced it him-
*See [P4] for a quantum mechanical version of the H theorem.
**See [B8]. The most important initial condition in our physical world is the selection of the Fried-
mann universe—in which, it seems, we live—as the one realized solution of the time-reversal invar-
iant gravitational equations. It has been speculated that this particular choice of actualized universe
is one indication of the incompleteness of our present physical laws, that the actual physical laws are
not all time-symmetric, that the time-reversal violation observed in the neutral K-particle system is
only a first manifestation of this asymmetry, and that the conventional view on the statistical arrow
of time may indeed need revision. For a discussion of all these topics, see the review by Penrose [P5].
ENTROPY AND PROBABILITY 63
self in 1903 [Ell], evidently unaware of Boltzmann's paper of 1868. (Lorentz
later called this definition the time ensemble of Einstein [L3], perhaps not the
most felicitous of names.) Rather, Einstein had reservations about the second def-
inition of probability, which Boltzmann gave in the paper of 1877 [B6]. In that
paper, Boltzmann introduced for the first time a new tool, the so-called statistical
method, in which there is no need to deal explicitly with collision mechanisms and
collision frequencies (as there is in the kinetic method). His new reasoning only
holds close to equilibrium [BIO]. He applied the method only to an ideal gas
[Bll]. For that case, he not only gave his second definition of probability but also
showed how that probability can be computed explicitly by means of counting
'complexions.'
In preparation for some comments on Einstein's objections (Section 4d) as well
as for a later discussion of the differences between classical and quantum statistics
(Chapter 23), it is necessary to recall some elementary facts about this counting
procedure.*
Suppose I show someone two identical balls lying on a table and then ask this
person to close his eyes and a few moments later to open them again. I then ask
whether or not I have meanwhile switched the two balls around. He cannot tell,
since the balls are identical. Yet I know the answer. If I have switched the balls,
then I have been able to follow the continuous motion which brought the balls
from the initial to the final configuration. This simple example illustrates Boltz-
mann's first axiom of classical mechanics, which says, in essence, that identical
particles which cannot come infinitely close to each other can be distinguished by
their initial conditions and by the continuity of their motion. This assumption,
Boltzmann stressed, 'gives us the sole possibility of recognizing the same material
point at different times' [B13]. As Erwin Schroedinger emphasized, 'Nobody
before Boltzmann held it necessary to define what one means by [the term] the
same material point' [S5]. Thus we may speak classically of a gas with energy E
consisting of N identical, distinguishable molecules.
Consider next (following Boltzmann) the specific case of an ideal gas model in
which the energies of the individual particles can take on only discrete values
e,,e2). . . . Let there be rc, particles with energy e, so that
*See Lorentz [L3] for the equivalence of this method with the microcanonical ensemble of Gibbs.
Also, the notion of ensemble has its roots in Boltzmann's work [B12], as was stressed by Gibbs in
the preface of his book on statistical mechanics [Gl].Since the gas is ideal, the particles are uncorrelated and therefore have no a priori
preference for any particular region in one-particle phase space (n space), i.e.,
they are statistically independent. Moreover, they are distinguishable in the sense
64 STATISTICAL PHYSICS
just described. Therefore, the number of microstates (or complexions, as Boltz-
mann called them) corresponding to the partition Eq. 4.4 is given by
Boltzmann took w to be proportional to the probability of the distribution speci-
fied by (n^,n2, . ..). This will be called his second definition of probability.
For later purposes I need to mention a further development, one not due to
Boltzmann. The number of microstates w is now called a fine-grained probability.
For the purpose of analyzing general macroscopic properties of systems, it is very
important to use a contracted description, which leads to the so-called coarse-
grained probability,* a concept that goes back to Gibbs. The procedure is as fol-
lows. Divide n space into cells co1,(o2, . .. such that a particle in COA has the mean
energy EA. Partition the TV particles such that there are NA particles in WA:
The set (NA,EA) defines a coarse-grained state. For the special case of the ideal
gas model, it follows from Eq. 4.5 that the volume W in F space corresponding
to the partition of Eqs. 4.6 and 4.7 is given by
where W is the so-called coarse-grained probability. The state of equilibrium cor-
responds to the maximum Wm.ut of W considered as a function of 7VA and subject
to the constraints imposed by Eqs. 4.6 and 4.7. Thus the Maxwell-Boltzmann
distribution follows** from the extremal conditions
"The names fine-grained and coarse-grained density (feine und grobe Dichte) were introduced by
the Ehrenfests [E45].
**For the classical ideal gas, one can get the Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution directly from Eqs.
4.4 and 4.5; that is just what Boltzmann himself did.The entropy in equilibrium, £„,, is given by (see Eq. 4.3)
ENTROPY AND PROBABILITY 65
Einstein's precursors have now been sufficiently introduced. I conclude this sec-
tion with three final comments.
The first definition of probability, in terms of time spent, is the natural one,
directly linked to observation. For example, the most probable state is the state in
which the system persists for the longest time. The second definition (either for
w or for W) is not directly linked to observation; it is more like a declaration. It
has the advantage, however, that one can more readily compute with it. Logic
demands, of course, that these two definitions be equivalent, that 'time spent' be
proportional to 'volume in F space.' This is the profound and not yet fully solved
problem of ergodic theory.* Boltzmann was well aware of the need to show this
equivalence. Einstein's physical intuition made him comfortable with the first but
not with the second definition.
Second, why did Boltzmann himself not introduce the symbol k?** After all,
his 1877 paper [B6] contains a section entitled 'The Relation of the Entropy to
the Quantity Which I Have Called Partition Probability,' that quantity being
essentially In W. Moreover, in that section he noted that In W 'is identical with the
entropy up to a constant factor and an additive constant.' He was also quite
familiar with Eq. 4.9, with its two Lagrange multipliers [B14]. I can imagine that
he did not write down Eq. 4.3 because he was more concerned with understanding
the second law of thermodynamics than with the applications of an equation such
as Eq. 4.3 to practical calculations. I hope that this question will be discussed
some day by someone more at home with Boltzmann's work than I am.
Finally, Eq. 4.3 is evidently more general than Eq. 4.10. Boltzmann was aware
of this: '[InH7] also has a meaning for an irreversible bodyf and also steadily
increases during [such a process]' [B6]. The first one to make use of Eq. 4.3 in its
broader sense was Einstein. It was also Einstein who, in 1905, in his paper on the
light-quantum hypothesis [E13], gave that equation its only fitting name: Boltz-
mann's principle.
4c. Preludes to 1905
Boltzmann's qualities as an outstanding lecturer are not reflected in his scientific
papers, which are sometimes unduly long, occasionally obscure, and often dense.
Their main conclusions are sometimes tucked away among lengthy calculations.
Also (and especially in regard to the theoretical interpretation of the second law),
Boltzmann would change his point of view from one paper to the next without
*For introductions to this problem, see, e.g., [Ul] and [VI].
**As to what might have been, in 1860 Maxwell could have been the first to introduce k when he
derived his velocity distribution, in which the Boltzmann factor makes its first appearance. Maxwell
wrote this factor as exp( — v2/a2), where v — velocity, showed that a2 is proportional to the average
of v2, and knew full well that this average is proportional to T.
f Obviously, he must have meant process instead of body.
66 STATISTICAL PHYSICS
advance warning to the reader.* Maxwell said of his writings: 'By the study of
Boltzmann I have been unable to understand him. He could not understand me
on account of my shortness, and his length was and is an equal stumbling block
to me' [M3]. Einstein once said to a student of his: 'Boltzmann's work is not easy
to read. There are great physicists who have not understood it' [S6].** That state-
ment was made around 1910, when he was a professor at the University of Zurich.
By then he must have read Boltzmann's major memoir of 1877 on the statistical
mechanical derivation of the second law, since he referred to that paper (for the
first time!) in 1909 [E47]. However, it is very doubtful whether in the years from
1901 to 1904, when he did his own work on this subject, Einstein knew either this
paper or the one of 1868, in which Boltzmann had introduced his first definition
of probability.
It must have been difficult for Einstein to get hold of scientific journals. Recall
that the first of his three papers on the foundations of statistical mechanics was
completed while he was still a teacher at SchafFhausen.t His move to Bern does
not seem to have improved his access to the literature very much [E48]. It is also
unclear whether he had read Maxwell's papers on kinetic theory at that time.
Certainly, he did not know English then, since he did not start to study that lan-
guage until about 1909 [S7] and his knowledge of it was still rudimentary when
he came to the United States.:):
Yet Einstein was acquainted with some of Maxwell's and Boltzmann's achieve-
ments. As he put it in his first paper on statistical physics [E10]: 'Maxwell's and
Boltzmann's theories have already come close to the goal' of deriving the laws of
thermal equilibrium and the second law from the equations of mechanics and the
theory of probability. However, he remarked, this goal had not yet been achieved
and the purpose of his own paper was 'to fill the gap' left by these men. From the
single reference in Einstein's paper, it is clear how much he could have learned
about their work. This reference is to Boltzmann's lectures on gas theory [B15],
a two-volume work which contains much original research and which was cer-
tainly not intended by Boltzmann to be a synopsis of his earlier work. The book
is largely based on the kinetic method (the Boltzmann equation); by comparison,
the comments on the statistical method are quite brief. The counting formula of
complexions is mentioned [B6]; however, said Boltzmann, 'I must content myself
to indicate [this method] only in passing,' and he then concluded this topic with
a reference to his 1877 paper. Also, it seems possible to me that Einstein knew of
*See especially Klein's memoir [K3] for a discussion of Boltzmann's style.
"The encyclopedia article by the Ehrenfests contains several such qualifying phrases as 'The aim
of the . .. investigations by Boltzmann seems to be .. .' [E46].
fSee Chapter 3.
|Helen Dukas, private communication. However, it may be that Einstein did see one of the German
translations of Maxwell's Theory of Heat, dating from the 1870s.
ENTROPY AND PROBABILITY 67
Maxwell's work on kinetic theory only to the extent that it was discussed by Boltz-
mann in those same volumes. Thus Einstein did not know the true gaps in the
arguments of Maxwell and, especially, of Boltzmann; nor did he accidentally fill
them. The reading of Einstein's paper [E10] is not facilitated by the absence of
an explicit statement as to what, in his opinion, the gaps actually were. This paper
is devoted exclusively to thermal equilibrium. The statistical interpretation of tem-
perature, entropy, and the equipartition theorem are discussed. The tool used is
essentially (in modern terms) the canonical ensemble. The paper is competent and
neither very interesting nor, by Einstein's own admission [E2], very well written.
Einstein believed that in his next paper, completed in 1903 [Ell], he gave a
proof of the second law for irreversible processes. At this stage, he of course needed
some definition for the thermodynamic probability W, and it is here that he inde-
pendently introduced Boltzmann's first definition in terms of the time spent in the
appropriate interval in F space. His proof is logically correct but rests on an erro-
neous assumption: 'We will have to assume that more probable distributions will
always follow less probable ones, that is, that W always [my italics] increases until
the distribution becomes constant and Whas reached a maximum' [E49]. Three
days after he sent this paper to the Annalen der Physik, he wrote to Besso, 'Now
[this work] is completely clear and simple so that I am completely satisfied with
it' [E50]. He had been studying Boltzmann's book since 1901 [E51]. The book
does refer to the Loschmidt objection, but, in typical Boltzmann fashion, in a
somewhat tucked-away place [B16]. Einstein must have missed it; at any rate, it
is obvious that in 1903 he was unaware of the main subtlety in the proof of the
second law: the overwhelming probability, rather than the certainty, of entropy
increase.
It was not until 1910 that, for the first time, Einstein's 'derivation' was criticized
in the literature. At that time, Paul Hertz pointed out that 'if one assumes, as
Einstein did, that more probable distributions follow less probable ones, then one
introduces thereby a special assumption which is not evident and which is thor-
oughly in need of proof [HI]. This is a remarkable comment. Hertz does not say,
'Your assumption is wrong.' Rather, he asks for its proof. Here we have but one
example of the fact that, at the end of the first decade of the twentieth century,
Boltzmann's ideas had not yet been assimilated by many of those who were active
at the frontiers of statistical physics. A larger audience acquired some degree of
familiarity with Boltzmann's work only after its exegesis by the Ehrenfests, pub-
lished in 1911 [E3].
Einstein's reply to Hertz, also written in 1910 [E2] is remarkable as well. He
agrees with Hertz's objection and adds, 'Already then [i.e., in 1903] my derivation
did not satisfy me, so that shortly thereafter I gave a second derivation.' The latter
is contained in the only paper Einstein completed in 1904 [El2].* It is indeed a
*For other discussions of Einstein's 1902-4 papers, see [K4] and [K5].
68 STATISTICAL PHYSICS
different derivation, in that use is made of the canonical ensemble, yet it contains
once again the assumption Hertz had criticized.
It is interesting but not all that surprising that in 1903 and 1904 Einstein, in
his isolation, had missed the point about time reversal. After all, the great Boltz-
mann had done the same thirty years earlier. However, the exchange between
Einstein and Hertz took place in 1910, when Einstein was a professor at Zurich
(and taught the kinetic theory of heat during the summer semester of that year
[S8]). By that time, he had read Boltzmann's work of 1877 (as mentioned earlier),
in which it was stated that the entropy does not always, but rather almost always,
increase. A month before replying to Hertz, he had phrased the second law quite
properly in another paper. * One can only conclude that Einstein did not pay much
attention when he replied to Hertz.
As a postscript to the issue of the second law, it is fitting to recall the first
personal exchange between Einstein and Ehrenfest, which took place in Prague
in February 1912. The Einsteins had come to the train to meet the Ehrenfests.
After the first greetings, 'their conversation turned at once to physics, as they
plunged into a discussion of the ergodic hypothesis' [K6].
What was the harvest of Einstein's scientific efforts up to this point? Five
papers. The first two, dealing with his quest for a universal molecular force, are
justly forgotten.** One main ambition of the next three, to establish a dynamic
basis for the thermodynamic laws, did not entirely come to fulfillment either.
Nothing indicates Einstein's flowering in 1905, which begins with his very next
paper. Nothing yet. However, there is one aspect (not yet mentioned) of his brief
1904 paper which does give the first intimations of things to come. In the years
1902 to 1904, Einstein may not have grasped the awesome problems—still a sub-
ject of active research—which have to be coped with in giving the second law a
foundation which stands the tests of requisite mathematical rigor. Yet these early
struggles of his played an important role in his development. They led him to ask,
in 1904, What is the meaning of the Boltzmann constant? How can this constant
be measured? His pursuit of these questions led to lasting contributions to statis-
tical physics and to his most important discovery in quantum theory.
In the opening paragraphs of Einstein's paper of 1904 [E12], reference is made
to Eq. 4.3: 'An expression for the entropy of a system .. . which was found by
Boltzmann for ideal gases and assumed by Planck in his theory of radiation... .'
Here, for the first time, Planck appears in Einstein's writings, and we also catch
a first brief glimpse of Einstein's subsequent concern with the quantum theory in
*'The irreversibility of physical phenomena is only apparent ... [a] system probably [my italics]
goes to states of greater probability when it happens to be in a state of relatively small probability'
[E29].
**See Section 4a.
ENTROPY AND PROBABILITY 69
the context of statistical considerations. It seems that he had already been brooding
for some time about the mysterious formula Eq. 4.2. Much later he wrote,
'Already soon after 1900, i.e., shortly after Planck's trailblazing work, it became
clear to me that neither mechanics nor thermodynamics could (except in limiting
cases) claim exact validity' [E52].
His statement that thermodynamics is not exact refers, of course, to the phe-
nomena of fluctuations. Einstein turned to fluctuations for the first time in 1904,
when he considered a system with variable energy E in thermal equilibrium with
a very large second system at temperature T. The equilibrium energy {E) of the
first system is given by
where u(E) is the density of states with energy E. In 1904 Einstein deduced a
formula for the mean square energy fluctuation
of the first system. Differentiating Eq. 4.11 with respect to /3, he obtained
The quantity («2) (Einstein noted) is a measure for the thermal stability of the
system. The larger the fluctuations, the smaller the system's degree of stability.
'Thus the absolute constant* [k] determines the thermal stability of the system.
[Equation 4.13] is of interest since it does not contain any quantities which remind
one of the assumptions on which the theory is based' [El2].
Next, Einstein introduced a criterion for fluctuations to be large:
This relation is not satisfied by a classical ideal gas under normal conditions, since
then (E) = nkT/2 (n is the number of particles) so that £ = 0(n~'), indepen-
dent of the volume. He went on to note that £ can be of order unity only for one
kind of system: blackbody radiation. In that case, (E) = aVT4, by the Stefan-
Boltzmann law (V is volume, a is a constant), and hence £ = 4k/aVTi. The
temperature T is proportional to the inverse of Xmax, the wavelength at which the
spectral distribution reaches its maximum. He therefore concluded that volume
dependence is important: for fixed T, £ can become large if X^ax/ V is large, i.e.,
'Einstein used a symbol other than k.
70 STATISTICAL PHYSICS
if V is small.* Thus he believed that radiation is 'the only kind of physical system
... of which we can suspect that it exhibits an energy fluctuation.'
This subject deserves two comments. First, the conclusion is incorrect. Consider
the radiation to be composed of n modes. Then (E) = aVT4 = nkT, so that
again £ = 0(n"'). In the classical theory (which, of course, Einstein was using in
1904), fluctuations are therefore not all that different for radiation and for an
ideal gas. Second, the reasoning was most important for Einstein's work in 1905,
since it drew his attention to the volume dependence of thermodynamic quantities,
a dependence which played a crucial role in his formulation of the light-quantum
hypothesis, which appeared in his very next paper.
Nevertheless, in 1904 Einstein had already taken a bold new step (of which he
was aware): he had applied statistical reasonings to radiation.** In 1905 he was
to do this again. In 1909, Eq. 4.13 would again be his starting point, and it would
lead him to the realization of the particle-wave duality of electromagnetic radia-
tion. In 1925, a formula closely related to Eq. 4.13 would make it clear to him
that a similar duality has to exist for matter. These topics will be discussed in
detail in Part VI of this book. For now, two last comments on Eq. 4.13. When
Einstein first derived it, he did not know that Gibbs had done so before him [G2].
And it is his most important and only memorable result prior to 1905.
In May 1905, Einstein was again busy with fluctuations, though in a different
style, when he did his work on Brownian motion, to be discussed in Chapter 5.
The remainder of the present chapter is devoted to a discussion of Einstein's gen-
eral views on statistical physics, in 1905 and in the years following.
4d. Einstein and Boltzmann's Principle
I have already stressed that all of Einstein's main contributions to the quantum
theory are statistical in origin. Correspondingly, most of his more important com-
ments on the principles of statistical mechanics are found in his papers on quan-
tum physics. His light-quantum paper of 1905 [E13] is a prime example. Two-
and-a-half of its seventeen pages deal with the photoelectric effect—nine with sta-
tistical and thermodynamic questions. This paper, in which the term Boltzmann's
principle appears in the literature for the first time, contains a critique of Boltz-
mann's statistical method.
During the years 1905 to 1920, Einstein stated_more than once his displeasure
with the handling of probability by others. In 1905 he wrote, 'The word proba-
bility is used in a sense that does not conform to its definition as given in the theory
of probability. In particular, "cases of equal probability" are often hypothetically
defined in instances where the theoretical pictures used are sufficiently definite to
*For £ = 1, F'/3 « 0.4/Tand X^ « 0.3/7. Einstein found this near-coincidence pleasing.
**Rayleigh had done so before him (see Section 19b), but I do not believe that Einstein knew that
in 1904.
ENTROPY AND PROBABILITY 71
give a deduction rather than a hypothetical assertion' [E13]. Since Einstein had
by then already reinvented Boltzmann's first definition, it appears safe to assume
that he was referring to the counting of complexions. Not only did he regard that
definition as artificial. More than that, he believed that one could dispense with
such countings altogether: 'In this way, [I] hope to eliminate a logical difficulty
which still hampers the implementation of Boltzmann's principle' [El3]. In order
to illustrate what he had in mind, he gave a new derivation of a well-known for-
mula for the change of entropy S of an ideal gas when, at constant temperature
T, the volume changes reversibly from F0 to V:
where n is the number of molecules in the gas, R is the gas constant, and TV is
Avogadro's number. As we shall see later, this equation played a crucial role in
Einstein's discovery of the light-quantum. (To avoid any confusion, I remind the
reader that this relation has nothing to do with any subtleties of statistical mechan-
ics, since it is a consequence of the second law of thermodynamics for reversible
processes and of the ideal gas law.*) Einstein derived Eq. 4.15 by the following
reasoning. Boltzmann's principle (Eq. 4.3), which he wrote in the form
(it took until 1909 before Einstein would write k instead of R/N) implies that a
reversible change from a state 'a' to a state 'b' satisfies
Let the system consist of subsystems 1,2,..., which do not interact and therefore
are statistically independent. Then
*For an infinitesimal reversible change, the second law can be written (p = pressure)
where cv, the specific heat at constant volume, S, and U, the internal energy, all are in general
functions of V and T. From
For a classical ideal gas, this last relation reduces to dU/d V = 0 since in this case NpV = nRT.
In turn, dU/d V = 0 implies that cv is a function of T only. (Actually, for an ideal gas, cv does not
depend on T either, but we do not need that here.) Hence TdS(V,T) = c,(T)dT + nRTdV/NV.
For a finite reversible change, this yields Eq. 4.15 by integration with respect to the volume.and from Eq. 4.16 it follows that
Equations 4.17 and 4.20 again give Eq. 4.15.
Equation 4.20 can of course also be derived from Boltzmann's formula Eq. 4.8,
since each factor WA can be chosen proportional to V (for all A). Therefore Eq.
4.8 can be written W = VN times a complexion-counting factor which is the
same for states a and b. Einstein was therefore quite right in saying that Eq. 4.15
(and, therefore, the ideal gas law which follows from Eqs. 4.15 and 4.16) can be
derived without counting complexions. 'I shall show in a separate paper [he
announced] that, in considerations about thermal properties, the so-called statis-
tical probability is completely adequate' [El3]. This statement was too optimistic.
Equation 4.8 yields much stronger results than Eq. 4.15. No physicist will deny
that the probability for finding n statistically independent particles in the subvol-
ume V of FQ is 'obviously' equal to (V/V0)". The counting of complexions gives
more information, however, to wit, the Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution. No
wonder that the promised paper never appeared.
Einstein did not cease criticizing the notion of complexion, however. Here he
is in 1910: 'Usually W is put equal to the number of complexions.... In order
to calculate W, one needs a complete (molecular-mechanical) theory of the system
under consideration. Therefore it is dubious whether the Boltzmann principle has
any meaning without a complete molecular-mechanical theory or some other the-
ory which describes the elementary processes. [Eq. 4.3] seems without content,
from a phenomenological point of view, without giving in addition such an Ele-
mentartheorie' [E29].
My best understanding of this statement is that, in 1910, it was not clear to him
how the complexion method was to be extended from an ideal to a real gas. It is
true that there are no simple and explicit counting formulas like Eqs. 4.5 and 4.8
if intermolecular forces are present. However, as a matter of principle the case of
a real gas can be dealt with by using Gibbs's coarse-grained microcanonical
ensemble, a procedure with which Einstein apparently was not yet familiar.
After 1910, critical remarks on the statistical method are no longer found in
Einstein's papers. His subsequent views on this subject are best illustrated by his
comments on Boltzmann and Gibbs in later years. Of Boltzmann he wrote in72 STATISTICAL PHYSICS
For the case of an ideal gas, the subsystems may be taken to be the individual
molecules. Let the gas in the states a and b have volume and temperature (V,T)
and (F0,T), respectively. Einstein next unveils his own definition of probability:
'For this probability [ Wa/Wb], which is a "statistical probability," one obviously
[my italics] finds the value
ENTROPY AND PROBABILITY 73
1915: 'His discussion [of the second law] is rather lengthy and subtle. But the
effort of thinking [about it] is richly rewarded by the importance and the beauty
of the subject' [E43]. Of Gibbs he wrote in 1918: '[His] book is ... a masterpiece,
even though it is hard to read and the main points are found between the lines'
[E54]. A year before his death, Einstein paid Gibbs the highest compliment. When
asked who were the greatest men, the most powerful thinkers he had known, he
replied, 'Lorentz,' and added, 'I never met Willard Gibbs; perhaps, had I done so,
I might have placed him beside Lorentz' [Dl].
At the end of Section 4a, I mentioned that Einstein preferred to think of prob-
ability in a phenomenological way, without recourse to statistical mechanics. The
final item of this chapter is an explanation of what he meant by that. To begin
with, it needs to be stressed that Boltzmann's principle was as sacred to Einstein
as the law of conservation of energy [E54]. However, his misgivings about the
way others dealt with the probability concept led him to a different way, uniquely
his own, of looking at the relation between S and W. His proposal was not to
reason from the microscopic to the macroscopic but rather to turn this reasoning
around. That is to say, where Boltzmann made an Ansatz about probability in
order to arrive at an expression for the entropy, Einstein suggested the use of
phenomenological information about entropy in order to deduce what the proba-
bility had to be.
In order to illustrate this kind of reasoning, which he used to great advantage,
I shall give one example which, typically, is found in one of his important papers
on quantum physics. It concerns the fluctuation equation 4.13, which had been
derived independently by Gibbs and by Einstein, using in essence the same
method. In 1909, Einstein gave a new derivation, this one all his own [E24]. Con-
sider a large system with volume V in equilibrium at temperature T. Divide V
into a small subvolume F0 and a remaining volume F,, where V = V0 + F,, F0
<K F,. The fixed total energy is likewise divided, E = E0 + Et. Assume* that
the entropy is also additive:
"This assumption was briefly challenged at a later time; see Section 2la.Suppose that E0, Et deviate by amounts &E0, A£, from their respective equilib-
rium values. Then
where W0 is the equilibrium value of W0. Equations 4.22 and 4.24 show that W0
is Gaussian in &Ea. Denote (as before) the mean square deviation of this distri-
bution by (e2). Then (e2) = kcgT2, which is again Eq. 4.13.
As we now know, although it was not at once clear then, in the early part of
the twentieth century, physicists concerned with the foundations of statistical
mechanics were simultaneously faced with two tasks. Up until 1913, the days of
the Bohr atom, all evidence for quantum phenomena came either from blackbody
radiation or from specific heats. In either case, statistical considerations play a key
role. Thus the struggle for a better understanding of the principles of classical
statistical mechanics was accompanied by the slowly growing realization that
quantum effects demand a new mechanics and, therefore, a new statistical
mechanics. The difficulties encountered in separating the two questions are seen
nowhere better than in a comment Einstein made in 1909. Once again complain-
ing about the complexions, he observed, 'Neither Herr Boltzmann nor Herr
Planck has given a definition of W [E24]. Boltzmann, the classical physicist, was
gone when these words were written. Planck, the first quantum physicist, had
ushered in theoretical physics of the twentieth century with a new counting of
complexions which had absolutely no logical foundation whatsoever—but which
gave him the answer he was looking for.* Neither Einstein, deeply respectful and
at the same time critical of both men, nor anyone else in 1909 could have foreseen
how odd it would appear, late in the twentieth century, to see the efforts of Boltz-
mann and Planck lumped together in one phrase.
In summary, Einstein's work on statistical mechanics prior to 1905 is memo-
rable first because of his derivation of the energy fluctuation formula and second
because of his interest in the volume dependence of thermodynamic quantities,
* Planck's counting is discussed in Section 19a.74 STATISTICAL PHYSICS
where the expressions in brackets refer to equilibrium values. The first-order
terms cancel since A£0 = —AEi (energy conservation) and [dS0/dE0] = [dSJ
6>£,] (equilibrium). Furthermore, [3*S0/dEt] = -l/c0T2 and [d*SJdE\} =
— \/CjT2, where c0,c^ are the respective heat capacities at constant volume and
c, » c0 since F, » V0. Thus Eq. 4.22 becomes
Next Einstein applied the relation S0 = k In W0 to the subsystem and reinter-
preted this equation to mean that W0 is the probability for the subsystem to have
the entropy S0 (at a given time). Hence,
o]ENTROPY AND PROBABILITY 75
which became so important in his discovery of the light-quantum. He reinvented
Boltzmann's first definition of probability in terms of 'time spent.' His critical
position in regard to Boltzmann's second definition may have led him to replace
the 'Boltzmann logic,' W —» S, by the 'Einstein logic,' S —*• W. Out of his concern
with the foundations of statistical mechanics grew his vastly more important
applications to the theoretical determination of the Boltzmann constant. These
applications are the main topic of the next chapter, where we meet Einstein in the
year of his emergence, 1905. One of the reasons for his explosive creativity in that
year may well be the liberation he experienced in moving away from the highly
mathematical foundation questions which did not quite suit his scientific
temperament.
References
Bl. M. Born in Albert Einstein: Philosopher-Scientist (P. Schilpp, Ed.), p. 46. Tudor,
New York, 1949.
B2. L. Boltzmann, Wiener Ber. 53, 195 (1866). Reprinted in Wissenschaftliche
Abhandlungen von Ludwig Boltzmann (F. Hasenohrl, Ed.), Vol. 1, p. 9. Chelsea,
New York, 1968. (These collected works are referred to below as WA.)
B3. , Wiener Ber. 66, 275 (1872); WA, Vol. 1, p. 316.
B4. , Wiener Ber. 63, 712 (1871); WA, Vol. 1, p. 288.
B5. , Wiener Ber. 75, 62 (1877); WA, Vol. 2, p. 112 (esp. Sec. 2).
B6. , Wiener Ber. 76, 373 (1877); QA, Vol. 2, p. 164.
B7. , PAW, 1897, p. 660; WA, Vol. 3, p. 615.
B8. , WA, Vol. 2, p. 118, footnote 2.
B9. , Wiener Ber. 58, 517 (1868); WA, Vol. 1, p. 49 and Sec. III. See also L.
Boltzmann, Nature 51, 413 (1895); WA, Vol. 3, p. 535.
BIO. , WA, Vol. 2, p. 218.
Bll. , WA, Vol. 2, pp. 166, 223.
B12. , Wiener Ber. 63, 679 (1871); WA, Vol. 1, pp. 259, (esp. p. 277); Crelles
J. 100, 201 (1887); WA, Vol. 3, p. 258.
B13. , Vorlesungen iiber die Principe der Mechanik, Vol. 1, p. 9. Barth,
Leipzig, 1897. Reprinted by Wissenschaftliche Buchges, Darmstadt, 1974.
B14. , Wiener Ber. 72, 427 (1875); WA, Vol. 2, p. 1, Eq. 13.
B15. , Vorlesungen iiber Gastheorie. Barth, Leipzig, 1896, 1898. Translated as
Lectures on Gas Theory (S. G. Brush, Tran.). University of California Press,
Berkeley, 1964.
B16. —, [B15], Vol. l.Sec. 6.
Cl. R. Clausius, AdP 79, 368, 500 (1850).
C2. , AdP 125, 353 (1865), esp. p. 400.
C3. , AdP 142, 433 (1871).
Dl. V. A. Douglas, /. Roy. Astr. Soc. Can. 50, 99 (1956).
El. A. Einstein, [Bl], p. 46.
E2. , AdP 34, 175 (1911).
E3. P. and T. Ehrenfest, Enz. d. Math. Wiss., Vol. 4, Part 2, Sec. 28. Teubner,
?6 STATISTICAL PHYSICS
Leipzig, 1911. Translated as The Conceptual Foundations of the Statistical
Approach in Mechanics (M. J. Moravcsik, Tran.). Cornell University Press, Ith-
aca, N.Y., 1959.
E4. A. Einstein, AdP 17, 541 (1905), footnote on p. 551.
E5. , AdP 4, 513 (1901).
E6. , AdP 8, 798(1902).
E7. —, letter to M. Grossmann, April 14, 1901.
E8. , letter to J. Stark, December 7, 1907. Reprinted in A. Hermann, Sudhoffs
Archiv. 50, 267 (1966).
E9. , AdP 34, 165(1911).
E10. , AdP 9, 417(1902).
Ell. , AdP 11, 170(1903).
E12. , AdP 14, 354 (1904).
E13. , AdP 17, 132 (1905).
E14. , Eine neue Bestimmung der Molekiildimensionen. K. J. Wyss, Bern, 1905.
Apart from a short addendum identical with AdP 19, 289 (1906).
E15. , AdP 34, 591 (1911).
El6. , KolloidzeitschrW, 137 (1920).
E17. —, AdP 17, 549 (1905).
E18. , AdP 19, 371 (1906).
E19. —, Z. Elektrochem. 13, 41 (1907).
E20. , Z. Elektrochem. 14, 235 (1908).
E21. , AdP 22, 180, 800 (1907).
E22. , AdP 22, 569 (1907).
E23. , Jahrb. Rod. Elektr. 4, 411 (1907), Sees. 15, 16.
E24. —, Phys. Zeitschr. 10, 185 (1909).
E25. —, Phys. Zeitschr. 10, 817 (1909).
E26. and L. Hopf, AdP 33, 1096 (1910).
E27. and , AdP 33, 1105 (1910).
E28. , AdP 47, 879 (1915).
E29. , AdP 33, 1275 (1910).
E30. , AdP 34, 170, 590 (1911).
E31. , AdP 35, 679(1911).
E32. , AdP 37, 832 (1912); 38, 881 (1912).
E33. , /. de Phys. 3, 277 (1913).
E34. and O. Stern, AdP 40, 551 (1914).
E35. , Verh. Deutsch. Phys. Ges. 18, 318 (1916).
E36. , Mitt. Phys. Ges. Zurich 16, 47 (1916).
E37. , Phys. Zeitschr. 18, 121 (1917).
E38. , Z. Phys. 27, 392 (1924).
E39. , PAW, 1924, p. 261.
E40. , PAW, 1925, p. 3.
E41. , PAW, 1925, p. 18.
E42. , in Proceedings of the First Solvay Conference (P. Langevin and M. de Brog-
lie, Eds.), p. 407. Gauthier-Villars, Paris, 1911.
E43. , in Kulturder Gegenwart (E. Lecher, Ed.). Teubner, Leipzig, 1915 (2nd ed.,
1925).
E44. , [E42], p. 441.
ENTROPY AND PROBABILITY 77
E45. [E3], Sec. 23.
E46. [E3], Sec. 11.
E47. A. Einstein, [E24], p. 187.
E48. , letter to M. Besso, March 17, 1903. EB, p. 13.
E49. , [Ell], p. 184.
E50. —, letter to M. Besso, January 1903. EB, p. 3.
E51. , letter to M. Grossmann, 1901, undated.
E52. , [Bl],p. 52.
E53. —, [E42], p. 436.
E54. , letter to M. Besso, June 23, 1918. EB, p. 126.
Gl. J. W. Gibbs, Elementary Principles of Statistical Mechanics. Yale University
Press, New Haven, Conn., 1902.
G2. , [Gl], Chap. 7.
HI. P. Hertz, AdP33, 537 (1910), esp. p. 552.
Jl. See, e.g., S. Jahn, Jahrb. Rad. Elektr. 6, 229 (1909), esp. p. 236.
Kl. T. S. Kuhn in Critical Problems in the History of Science (M. Clagett, Ed.), p.
321. University of Wisconsin Press, Madison, 1962.
K2. M. Klein, Am. Scientist 58, 84 (1970).
K3. , in The Boltzmann Equation (E. G. D. Cohen and W. Thirring, Eds.), p.
53. Springer Verlag, New York, 1973.
K4. , Science 157, 509 (1967).
K5. , in Proceedings of the Jerusalem Einstein Centennial Symposium, March
1979.
K6. , Paul Ehrenfest, Vol. 1, p. 176. North Holland, Amsterdam, 1970.
LI. P. T. Landsberg, Phys. Rev. Lett. 45, 149 (1980).
L2. H. A. Lorentz, [E42], p. 441.
L3. , Entropie en Waarschynlykheid, p. 39. Brill, Leiden, 1923. Translated as
Lectures on Theoretical Physics (L. Silberstein and A. Trivelli, Trans.), Vol. II,
p. 175. Macmillan, London, 1927.
L4. J. Loschmidt, Wiener Ber. 73, 128 (1876), see esp. p. 139; 75, 67 (1877).
Ml. J. C. Maxwell, letter to P. G. Tait, December 11, 1867. Reprinted in C. G. Knott,
Life and Scientific Work of P. G. Tait, p. 213. Cambridge University Press, Cam-
bridge, 1911.
M2. , letter to P. G. Tait, undated; Knott, p. 214.
M3. , letter to P. G. Tait, August 1873; Knott, p. 114.
PI. M. Planck, Verh. Deutsch. Phys. Ges. 2, 237 (1900).
P2. , Verh. Deutsch. Phys. Ges. 2, 202 (1900).
P3. , AdP 4, 553(1901).
P4. W. Pzu\i,Collected Scientific Papers (R. Kronig and V. Weisskopf, Eds.), Vol. 1,
p. 549. Interscience, New York, 1964.
P5. R. Penrose in General Relativity (S. W. Hawking and W. Israel, Eds.), p. 581.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1979.
51. A. Sommerfeld, Phys. Zeitschr. 18, 533 (1917).
52. E. Salaman, Encounter, April 1979, p. 19.
S3 W. Schottky, Thermodynamik, p. 116. Springer, Berlin, 1929.
54. A. Sommerfeld, Thermodynamics and Statistical Mechanics, p. 213. Academic
Press, New York, 1956.
55. E. Schroedinger in E. Broda, Ludwig Boltzmann, p. 65. Deuticke, Vienna, 1955.
78 STATISTICAL PHYSICS
56. Se, p. 176.
57. Se, p. 198.
58. Se, p. 169.
Ul. G. E. Uhlenbeck and G. W. Ford, Lectures in Statistical Mechanics, Chap. I.
American Mathematical Society, Providence, 1963.
VI. V. I. Arnold and A. Avez, Problemes Ergodiques de la Mecanique Classique, Gau-
thier-Villars, Paris, 1967.
