1O
Herr Professor Einstein
10a. From Bern to Zurich
Soon after December 1907 Einstein began his academic career.
His first step, then a common one, was to apply for a Privatdozentship. This
was not a faculty position and no salary was provided by a university or any other
official body. To be Privatdozent meant only to have the right to teach at the
university where one was appointed. The only remuneration was a small fee paid
by each course attendant. It used to be said often in those times that a university
career could be contemplated only if one was independently wealthy or married
to a well-to-do person. Neither applied to Einstein. That is perhaps why nothing
had come of his earlier intent to seek such a post [El].
In 1907 he decided nevertheless to apply while retaining his position at the
patent office. On June 17 he sent a letter to the cantonal authorities in Bern
enclosing copies of his PhD thesis, of seventeen published papers (including, of
course, the harvest of 1905), and a curriculum vitae. Several faculty members
spoke in favor of the application when the matter came up for discussion.* But
rules are rules. For whatever reason, Einstein had omitted to follow the require-
ment to send along with his application a Habilitationsschrift, a not hitherto pub-
lished scientific article. Accordingly, the request was denied until such time as
Herr Einstein saw fit to produce such a document [Fl]. Einstein procrastinated.
In January 1908 he wrote to Grossmann, asking him the best way to apply for
a vacant high school position: 'Can I visit there to give an oral demonstration of
my laudable personality as teacher and citizen? Wouldn't I probably make a bad
impression (no Swiss-German, Semitic looks, etc.)? Would it make sense if I were
to extol my scientific papers on that occasion?' [Ela]. Perhaps he never applied,
perhaps he was rejected. At any rate, early in 1908 he finally produced his
Habilitationsschrift and on February 28 a letter was drawn up informing young
Doctor Einstein that his application had been accepted and that he had been
granted the venia docendi, the right to teach [F2]. Einstein was for the first time
a member of the academic community.
His main job at the patent office forced him to lecture at odd hours. In the
summer semester of 1908 he taught the kinetic theory of heat on Saturday and
"The professor of experimental physics was opposed to the idea, however [Ela].
184
HERR PROFESSOR EINSTEIN 185
Tuesday mornings from seven to eight to an audience of three friends, including
Besso. His second and last course was given in the winter semester of 1908-9.
Each Wednesday evening from six to seven he lectured to four listeners. His sister
Maja would occasionally drop in. After two years at the University of Berlin, she
was now attending the University of Bern. It was there that on December 21,
1908, the next main academic event in the Einstein family took place. On that day
Maja received her PhD magna cum laude on a thesis in Romance languages
[Elb].
The topic of Einstein's second course, the theory of radiation, was also the sub-
ject of his Habilitationsschrift: 'Consequences for the Constitution of Radiation of
the Energy Distribution Law of Blackbody Radiation' [F3]. This paper was never
published nor was its manuscript ever found. Its content may well have been
incorporated in the reports 'On the Current Status of the Radiation Problem,'
published early in 1909 [E2], and "On the Development of Our Views Concern-
ing the Nature and Constitution of Radiation,' which followed later that same
year [E3]. These two papers are not just survey articles. They contain highly
important new physics. Forty years later, Pauli said of the second report that it
'can be considered as one of the landmarks in the development of theoretical phys-
ics' [PI]. In Chapter 21 I shall come back in detail to these two papers. Suffice it
to say here that they are Einstein's most important contributions in the period
from 1908 to 1911.
The first of these two papers was completed in Bern, the second one in Zurich.
Meanwhile Einstein had obtained his first faculty post, associate professor of the-
oretical physics at the University of Zurich. It was a newly created position. There
had been no professor of theoretical or mathematical physics since Clausius had
left the university in 1867 [Rl]. The proposal to the faculty written by Alfred
Kleiner clearly shows Einstein's rapidly growing renown: 'Today Einstein ranks
among the most important theoretical physicists and has been recognized rather
generally as such since his work on the relativity principle . . . uncommonly sharp
conception and pursuit of ideas . . . clarity and precision of style. . ..' [SI].
Einstein must have been aware of this appreciation. Perhaps, also, he may have
sensed some of the following sentiments expressed in a part of the final faculty
report*: 'These expressions of our colleague Kleiner, based on several years of
personal contact, were all the more valuable for the committee as well as for the
faculty as a whole since Herr Dr Einstein is an Israelite and since precisely to the
Israelites among scholars are ascribed (in numerous cases not entirely without
cause) all kinds of unpleasant peculiarities of character, such as intrusiveness,
impudence, and a shopkeeper's mentality** in the perception of their academic
position. It should be said, however, that also among the Israelites there exist men
who do not exhibit a trace of these disagreeable qualities and that it is not proper,
*It is, of course, highly improbable that Einstein ever saw this report.
**'. . . Zudringlichkeit, Unverschamtheit, Kramerhaftigkeit . . .'
l86 RELATIVITY, THE GENERAL THEORY
therefore, to disqualify a man only because he happens to be a Jew. Indeed, one
occasionally finds people also among non-Jewish scholars who in regard to a com-
mercial perception and utilization of their academic profession develop qualities
which are usually considered as specifically "Jewish." Therefore neither the com-
mittee nor the faculty as a whole considered it compatible with its dignity to adopt
anti-Semitism as a matter of policyf and the information which Herr Kollege
Kleiner was able to provide about the character of Herr Dr Einstein has com-
pletely reassured us' [SIa]. Opinions such as these of course do not describe just
Zurich in 1909 but western civilization in the early twentieth century.
The secret faculty vote of March 1909 on the Einstein appointment was ten in
favor, one abstention. On July 6, 1909, Einstein submitted his resignation to the
patent office. Two days later a new mark of rising eminence: the University of
Geneva bestowed on him his first honorary doctorate.* On October 15 he com-
menced his new university position; on the 22nd he, Mileva, and Hans Albert
were registered as residing at Moussonstrasse 12. That same month the new asso-
ciate professor and doctor honoris causa attended, at age thirty, his first physics
conference, at Salzburg. At this meeting he gave the report so highly praised by
Pauli. On December 11, 1909, he gave, for the first but not the last time in his
life, an inaugural address, this one entitled 'On the Role of Atomic Theory in the
New Physics.' Einstein's salary in his new position was 4500 SF per annum, the
same amount he had received as a technical expert second class in Bern.
New reponsibilities awaited him: six to eight hours of teaching and seminars
per week, students to be taken care of, among them Hans Tanner, his first PhD
student, who did not get his degree with Einstein, however.** He appeared in
class in somewhat shabby attire, wearing pants that were too short and carrying
with him a slip of paper the size of a visiting card on which he had sketched his
lecture notes [S2]. In his later years, Einstein used to say that he did not enjoy
teaching. 'He [E.] obviously enjoyed explaining his ideas to others, and was excep-
tionally good at it because of his own way of thinking in intuitive and informal
terms. What he presumably found irksome was the need to prepare and present
material that was not at the moment at the center of his interest. Thus the prep-
aration of lectures would interfere with his own thought' [S3].
In his Zurich period, from October 1909 to March 1911, Einstein published
eleven papers on theoretical physics, including the one on critical opalescence. He
also was active as an experimentalist. In his Bern days, he had published a paper
that contained the idea for an apparatus intended to measure small voltages [E4].
•p.. . den "Antisemitismus" als Prinzip auf ihre Fahne zu schreiben. . ..'
* Marie Curie and Ostwald were also among the recipients of honorary degrees.
"After Einstein left for Prague, Tanner went to Basel, where he got his degree in 1912. Another
student, Hermann Schuepp, was given a PhD thesis topic by Herzog before Einstein arrived at
Zurich. Einstein acted as the referee for this thesis, which was accepted by the faculty on December
21, 1909 [Dl].
HERR PROFESSOR EINSTEIN 187
In Bern he had tried to follow up experimentally on this idea in 'a small labora-
tory for electrostatic experiments which I have concocted with primitive means'
[E5]. Einstein's fellow Olympia member, Konrad Habicht, and the latter's brother
Paul became interested. In the university laboratory in Zurich, they constructed
a 'Maschinchen,' little machine, as Einstein affectionately called his gadget. In
their paper the Habichts state that 'the . .. experiments were performed in col-
laboration with A. Einstein' [HI]. Einstein followed the further development with
lively interest [E6]. (For more on the little machine, see Chapter 29.)
Einstein and his family moved to Prague in March 1911. The family was a
foursome by then. On July 28, 1910, a second son had been born to Albert and
Mileva. They named him Eduard and called him Tede or Tedel; their nickname
for the two boys was 'die Barchen,' the little bears. 'Eduard inherited from his
father the facial traits and the musical talents, from his mother the tendency to
melancholy' [S4]. In later years Eduard cared much for the arts. He wrote poetry.
He wanted to become a psychiatrist and studied medicine but did not reach his
goal. His life came to a sad end.*
lOb. Three and a Half Years of SUence
Einstein first stated the equivalence principle in 1907. In 1915 he presented the
general theory of relativity as we now know it. This much I learned long ago from
Pauli's encyclopedia article, and also that Einstein arrived at his final version
'nach langen Irrwegen,' after having followed wrong tracks for a long time [P2].
I therefore imagined an Einstein engrossed in his new ideas of 1907 and laboring
unremittingly from 1907 until 1915 to incorporate into a full-fledged theory the
generalization from invariance under uniform motion to invariance under general
motion. Not until I read his publications and especially his correspondence of that
period did I realize that I was wrong.
Einstein remained silent on gravitation from December 1907 until June 1911,
a few months after he had settled in Prague.
One can think of many reasons for this. It was an interval of conspicuous com-
motion. There was a new baby in the family. There were three career changes,
first from technical expert to Privatdozent in Bern to associate professor in Zurich
and then, as we shall see, to full professor in Prague. There was a new style of
doing physics: in collaboration, first with Laub, then with the Habicht brothers,
then with Ludwig Hopf. Lecturing took time and effort: 'I am very occupied with
the courses, so that my real free time is less than in Bern' [E7]. All of these factors
could have contributed to digressions from the main course. It was also a period
in which Einstein experienced a rapid rise to fame and in which he established
"Helen Dukas tells me that Einstein recognized rather early signs of dementia praecox in his
younger son. After many vicissitudes, Eduard was institutionalized in the Burgholzli Hospital in
Zurich, where he died in 1965.
l88 RELATIVITY, THE GENERAL THEORY
his first contacts with larger segments of the physics community. Such circum-
stances often lead to a slackening of creative tensions. All these events combined
might well have sufficed for others to desist from starting a truly major new pro-
gram in research. Yet, I think, all this has little if anything to do with Einstein's
silence on gravitation.
Indeed, if he was silent on that subject, he was not silent on physics as a whole.
New research continued during the years in question. There were the papers with
Laub on special relativity, the papers with Hopf on classical radiation theory, and
the difficult paper on critical opalescence. He invented his little machine. Above
all, there were the papers on quantum physics already mentioned, highly creative
in content. All this work hardly gives the impression of a man who is sidetracked
and cannot find time for serious thinking.
There is, of course, nothing unusual about the fact that Einstein did not publish
anything new about gravitation between 1908 and 1911. It could mean simply
that he thought about the problem but did not find anything novel to communicate.
More curious is the fact that he twice gave surveys of relativity theory without
mentioning gravitation or the equivalence principle and its remarkable implica-
tions: the red shift and the bending of light. The first of these surveys was his
report at the Salzburg conference, which included a survey of relativity theory, 'of
the consequences of which I would like to mention only a single one' [E3] (namely,
E = me2), but quantum theory rather than relativity theory was the main issue.
The second survey was given in 1910. It is a detailed document, forty-four printed
pages long [E8]. There is no mention of relatively accelerated systems. Again this
is not too surprising. Even the special theory was still so new that it may have
seemed advisable to confine the explications to the case of uniform relative motion.
However, even such pedagogical motives fail to explain one fact which I find
truly significant. Throughout his career Einstein was accustomed to writing to one
or more colleagues or friends about scientific problems which at any given time
were important to him. With a refreshing frankness, he would share with them
not only the delights of a new insight but also the troubles of being stuck. It would
not in the least have been out of style for Einstein to write to one of his friends:
I am preoccupied with the gravitation problem, it mystifies me and I am not get-
ting anywhere. In fact, I am quite sure that he would have written in this vein if,
between 1908 and 1911, this problem had really nagged him. Yet, as far as I
know, in his scientific correspondence during this period, mention is made only
once of gravitation and the related new issues. These same letters also made clear
to me the reason for Einstein's silence on the equivalence principle and its con-
sequences: it was not gravitation that was uppermost in his mind. It was the quan-
tum theory.
Some examples may show the intensity of Einstein's concern with quantum
physics during that period. Sometime in 1908 he wrote to Laub, 'I am incessantly
busy with the question of the constitution of radiation.... This quantum problem
is so uncommonly important and difficult that it should be the concern of every-
HERR PROFESSOR EINSTEIN 189
body. I did succeed in inventing something which formally corresponds to [a quan-
tum theory], but I have conclusive grounds to consider it nonsense' [E9]. To Stark,
July 1909: 'You can hardly imagine how much trouble I have taken to invent a
satisfactory mathematical treatment of the quantum theory' [E10]. To Besso,
November 1909: 'Reflected little and unsuccessfully about light-quanta' [Ell].
Again to Besso, one month later, he writes about attempts to modify Maxwell's
equations in such a way that the new equations would have light-quantum solu-
tions: 'Here perhaps lies the solution of the light-quantum problem' [E12]. To
Laub, that same day: "I have not yet found a solution of the light-quantum ques-
tion. All the same I will try to see if I cannot work out this favorite problem of
mine' [E13].* Also to Laub, March 1910: 'I have found some interesting things
about quanta, but nothing is complete yet' [El4].
In the summer of 1910 Einstein wrote to Laub about his long review article
[E8]: '[This paper] contains only a rather broad expose of the epistemological
foundations of the relativity theory' [El5]. This would have been as good an
occasion as any to reflect on the new epistemology of the equivalence principle,
but Einstein does not do so. Rather he adds, a few lines later, 'I have not come
further with the question of the constitution of light.' In November he writes again
to Laub: 'Currently I have great expectations of solving the radiation problem
...' [E16]. A week later, once more to Laub: 'Once again I am getting nowhere
with the solution of the light-quantum problem' [El7]. In December, to Laub:
'The enigma of radiation will not yield' [E18]. Finally, by May 1911 he is ready
to give up for the time being; he writes to Besso: 'I do not ask anymore whether
these quanta really exist. Nor do I attempt any longer to construct them, since I
now know that my brain is incapable of fathoming [the problem] this way' [E19].
One month later, in June 1911, he was back to gravitation theory.
It would, of course, be absurd to suppose that Einstein did not think about
gravitation at all during those three and a half years. A letter he wrote to Som-
merfeld from Bern, just before taking up his post in Ziirich, shows that he had
indeed done so:
'The treatment of the uniformly rotating rigid body seems to me to be very
important because of an extension of the relativity principle to uniformly rotat-
ing systems by trains of thought which I attempted to pursue for uniformly
accelerated translation in the last section of ... my paper [of 1907]. [E20]**
That isolated remark, important as it is, does not change my opinion that Einstein
was concentrating in other directions during this period. In later years, Einstein
himself tended to be uncommunicative about his thoughts on gravitation during
*Ich will sehen ob ich dieses Lieblingsei doch nicht ausbriiten kann.
**See also [S5], I shall return in the next chapter to the influence of the problem of rotating bodies
on Einstein's thinking.
190 RELATIVITY, THE GENERAL THEORY
that time. In the Gibson lecture on the origins of the general theory of relativity,
given in Glasgow in June 1933, he says,
'If [the equivalence principle] was true for all processes, it indicated that the
principle of relativity must be extended to include nonuniform motions of the
coordinate systems if one desired to obtain an unforced and natural theory of
the gravitational field. From 1908 until 1911 I concerned myself with consid-
erations of this nature, which I need not describe here' [E21].
In his major scientific autobiographical notes of 1949 [E22], he remains silent
about those particular years. His final autobiographical sketch, written a few
months before his death, contains the following statement: 'From 1909 to 1912,
while I had to teach theoretical physics at the universities of Zurich and Prague,
I puzzled incessantly about the problem [of gravitation]' [E23]. This is indeed
borne out by letters he wrote to his friends after the middle of 1911, but not by
the letters prior to that time. Indeed, it seems evident that until he reached Prague,
he considered—and, it should be said, for many good reasons—the riddles of the
quantum theory far more important and urgent than the problem of gravitation.
In sharp contrast, from then until 1916 there are only a few minor papers on the
quantum theory while his correspondence shows clearly that now the theory of
gravitation is steadily on his mind. I would not go so far as to say that this intense
preoccupation is the only reason he did not at once participate in the new quantum
dynamics initiated by Bohr in 1913. But it must have been a heavily contributing
factor.
Let us next join Einstein in Prague.
References
Dl. C. DUr, letter to R. Jost, November 29, 1979.
El. A. Einstein, letter to M. Besso, January 1903; EB, p. 3.
Ela. , letter to M. Grossmann, January 3, 1908.
Elb. M. Einstein, 'Beitrage zur Uberlieferung des Chevaliers du Cygne und der Enfance
Godefroi,' Druck, Erlangen, 1910.
E2. A. Einstein, Phys. Zeitschr. 10, 185 (1909).
E3. —, Phys. Zeitschr. 10, 817 (1909).
E4. , Phys. Zeitschr. 9, 216 (1908).
E5. , letter to J. Stark, December 14, 1908. Reprinted in A. Hermann, Sudhoffs
Archiv. 50, 267 (1966).
E6. in EB pp. 42, 47, 464.
E7. , letter to M. Besso, November 17, 1909; EB, p. 16.
E8. , Arch. Sci. Phys. Nat. 29, 5, 125 (1910).
E9. , letter to J. Laub, 1908, undated.
E10. , letter to J. Stark, July 31, 1909. Reprinted in A. Hermann, [E5].
Ell. —, letter to M. Besso, November 17, 1909; EB, p. 16.
E12. , letter to M. Besso, December 31, 1909; EB, p. 18.
E13. , letter to J. Laub, December 31, 1909.
HERR PROFESSOR EINSTEIN 1Q1
E14. , letter to J. Laub, March 16, 1910.
E15. , letter to J. Laub, Summer 1910, undated.
E16. , letter to J. Laub, November 4, 1910.
E17. , letter to J. Laub, November 11, 1910.
E18. , letter to J. Laub, December 28, 1910.
E19. , letter to M. Besso, May 13, 1911; EB, p. 19.
E20. , letter to A. Sommerfeld, September 29, 1909.
E21. , 'The Origins of the General Theory of Relavitity.' Jackson, Wylie, Glasgow,
1933.
E22. in Albert Einstein, Philosopher-Scientist (P. A. Schilpp, Ed.). Tudor, New
York, 1949.
E23. in Helle Zeit, dunkle Zeit (C. Seelig, Ed.). Europa Verlag, Zurich, 1956.
Fl. M. Fliickiger, Einstein in Bern, pp. 114ff. Paul Haupt Verlag, Bern, 1974.
F2. ,[Fl],p. 123.
F3. —, [Fl], p. 118.
HI. C. and P. Habicht, Phys. Zeitschr. 11, 532 (1910).
PI. W. Pauli in Albert Einstein: Philosopher-Scientist, p. 149.
P2. in Encyklopddie der Mathematische Wissenschaften, Vol. V, 2, Sec. 56.
Teubner Verlag, Leipzig, 1921.
Rl. G. Rasche and H. Staub, Viertelj. Schrift Naturf. Ges. Ziirich 124, 205 (1979).
51. Se, p. 166.
Sla. C. Stoll, letter to H. Ernst, March 4, 1909.
52. Se, p. 171.
53. E. G. Straus, lecture delivered at the Einstein Centennial Celebration, Yeshiva
University, September 18, 1979.
54. Se, p. 192.
55. J. Stachel in General Relativity and Gravitation, GRG Society Einstein Centennial
Volume, Vol. 1, p. 1. Plenum Press, New York, 1980.
