!3
Field Theories of Gravitation:
the First Fifty Years
13a. Einstein in Vienna
It did not take Einstein long to realize that the collaboration with Grossmann [El ]
had led to some conclusions that defeated the very task he had set himself. Let us
briefly recapitulate the developments in his thinking about gravitation up to the
spring of 1913. Late in 1907 he discovered the singular position of gravitation in
the theory of relativity. He realized that the question was not how to incorporate
gravitation into the special theory but rather how to use gravitation as a means of
breaking away from the privileged position of covariance for uniform relative
motion to covariance for general motion. In his Prague days, the analysis of the
motion of light in an inhomogeneous gravitational field taught him that the light
velocity depends on the gravitational potential and that therefore the framework
of the special theory of relativity was too narrow [E2]. Toward the end of his stay
in Prague, the technical concept of general covariance took shape in his mind and
the fundamental role of the metric tensor as the carrier of gravitation became clear.
The first steps toward the tensor theory of gravitation, taken with Grossmann, led
him to conclude that the gravitational field equations can be covariant only with
respect to linear transformations.
By August 1913, it had become clear to him that this last result spelled disaster.
He expressed this in a letter to Lorentz: .. .'My faith in the reliability of the
theory still fluctuates. .. . The gravitational equations unfortunately do not have
the property of general covariance. Only their covariance for linear transforma-
tions is assured. However, the whole faith in the theory rests on the conviction
that acceleration of the reference system is equivalent to a gravitational field.
Thus, if not all systems of equations of the theory . .. admit transformations other
than linear ones, then the theory contradicts its own starting point [and] all is up
in the air' (sie steht dann in der Luft) [E3].
Thoughts such as these must have been on Einstein's mind when he traveled
to Vienna, where on September 23 he had to present a paper before the Natur-
forscherversammlung.* He was going to report not only on his own work but also
*At that meeting, Einstein met and complimented Friedrich Kottler, who had been the first to write
the Maxwell equations in generally covariant form, though not in connection with a theory of grav-
itation [Kl]. Kottler's later involvement with general relativity was less successful [E3a].
228
FIELD THEORIES OF GRAVITATION: THE FIRST FIFTY YEARS 229
on the gravitation theory which the Finnish physicist Gunnar Nordstrom had
been developing since 1912. Furthermore, he was going to comment on yet another
recent gravitation theory, this one by Abraham (whom we encountered earlier in
the discussion of special relativity). He would also be confronted, he knew, with
still a further theory of gravity of recent vintage, one by Gustav Mie.* In one way
or another, this outpouring of gravitation theories in the years 1912 and 1913 was
a consequence of Einstein's Prague papers. Abraham had proposed to extend Ein-
stein's theory of variable light velocity in a static gravitational field to the nonstatic
case. Nordstrom had raised another question: could not the equivalence principle
be incorporated in a relativistic theory with constant light velocity? Mie's theory
was yet another variant in which c is constant. These activities during 1911-13
do not by any means mark the beginnings of the search for a field theory of grav-
itation, however. As a preface to the discussion of the confused situation at the
Vienna congress of 1913 let us briefly go back half a century.
The search began with Maxwell's remarks on a vector theory of gravitation.
These are found tucked away in his great memoir, A Dynamical Theory of the
Electromagnetic Field, completed in 1864, the purpose of which is 'to explain the
[electromagnetic] action between distant bodies without assuming the existence of
forces capable of acting directly at sensible distances. The theory I propose may
therefore be called a theory of the Electromagnetic Field . ..' [Ml]. After devoting
some forty printed pages to this problem, Maxwell abruptly and briefly turns to
gravitation: 'After tracing to the action of the surrounding medium both the mag-
netic and the electric attractions and repulsions, and finding them to depend on
the inverse square of the distance, we are naturally led to inquire whether the
attraction of gravitation, which follows the same law of the distance, is not also
traceable to the action of a surrounding medium.' But how can one explain, Max-
well asks, that the gravitational force is attractive whereas the force between elec-
tric charges of the same sign is repulsive? He notes that this requires an ad hoc
change of sign when going from the electromagnetic to the gravitational pon-
deromotive force (recall: this is a vector theory). Therefore the gravitational energy
also needs an additional minus sign. This leads to paradoxes: 'the presence of
dense bodies influences the medium so as to diminish this energy [of the medium]
wherever there is a resultant attraction. As I am unable to understand in what
way a medium can possess such properties, I cannot go any further in this direc-
tion in searching for the cause of gravitation.'
Maxwell's wise words were not generally heeded, not even by physicists of great
stature. Oliver Heaviside discussed the gravitational-electromagnetic analogy
without mentioning the negative energy difficulty [HI]. So, remarkably, did
Lorentz, in one of his rare speculative papers [LI], written in 1900. He proposed
that the repulsive forces between two particles with respective charges ( + e, + e)
equal those for (— e, —e) but are slightly weaker (in absolute magnitude) than
the attractive force for the case (+ e, — e). Then if one has, for example, two
'References to other work on gravitation from that period are found in a review by Abraham [Al]
230 RELATIVITY, THE GENERAL THEORY
neutral particles at rest, each composed of a pair of subunits (+e, — e), there is
a residual Newtonian attraction between them. The formalism of his theory con-
sists of a doubled set of Maxwell equations and ponderomotive forces (the latter
with coefficients adjusted to give the desired behavior for the various charge com-
binations). Nowhere in this strange paper is it noted that there exists a doubling
of conservation laws, one for charge and one for gravitational rest mass. Lorentz
calculated velocity-dependent corrections to Newton's law and went as far as eval-
uating their influence (too small) on the perihelion of Mercury. A few others also
examined the consequences of this theory [Gl, Wl]. In 1908 Poincare mentioned
Lorentz's gravitation theory as an example of a field theory that is compatible
with the requirements of special relativity [PI].*
As late as 1912, it was still necessary to show that all these vector theories made
no sense because of Maxwell's negative energy difficulty. At that time Abraham
pointed out that the equilibrium of a gravitational oscillator is unstable [A2]: the
amplitude of the slightest oscillation increases with emission of gravitational field
energy; there is radiation enhancement rather than radiation damping. Thus the
vector theories were buried at just about the time attention shifted to scalar
theories.
This brief period began with Einstein's paper of June 1911, in which he
showed that the velocity of light cannot generally be treated as a universal constant
in a static gravitational field [E4]. Half a year later, Abraham made the first
attempt to extend this conclusion to nonstatic fields [A3]. He tried the impossible:
to incorporate this idea of a nonconstant light velocity into the special theory of
relativity. He generalized the Newtonian equation for a point particle, K —
— V<p = a, where K is the gravitational force acting on a unit of mass, <p the
potential, and a the acceleration, to
where «,, is the four-velocity and the dot denotes differentiation with respect to
the proper time r. The function <t> is supposed to satisfy an equation of the type
where <t> and p are scalar fields. The four-velocity uf satisfies
From Eqs. 13.1 and 13.3,
* Poincare had already emphasized the need for a relativistic theory of gravitation in his memoir of
1905 [ P2], in which he discussed some general kinematic aspects of the problem without commitment
to a specific model. See also Minkowski [M2].
FIELD THEORIES OF GRAVITATION: THE FIRST FIFTY YEARS 231
since c is not a constant. Hence
or, approximately,
which is Einstein's equation of 1911 (see Eq. 11.6). No use is made of Eq. 13.2
in this derivation. The latter equation looks invariant with respect to special rel-
ativity, but of course it is not, since c is variable. Abraham commented on this in
his next communication: 'The variability of c implies that the Lorentz group holds
only in the infinitesimally small' [A4], a statement that was almost at once dis-
proved by Einstein [E5].
A debate began in the Annalen der Physik which, from Abraham's side, lacked
style and substance. In a first comment [A5], Abraham noted that relativity was
threatening the healthy development of physics since 'it was clear to the sober
observer that this theory could never lead to a complete world picture if it were
not possible ... to incorporate gravity.' He added that Einstein had given 'the
death blow to relativity' by discarding the unconditional validity of Lorentz invar-
iance.* 'Someone who, like this author [A.], has had to warn repeatedly against
the siren song of this theory will greet with satisfaction [the fact] that its originator
has now convinced himself of its untenability.' Abraham acknowledged the cor-
rectness of Einstein's technical objections to his work. In a later paper [A6], he
unveiled his 'second theory': 'I would prefer to develop the new theory of gravi-
tation without entering into [a discussion of] the space-time problem.' Abraham
now gives up Lorentz invariance altogether and introduces an absolute reference
system (see also [Al], p. 488).
Einstein shot right back, though in measured language: '[Special] relativity has
a wide range of applicability [and is] an important advance; I do not believe it has
impeded the progress of physics.... There is not the slightest ground to doubt the
general validity of the relativity principle [for uniform motion]' [E6]. He
expressed his own views about the difficult and as yet unsolved problem of gravity
by making a comparison: 'In my opinion, the situation [regarding gravity] does
not indicate the failure of the [special] relativity principle, just as the discovery
and correct interpretation of Brownian motion did not lead one to consider ther-
modynamics and hydrodynamics as heresies.' He added that he himself did not
yet understand how the equivalence principle was to be implemented in general.
Abraham did not give up and published a rebuttal [A7]. It adds nothing sub-
stantially new and is vicious: '[Einstein] craves credit for the future theory of rel-
ativity.' In reply, Einstein published a five-line statement in which he declared
*Note that these comments preceded the publication of the Einstein-Grossman paper [El].
232 RELATIVITY, THE GENERAL THEORY
that the public debate was closed as far as he was concerned [E7]. To a friend he
described Abraham's theory as 'a stately horse which lacks three legs' [E8].
I would have disregarded the Abraham-Einstein polemic were it not for the
fact that Abraham was a very good physicist. Einstein considered him to have the
best understanding of gravitation among his colleagues [E9]. Abraham's 1914
review of gravitation theories is excellent [Al]. When in 1913 Einstein decided to
leave Zurich for Berlin, he suggested to Zangger that Abraham be considered as
his successor [E10].* But, he added, 'I believe that they will proceed without me
because I have espoused the cause of the feared Abraham.'
Abraham had a great and unfortunate talent for creating difficulties for himself,
especially because of his biting sarcasm. Between himself and his visions stood
forever the figure of his demon: Einstein. He understood relativity but could not
find peace with it. He cannot be called a major scientist but should be remembered
nevertheless as a figure representing the tragic element which accompanies sci-
entific transition. He died in 1923 of a brain tumor. Born and von Laue jointly
wrote his obituary: 'He was an honorable opponent who fought with honest weap-
ons and who did not cover up a defeat by lamentation and nonfactual arguments.
The abstractions of Einstein were deeply repugnant to him; he loved his absolute
aether, his field equations, his rigid electron, as a youth does his first flame, whose
memories cannot be erased by later experiences. But he remained clearheaded
... his objections rested on basic convictions regarding physics .. . and not on lack
of knowledge' [Bl].
To return to the developments prior to the publication of the Ein-
stein-Grossmann paper, late in 1912 Nordstrom in Helsingfors (Helsinki) came
forth with an ingenious idea [Nl]. Since both Einstein and Abraham experienced
so much trouble from the ^-dependence of c, why not try to find a theory of
gravitation in which c is independent of $ and remains a universal constant in the
familiar way? As I have noted repeatedly, Einstein correctly saw from the begin-
ning that the incorporation of gravity meant the end of the unconditional validity
of special relativity. All the same, Nordstrom's question was an eminently sensible
one for its time. It is peculiar that this line of thought had remained unexplored
(or at least had not been discussed in the scientific literature) until October 1912.
As we saw from Abraham's mishandling of Eqs. 13.1-13.4, the problem is not
quite trivial. Nordstrom's idea was to let not c but, instead, mass depend on <1>.
For general mass m, he rewrote Eq. 13.1 (which referred to unit mass) as follows:
The novelty of his theory lies in the m term. From Eq. 13.7 and the obviously
unchanged Eq. 13.3, one finds
*On May 17, 1912, Einstein wrote to Wien that Abraham had become a 'convert' to his theory.
FIELD THEORIES OF GRAVITATION: THE FIRST FIFTY YEARS 233
whence
Note further that Eqs. 13.7 and 13.8 yield
in which m has disappeared. Equations 13.10 and 13.2 form the basis of Nord-
stroms first theory, in which he identified p with the 'rest mass density' [N2].
I shall leave aside further details of this theory, which left much to be desired, and
turn at once to his 'second theory', which he proposed in 1913 [N3]. Though it
was not to survive, it deserves to be remembered as the first logically consistent
relativistic field theory of gravitation ever formulated.
The main idea (which Nordstrom owed to von Laue and Einstein) is that the
only possible source for his scalar gravitational field is
the trace of the energy momentum tensor T1" (rim is, as usual, the Minkowski
metric). All the physical conclusions of the theory are due to Nordstrom himself.
I shall not follow his derivations, however, but instead describe the simple trick,
reported by Einstein at the Vienna meeting [Ell], which leads rapidly to the
desired result.
In Eq. 13.10, put $ = c2 In $. Then
This equation can be derived from the variational principle
Once one has a variational principle, one can derive the equation for the energy
momentum tensor of a particle with rest mass m and rest volume V (p = m/V),
where the particle is treated as a continuum distributed over the rest volume V:
and for its divergence
234 RELATIVITY, THE GENERAL THEORY
in which all reference to a particle with mass m has disappeared. Einstein pro-
posed to consider Eq. 13.16 to hold whatever material (and electromagnetic) sys-
tem generates T*". Put
This is Nordstrom's 'second' field equation. It follows from Eqs. 13.16 and 13.17
that
where
is the energy momentum tensor of the gravitational field. Thus the theory is
Lorentz invariant and also satisfies the conservation laws.
Now to the equivalence principle. Consider a totally static closed system. This
obeys (integrated over the system) jrj<£e = 0 (i = 1, 2, 3). Hence, JTtfjt = —
E/c2, where E is its total energy. The same relation is also true for a system in
statistical equilibrium provided E is considered as the time average, over the sys-
tem.* Go to the static weak-field limit, i^/c2 = 1 + 4>/c2, where $ is the New-
tonian potential. Then Eq. 13.17 becomes
and we have the desired result that the gravitational mass is proportional to the
total energy of the system.** As Einstein put it later, in this theory the equivalence
principle is a statistical law [E12].
About one quarter of Einstein's Vienna report, 'On the Current Status of the
Gravitation Problem,' is devoted to Nordstrom's work.f He commented only
briefly on Abraham's contributions, noting that he considered it a requirement of
any future theory that special relativity be incorporated and that Abraham had
not done so. When in the subsequent discussion Mie remarked that Nordstrom's
theory was an outgrowth of Abraham's work, Einstein replied: psychologically
yes, logically no. The incorporation of the equivalence principle was another desi-
*See [L2]. The average is to be taken over a time that evens out pressure fluctuations.
**This is the weak equivalence principle in the sense of Dicke, who further showed that the Nord-
strom theory does not satisfy the strong equivalence principle, according to which in a nonrotating
free-falling laboratory the laws of physics are those of gravity-free space, assumed to be everywhere
the same [Dl].
-(-Einstein also used this occasion to withdraw an objection to the scalar theory which he had raised
in his paper with Grossmann [El]. For other comments on scalar gravitation, see [W2].
FIELD THEORIES OF GRAVITATION: THE FIRST FIFTY YEARS 235
deratum stressed by Einstein. 'In the context [of a theory of gravitation], the Eot-
vos experiment plays a role similar to that of the Michelson experiment for uni-
form motion.' When Mie asked afterward why Einstein had not mentioned his,
Mie's, work, Einstein replied that he would discuss only theories which, unlike
Mie's, satisfy the equivalence principle.* The bulk of Einstein's report was of
course devoted to his recent work with Grossmann. It added little to what has
already been described here. At Vienna, Mie was Einstein's principal antagonist.
Shortly after this meeting, Mie wrote a further critique on Einstein's theory [M4],
to which Einstein replied by giving arguments that were in part incorrect: once
again he stressed the inevitability of the invariance of the gravitational equations
for linear transformations only [El 3].
In summary, prior to 1912 no attempt to construct a field theory of gravitation
had led anywhere. Toward the end of 1913 the situation was thoroughly con-
fused. Nordstrom's was the only consistent theory of gravitation. Most physicists
were ready to accept special relativity. A few were willing to concede the funda-
mental role of the equivalence principle, but others thought that an exaggeration.
There is no evidence that anyone shared Einstein's views concerning the limita-
tions imposed by gravitation on special relativity, nor that anyone was ready to
follow his program for a tensor theory of gravitation. Only Lorentz had given him
some encouragement. 'I am happy that you receive our investigation [E.-
Grossmann] with favor,' Einstein wrote in the same letter in which he had
expressed his own doubts about the status of his theory [E3].
Despite these reservations, Einstein was in a combative mood. Commenting on
the criticisms by Abraham and Mie, he wrote, 'I enjoy it that this affair is at least
taken up with the requisite animation. I enjoy the controversies. Figaro mood:
"Will der Herr Graf ein Tanzlein wagen? Er soil's nur sagen! Ich spiel ihm auf"
[E14].** He felt sure that the four-dimensional pseudo-Euclidean description
needed revision. 'I enjoy it that colleagues occupy themselves at all with the theory,
although for the time being with the purpose of killing it. ... On the face of it,
Nordstrom's theory ... is much more plausible. But it, too, is built on the a priori
Euclidean four-dimensional space, the belief in which amounts, I feel, to some-
thing like a superstition' [E15]. In March 1914, he expressed himself as follows
about his own efforts. 'Nature shows us only the tail of the lion. But I do not
doubt that the lion belongs to it even though he cannot at once reveal himself
because of his enormous size' [E16].f
*In Mie's theory [M3], the ratio of gravitational and inertial mass depends on physical parameters
such as velocity and temperature. Also, there is neither a red shift nor a bending of light. I do not
discuss this complicated theory here (it contains two scalar fields) because it does not contain con-
ceptually interesting points of view.
"Would the Count like to dare a little dance? Let him but say so! I'll play him a tune.
fSee Chapter 14 for comments by Einstein in 1914 on the Nordstrom theory and [E17] for his
reminiscences on scalar theories.
236 RELATIVITY, THE GENERAL THEORY
The portrait of Einstein the scientist in 1913 is altogether remarkable. He has
no compelling results to show for his efforts. He sees the limitations of what he
has done so far. He is supremely confident of his vision. And he stands all alone.
It seems to me that Einstein's intellectual strength, courage, and tenacity to con-
tinue under such circumstances and then to be supremely vindicated a few years
later do much to explain how during his later years he would fearlessly occupy
once again a similar position, in his solitary quest for an interpretation of quantum
mechanics which was totally at variance with commonly held views.
13b. The Einstein-Fokker Paper
Adriaan Daniel Fokker received his PhD degree late in 1913 under Lorentz. His
thesis dealt with Brownian motions of electrons in a radiation field [Fl] and con-
tains an equation which later became known as the Fokker-Planck equation.
After this work was completed, Lorentz sent Fokker to Zurich to work with Ein-
stein. The resulting collaboration lasted one semester only. It led to one brief paper
which is of considerable interest for the history of general relativity because it
contains Einstein's first treatment of a gravitation theory in which general covar-
iance is strictly obeyed [El8].
The authors first rewrite Eq. 13.13:
from which they conclude that the Nordstrom theory is a special case of the Ein-
stein-Grossmann theory, characterized by the additional requirement that the
velocity of light be constant. Yet the theory is, of course, more general than special
relativity. In particular, it follows from Eq. 13.21 that neither the real rate dt of
a transportable clock nor the real length dl of a transportable rod have the special
relativistic values dt0 and dl0, respectively. Rather (as Nordstrom already knew)
dt0 = dt/4/, dl0 = dl/\{/, compatible with the i/'-independence of the light velocity.
This paper is particularly notable for its new derivation of the field equation
(Eq. 13.17). 'From the investigation by mathematicians of differential tensors,'
this field equation must be of the form (they state)
where
is the curvature scalar derived from the Ricci tensor R^ (Eq. 12.20) in which the
g^ are, of course, given (in the present instance) by Eq. 13.21. Einstein and Fok-
ker go on to prove that Eq. 13.22 (with the constant adjusted) is equivalent to
Eq. 13.17!
The paper concludes with the following remark: 'It is plausible that the role
which the Riemann-Christoffel tensor plays in the present investigation would
FIELD THEORIES OF GRAVITATION: THE FIRST FIFTY YEARS 237
also open a way for a derivation of the Einstein-Grossmann gravitation equations
in a way independent of physical assumptions. The proof of the existence or non-
existence of such a connection would be an important theoretical advance.' A final
footnote states that one of the reasons given by Einstein and Grossmann [El] for
the nonexistence of such a connection was incorrect, namely, the allegedly wrong
weak-field properties of the Ricci tensor (Chapter 12).
Thus, early in 1914, just fifty years after Maxwell's first attempt at a gravita-
tion field theory, Einstein was not yet quite there but he was closing in, as the
final remark of the Einstein-Fokker paper clearly indicates. That it took him
almost another two years before he had the final answer was due in part to
important changes which were about to take place in his personal life, as we shall
see next.
References
Al. M. Abraham, Jahrb. Rod. Elekt. 11, 470 (1914).
A2. , Arch. Math. Phys. 20, 193 (1912).
A3. , Phys. Zeitschr. 13, 1, 4 (1912).
A4. , Phys. Zeitschr. 13, 310 (1912).
A5. —, AdP 38, 1056 (1912).
A6. —, Phys. Zeitschr. 13, 793 (1913).
A7. , AdP 39, 444 (1912).
Bl. M. Born and M. von Laue, Phys. Zeitschr. 24, 49 (1923).
Dl. R. H. Dicke, Ann. Phys. 31, 235 (1965).
El. A. Einstein and M. Grossmann, Z. Math. Physik. 62, 225 (1913).
E2. , AdP3», 355, 443 (1912).
E3. , letter to H. A. Lorentz, August 14, 1913.
E3a. , AdP 51, 639, (1916).
E4. ,AdP 35, 898(1911).
E5. , AdPW, 355 (1912), Sec. 4.
E6. , AdP 38, 1059(1912).
E7. ,AdP 39, 704(1912).
E8. , letter to L. Hopf, August 16, 1912.
E9. —, letter to M. Besso, late 1913; EB, p. 50.
E10. , two letters to H. Zangger; one, undated, from late 1913 or early 1914 and the
other dated July 7, 1915.
Ell. —, Phys. Zeitschr. 14, 1249 (1913); 15, 108 (1914).
E12. , Scientia 15, 337 (1914).
E13. , Phys. Zeitschr. 15, 176 (1914).
E14. , letter to H. Zangger, undated, late 1913 or early 1914.
E15. , letter to E. Freundlich, undated, early 1914.
E16. , letter to H. Zangger, March 10, 1914.
E17. in Albert Einstein, Philosopher-Scientist (P. Schilpp, Ed.), pp. 63-5. Tudor,
New York, 1949.
E18. and A. D. Fokker, AdP 44, 321 (1914).
Fl. A. D. Fokker, Phys. Zeitschr. 15, 96 (1914).
238 RELATIVITY, THE GENERAL THEORY
Gl. R. Cans, Phys. Zeitschr 6, 803 (1905).
HI. O. Heaviside, Electromagnetic Theory (3rd edn.), Vol. 1, p. 455. Chelsea, New
York, 1971.
Kl. F. Kottler, Wiener Ber. 121, 1659 (1912).
LI. H. A. Lorentz, Collected Works, Vol. 5, p. 198. Nyhoff, The Hague, 1934.
L2. M. von Laue, Das Relativitdtsprinzip, (2nd edn.), p. 208. Vieweg, Braunschweig,
1913.
Ml. J. C. Maxwell, Collected Papers, Vol. 1, p. 570. Dover, New York, 1952.
M2. H. Minkowski, Goett. Nachr., 1908, p. 53, Anhang.
M3. G. Mie, AdP 40, 1 (1913), Sec. 5.
M4. , Phys. Zeitschr. 15, 115, 169 (1914).
Nl. G. Nordstrom, Phys. Zeitschr. 13, 1126 (1912).
N2. , AdP 40, 856(1913).
N3. , AdP 42, 533 (1913).
PI. H. Poincare, Oeuvres, Vol. 9, p. 551. Gauthier-Villars, Paris, 1954.
P2. , [PI], p. 494, Sec. 9.
Wl. F. Wacker, Phys. Zeitschr. 7, 300 (1906).
W2. M. Wellner and G. Sandri, Am. J. Phys. 28, 36 (1963).
