27
The Final Decade
Einstein's mind continued to be intensely active and fully alert until the very end
of his life. During the last ten years, however, his age, the state of his health, his
never-ending urge to do physics, and the multitude of his extra-scientific involve-
ments called for economy in the use of his energies and time. He kept to simple
routines as much as possible. He would come down for breakfast at about nine
o'clock, then read the morning papers. At about ten-thirty he would walk to The
Institute for Advanced Study, stay there until one o'clock, then walk home. I know
of one occasion when a car hit a tree after its driver suddenly recognized the face
of the beautiful old man walking along the street, his black woollen knit cap firmly
planted on his long white hair. After lunch he would go to bed for a few hours.
Then he would have a cup of tea, work some more or attend to his mail or receive
people for discussions of nonpersonal matters. He took his evening meal between
six-thirty and seven. Thereafter he would work again or listen to the radio (there
was no television in his home) or occasionally receive a friend. He normally retired
between eleven and twelve. Every Sunday at noon he listened to a news analysis
broadcast by Howard K. Smith. Guests were never invited at that hour. On Sun-
day afternoons there would be walks or drives in some friend's car. Only seldom
would he go out to a play or a concert, very rarely to a movie. He would occa-
sionally attend a physics seminar at Palmer Laboratory, causing the awed hush I
mentioned before. In those last years, he no longer played the violin but impro-
vised daily on the piano. He also had stopped smoking his beloved pipes [Dl].
At the beginning of his last decade Einstein, sixty-six years old, shared his home
on Mercer Street with his sister Maja, his stepdaughter Margot, and Helen
Dukas, who took care of everything from mail to meals. Soon after the end of the
war, Maja began making preparations for rejoining her husband, Paul, who then
was living with the Bessos in Geneva [El]. It was not to be. In 1946 she suffered
a stroke and remained bedridden thereafter. Her situation deteriorated; in the end
she could no longer speak, though her mind remained clear. Every night after
dinner, Einstein would go to the room of his sister, who was so dear to him, and
read to her. She died in the Mercer Street home in June 1951.
Physics remained at the center of Einstein's being in the final decade, during
which, as I described earlier, he concentrated exclusively on unified field theory
473
474 JOURNEY S END
and on questions of principle regarding the quantum theory. His published work
during that period includes eight papers on unified field theory; a contribution to
Dialectica, written at the instigation of Pauli, in which he explained his views on
quantum mechanics [E2]; and his necrology, as he called it, the important essay
entitled 'Autobiographisches' [E3]. On rare occasions, he would give a seminar
about his work at the Institute. In order to avoid curiosity-seekers, especially the
press, announcements of such talks were made only by word of mouth. The sem-
inars themselves were lucid, inconclusive, and other-worldly. Those were the days
of striking advances in quantum electrodynamics and unexpected discoveries of
new particles, days in which the gap between Einstein's physics and the physics
of younger generations was ever widening.
At no time did Einstein immerse himself more in problems of policy and politics
than during the years following the end of the Second World War. 'The war is
won but peace is not,' he told an audience in December 1945 [E4]. He regarded
the post-war world as dangerously unstable and believed that new modes of gov-
ernance were called for. 'The first atomic bomb destroyed more than the city of
Hiroshima. It also exploded our inherited, outdated political ideas' [E5]. As early
as September 1945, he suggested that 'the only salvation for civilization and the
human race lies in the creation of a world government, with security of nations
founded upon law' [E6]. In his opinion, such a world government should be given
powers of decision which would be binding on the member states. He was skep-
tical of the United Nations because it lacked such powers. World government
remained a theme with variations to which he returned time and again in his
remaining years. He repeated it in 1950 in a message 'on the moral obligation of
a scientist': 'Mankind can be saved only if a supranational system, based on law,
is created to eliminate the methods of brute force' [E7]. That, he believed, is what
man should strive for, even if the environment were hostile to such ideals. 'While
it is true that an inherently free and scrupulous person may be destroyed, such an
individual can never be enslaved or made to serve as a blind tool' [E7]. In several
instances,* celebrated in their day, he advocated civil disobedience. 'It is my belief
that the problem of bringing peace to the world on a supranational basis will be
solved only by employing Gandhi's method on a large scale' [E8]. 'What ought
the minority of intellectuals to do against [the] evil [of suppressing freedom of
teaching] ? Frankly, I can see only the revolutionary way of non-cooperation in
the sense of Gandhi's' [E9]. These statements, dating from the ugly McCarthy
period, were rather uncommon for that time.
Einstein further believed in the necessity 'to advance the use of atomic energy
*In a letter concerning a conscientious objector [Nl] and in another one to William Frauenglass, a
high-school teacher who had been called to appear before the House Committee on Un-American
Activities [N2].
THE FINAL DECADE 475
in ways beneficial to mankind [and] to diffuse knowledge and information about
atomic energy ... in order that an informed citizenry may intelligently determin
and shape its action to serve its own and mankind's best interest,' as it is put in
the charter of the Emergency Committee of Atomic Scientists, a group of which
he was the chairman during its brief existence.* In 1954 Einstein sided with the
overwhelming majority of atomic scientists who publicly condemned the United
States government's actions in the security case against Oppenheimer.
Einstein's political views in the post-war years centered, I believe, on the themes
just described. The reader interested in a more complete picture of his actions and
beliefs is referred once again to the book Einstein on Peace [Nl], in which the
documentation of this period, covering hundreds of pages, illustrates how much
effort Einstein devoted in his last years to issues dealing with the world's future.
Some of his suggestions were perhaps unrealistic, other perhaps premature. Cer-
tain it is, though, that they originated from a clear mind and strong moral
convictions.
Two further issues, bearing on Einstein's political views but going much
deeper, must be mentioned. He never forgave the Germans. 'After the Germans
massacred my Jewish brothers in Europe, I will have nothing further to do with
Germans. ... It is otherwise with those few who remained firm within the range
of the possible' [E10]. To him those few included Otto Hahn, Max von Laue,
Max Planck, and Arnold Sommerfeld.
Einstein was devoted to the cause of Israel, even though on occasion he was
publicly critical of its government. He spoke of Israel as 'us' and of the Jews as
'my people.' It appears to me that Einstein's Jewish identity emerged ever more
strongly as he grew older. He may never have found a place that truly was home
to him. But he did find the tribe to which he belonged.
During the last years of his life, Einstein was not well.
For a number of years, he had had attacks of pain in the upper abdomen. These
lasted usually two days, were accompanied by vomiting, and recurred every few
months. In the fall of 1948, the surgeon Rudolf Nissen,** who had been called in
for consultation, diagnosed an abdominal growth the size of a grapefruit. He sug-
gested an experimental laparotomy, to which Einstein consented. On December
12 he entered the Jewish Hospital in Brooklyn. Dr Nissen performed the oper-
ation and discovered that the growth was an aneurysm in the abdominal aorta.
The aneurysm was intact, its lining was firm. Corrective measures were counter-
indicated. Einstein stayed in the hospital until the incision had sufficiently healed.
"The committee was incorporated in August 1946. Its other members were R. Bacher, H. Bethe, E.
Condon, T. Hogness, L. Szilard, H. Urey, and V. Weisskopf. This group became inactive in Jan-
uary 1949.
**Here I use an informal account by Dr Nissen [N3].
476 JOURNEY'S END
The nurse's notes indicate that he invariably responded to inquiries about his
health by saying that he felt well. He left the hospital on January 13, 1949.
About a year and a half later, it was found that the aneurysm was growing.
From then on, 'we around him knew ... of the sword of Damocles hanging over
us. He knew it, too, and waited for it, calmly and smilingly' [D2].
On March 18, 1950, Einstein put his signature to his last will and testament.
He appointed his friend, the economist Otto Nathan as executor. Nathan and
Helen Dukas were named trustees of all his letters, manuscripts, and copyrights
with the understanding that all his papers would eventually be turned over to the
Hebrew University. Other dispositions included the bequests of his books to Helen
Dukas and of his violin to his grandson Bernhard Caesar.
Among the other legatees were his sons, Hans Albert, then a professor of engi-
neering at Berkeley, and Eduard, then confined to the psychiatric hospital Burg-
holzli in Zurich. Their mother, Mileva, had died in Zurich on August 4, 1948.
My picture of Mileva has remained rather vague. Among the many difficulties
which beset her life, the poor mental health of Eduard must have been a partic-
ularly heavy burden. She saw 'Tede' regularly until the end of her life. Eduard
died in Burgholzli in 1965, Hans Albert in Berkeley in 1973.
Among the many events in later years, I single out one.
Chaim Weizmann, the first president of Israel, died on November 9, 1952.
Thereupon the Israeli government decided to offer the presidency to Einstein, who
first heard this news one afternoon from The New York Times. What happened
next has been described by a friend who was with Einstein that evening. 'About
nine o'clock a telegram was delivered . .. from the Israeli ambassador in Wash-
ington, Mr Abba Eban. The highly elaborate terms of the telegram .. . made it
quite plain that the earlier report must be true, and the little quiet household was
much ruffled. "This is very awkward, very awkward," the old gentleman was
explaining while walking up and down in a state of agitation which was very
unusual with him. He was not thinking of himself but of how to spare the
Ambassador and the Israeli government embarrassment from his inevitable
refusal.. .. He decided not to reply by telegram but to call Washington at once.
[ He got] through to the Ambassador, to1 whom he spoke briefly and almost humbly
made plain his position' [Ml].
The end came in 1955.
In March of that year, Einstein had occasion to remember three old friends.
He wrote to Kurt Blumenfeld, 'I thank you belatedly for having made me con-
scious of my Jewish soul' [Ell]. He wrote his last autobiographical sketch [E12],
a contribution to a special issue of the Schweizerische Hochschulzeitung published
on the occasion of the centenary of the ETH. In this note, he mentioned 'the need
to express at least once in my life my gratitude to Marcel Grossmann,' the friend
whose notebooks he had used as a student, who had helped him to get a job at the
patent office, to whom he had dedicated his doctoral thesis, and with whom he
had written his first paper on the tensor theory of general relativity. In the same
THE FINAL DECADE 477
month Miehele Besso died, another trusted friend from his student days, later his
colleague at the patent office, and his sounding board in the days of special rela-
tivity. In a letter to the Besso family, Einstein wrote, 'Now he has gone a little
ahead of me in departing from this curious world' [El3].
On April 11 he lent for the last time his name to a pacifist manifesto—this one
drawn up by Bertrand Russell—in which all nations are urged to renounce
nuclear weapons [N4].
On the morning of Wednesday, April 13, the Israeli consul called on Einstein
at his home in order to discuss the draft of a statement Einstein intended to make
on television and radio on the occasion of the forthcoming anniversary of Israel's
independence. The incomplete draft [N5] ends as follows. 'No statesman in a
position of responsibility has dared to take the only promising course [toward a
stable peace] of supranational security, since this would surely mean his political
death. For the political passions, aroused everywhere, demand their victims.'
These may well be the last phrases Einstein committed to paper.
That afternoon Einstein collapsed at home. The aneurysm had ruptured. Guy
K. Dean, his personal physician, was called immediately. That evening, two med-
ical friends of Einstein's were called to Princeton from New York: Rudolf Ehr-
mann, who had been his physician in Berlin, and Gustav Bucky, a radiologist. On
Thursday Frank Glenn, a cardiac and aortic surgeon from New York Hospital,
was also called in for consultation. After the doctors had deliberated, Einstein
asked Dr Dean if it would be a horrible death. Perhaps, one does not know, he
was told. Perhaps it will be minutes, perhaps hours, perhaps days [D3]. 'He was
very stoical under pain,' Dr Dean said a few days later [D4]. During this period,
Einstein often resisted being given morphine injections and firmly refused all sug-
gestions for an operation. 'I want to go when / want. It is tasteless to prolong life
artificially; I have done my share, it is time to go. I will do it elegantly' [D2]. On
Friday he was moved to Princeton Hospital. That evening a call was made to his
son Hans Albert in Berkeley, who immediately left for Princeton and arrived on
Saturday afternoon. 'On Saturday and Sunday, I was together quite a lot with my
father, who much enjoyed my company' [El4]. On Saturday Einstein called the
house to ask for his glasses. On Sunday he called for writing material [D3]. That
evening he appeared to be resting comfortably.
Alberta Rozsel, a night nurse at the hospital, was the last person to see Einstein
alive. At 1:10 a.m. on April 18, 'Mrs Rozsel noted that he was breathing differ-
ently. She summoned another nurse, who helped her roll up the head of the bed.
Right after the other nurse left, Dr. Einstein mumbled in German. Then, as Mrs
Rozsel put it, "he gave two deep breaths and expired'" [D4]. It was 1:15 in the
morning.
The news was made public at 8 a.m. The autopsy performed that morning*
*By Dr Thomas F. Harvey, who removed the brain, part of which now rests in a bottle somewhere
in Weston, Missouri [Wl].
478 JOURNEY'S END
showed that death had been caused by 'a big blister on the aorta, which broke
finally like a worn-out inner tube' [D4]. Later that morning, Hermann Weyl
came to the hospital, where he and Dr Dean spoke to reporters.
At 2 p.m. the body was removed to the Mather Funeral Home in Princeton
and from there, ninety minutes later, to the Ewing Crematorium in Trenton,
where twelve people close to Einstein gathered.* One of them spoke briefly, recit-
ing lines from Goethe's Epilog zu Schiller's Glocke. The body was cremated
immediately thereafter. The ashes were scattered at an undisclosed place.
References
Dl. H. Dukas, letter to C. Seelig, Bibl. ETH, Zurich, HS 304:133.
D2. , letter to A. Pais, April 30, 1955.
D3. , letter to C. Seelig, May 8, 1955; Bibl. ETH, Zurich, HS 304:90.
D4. G. K. Dean, The New York Times, April 19, 1955.
El. A. Einstein, letter to M. Besso, April 21, 1946; EB, p. 376.
E2. , Dialectica 2, 320 (1948).
E3. in Albert Einstein: Philosopher-Scientist (P. A. Schilpp, Ed.), p. 2. Tudor,
New York, 1949.
E4. , The New York Times, December 11, 1945.
E5. , co-signing a statement published in The New York Times, October 10, 1945.
E6. , The New York Times, September 15, 1945.
E7. , Impact 1, 104 (1950).
E8. , letter to G. Nellhaus, March 20, 1951.
E9. , letter to W. Frauenglass, published in The New York Times, June 12, 1953.
E10. , letter to A. Sommerfeld, December 14, 1946.
Ell. , letter to K. Blumenfeld, March 25, 1955.
E12. , Schweizerische Hochschulzeitung 28, 1955, special issue. Reproduced with
a small deletion in Helle Zeit, dunkle Zeit (C. Seelig, Ed.). Europa, Zurich, 1956.
E13. , letter to V. Besso, March 21, 1955; EB, p. 537.
E14. H. A. Einstein, letter to C. Seelig, April 18, 1955; Bibl. ETH, Zurich, HS 304:566.
Ml. D. Mitrany, Jewish Observer and Middle East Review, April 22, 1955.
Nl. O. Nathan and M. Norden, Einstein on Peace, p. 542. Schocken, New York, 1968.
N2. —and—, [Nl], p. 546.
N3. R. Nissen, letter to C. Seelig, June 29, 1955; Bibl. ETH, Zurich, HS 304:906/
911.
N4. O. Nathan and M. Norden, [Nl], p. 631.
N5. —and—, [Nl], pp. 643-4.
SI. C. Seelig in Helle Zeit, dunkle Zeit, p. 86. Europa Verlag, Zurich, 1956.
Wl. N. Wade, Science 213, 521 (1981).
*Their names are found in [SI].
