11
The Prague Papers
Ha. From Zurich to Prague
'I will most probably receive a call from a large university to be full professor with
a salary significantly better than I have now. I am not yet permitted to say where
it is' [El]. So Einstein wrote to his mother on April 4, 1910, less than half a year
after he had begun his associate professorship in Zurich. The call he expected was
supposed to come from the Karl-Ferdinand University, the German university in
Prague. He had to be discreet since the search committee convened in January
had not even made a proposal to the faculty yet. The experimentalist Anton
Lampa, committee chairman and Einstein's strong advocate, had sounded him out
beforehand. The committee report dated April 21, 1910, proposed three candi-
dates and stated that all of them were willing to accept a formal offer. Einstein
was the first choice. This report quotes a glowing recommendation by Planck:
'[Einstein's work on relativity] probably exceeds in audacity everything that has
been achieved so far in speculative science and even in epistemology; non-Euclid-
ean geometry is child's play by comparison.' Planck went on to compare Einstein
to Copernicus [HI].
The news spread. In July 1910 the Erziehungsrat (board of education) peti-
tioned the government of the Canton Zurich. It was noted that, according to
experts, Einstein was one of the few authorities in theoretical physics; that stu-
dents from the ETH were coming to the University of Zurich to attend his lec-
tures; that he was teaching six to eight hours per week instead of the customary
four to six; and that efforts should be made to keep him in Zurich. An annual
raise of 1000 SF was proposed. The petition was granted [PI].
It would appear that Einstein was eager to go to Prague, however. In the sum-
mer of 1910 he wrote to Laub, 'I did not receive the call from Prague. I was only
proposed by the faculty; the ministry has not accepted my proposal because of my
Semitic descent' [E2]. (I have seen no documents to this effect.) In October he
wrote to Laub that the appointment seemed pretty certain [E3], but in December
he wrote that there had been no word from Prague yet [E4]. However, on Jan-
uary 6, 1911, His Imperial and Apostolic Majesty Franz Joseph formally
approved the appointment, effective April 1. Einstein was notified by letter, dated
January 13 [HI]. Prior to the beginning of his appointment, he had to record his
religious affiliation. The answer none was unacceptable. He wrote 'Mosaisch'
192
THE PRAGUE PAPERS 193
[Fl]. On January 10, he sent his letter of resignation, which was accepted on
February 10 [P2]. In February Einstein visited Lorentz in Leiden. In March he
and his family arrived in Prague [SI].
It is mildly puzzling to me why Einstein made this move. He liked Zurich.
Mileva liked Zurich. He had colleagues to talk to and friends to play music with.
He had been given a raise. He must have known that in the normal course of
events further promotion was to be expected. Prague was not an active center of
theoretical physics. However, a letter by Kleiner to a colleague may indicate that
there were other considerations. 'After my statements about his conduct some time
ago (after which he wanted to apologize, which I once again prevented), Einstein
knows that he cannot expect personal sympathy from the faculty representatives.
I would think you may wait until he submits his resignation before you return to
this matter .. .' [Kl]. I do not know what the cause of friction was.
'I have here a splendid institute in which I work comfortably,' Einstein wrote
to Grossmann soon after his arrival in Prague [E5]. Ludwig Hopf, his assistant
from Zurich, had accompanied him but left soon afterward for a junior position
in Aachen. What little I know about Emil Nohel, Hopf's successor, is found in
Chapter 29. In the summer of 1911, Besso came for a visit [E6]. In February
1912 Einstein and Ehrenfest met personally for the first time in Prague [K2].
Otto Stern availed himself of his independent means to join Einstein there, after
having received his PhD with Sackur in Breslau [S2], and stayed with Einstein
from 1912 to 1914, first in Prague, then in Zurich.
'My position and my institute give me much joy,' Einstein wrote to Besso, but
added, 'Nur die Menschen sind mir so fremd,' (Only the people are so alien to
me) [E7]. It appears that Einstein was never quite comfortable in Prague. When
he arrived at the Institute, a porter would greet him with a bow and a 'your most
obedient servant', a servility that did not agree with him. He was bothered by
bureaucracy. 'Infinitely much paperwork for the most insignificant Dreck,' he
wrote to one friend [E5] and, 'Die Tintenscheisserei ist endlos,' to another [E7a].
His wife was not at ease either [F2]. In Einstein's day, there were four institutions
of higher learning in Prague, two universities and two institutes of technology, one
Czech and one German each. As Stern later recalled: 'At none [of these
institutions] was there anyone with whom Einstein could talk about the matters
which really interested him ... he was completely isolated in Prague . . .' [Jl].
Einstein's stay in Prague lasted sixteen months. Ehrenfest was his first choice
as his successor. This proposal came to naught because of Ehrenfest's refusal to
state a religious affiliation [K3]. Eventually Philipp Frank was named to this post
on Einstein's recommendation. Frank stayed in Prague until 1938.* In the next
chapter I shall describe Einstein's return to Zurich. First, however, let us have a
look at his physics during the Prague period.
*See Frank's biography [Fl] for other details about Einstein's Prague period.
194 RELATIVITY, THE GENERAL THEORY
lib. 1911. The Bending of Light is Detectable
Do not Bodies act upon Light at a distance, and by their action
bend its Rays; and is not this action (caeteris paribus) strongest
at the least distance?
ISAAC NEWTON: Opticks, Query 1
Einstein finally broke his silence about gravitation in June 1911 [E8]. He had
become dissatisfied with his presentation of 1907 [E9]. 'More than that, I now
realize that one of the most important consequences of those considerations is ame-
nable to experimental verification.' This is the bending of light. He had already
been aware of this phenomenon in 1907. However, at that time he had thought
only of terrestrial experiments as a means of its observation and had concluded
that these would be too hard to perform (still true to this day). Meanwhile it had
dawned on him that deflection of light by the sun could be detectable. He also had
other new conclusions to report.
The resulting paper, 'On the Influence of Gravitation on the Propagation of
Light,' is included in Das Relativitatsprinzip, which first appeared in 1913, a
handy little book (English translation, [LI]). Its later editions contain contribu-
tions to relativity theory by Lorentz, Minkowski, Einstein, and Weyl. The book
has two flaws. First, there is no contribution by Poincare. Poincare's memoir of
1905 is lengthy and does not readily fit into this small volume. However, a frag-
ment could easily have been included, especially since one of Lorentz's papers does
appear in abridged form. A second shortcoming of the book is the absence of the
brief Section V of Einstein's 1907 article [E9]. Either this piece should have been
included along with his 1911 article or else both should have been omitted, since
the finer points of the 1911 paper cannot be understood without the approxima-
tions he had used in 1907.
In the 1911 paper Einstein cautioned his readers, 'Even if the theoretical foun-
dation is correct, the relations derived here are valid only in first approximation,'
but did not add an explicit statement about the nature of this approximation. He
had yet to acquire the skill of reiterating conclusions from his own earlier work.
This is not surprising. Prior to Einstein's involvement with gravitation, each
one of his papers is transparent and self-contained (with the possible exception of
his earliest writing on the foundations of statistical mechanics) though his readers
may occasionally have to go to some effort to realize that. We have seen on various
earlier occasions that Einstein did not go to great trouble to search the literature
for contributions by others, but that was no particular hindrance to an understand-
ing of what he himself had to communicate. Of course, he would return now and
then to a subject he had discussed earlier, but then the new contribution would
again be self-contained. We know that sometimes he had thought long and hard
before gaining a new insight, as in the case of special relativity. Yet little if any
sign of the preceding struggle is found in the resulting papers, which rather give
the impression of a man hugely enjoying himself. From 1907 until 1916, this light
THE PRAGUE PAPERS 195
touch and this element of closure is missing. His style of writing changes. Instead
of statements made with characteristic finality, we find reports on work in
progress.
Turning to the first of the Prague papers, I should evidently begin with the
approximations to which Einstein referred. His problem was and remained to find
a way to give meaning to simultaneity for the case of uniformly accelerated sys-
tems. To this end, he used once again the approximate methods of 1907. Thus in
1911 the three coordinate systems S, Z, and S' discussed in Chapter 9 reappear.*
Recall that Z is in constant acceleration relative to S and that the inertial frame
S' is at one, and only one, time coincident with Z. As indicated earlier, the strategy
was to relate the clocks in S' to those in S by a Lorentz transformation and then,
for a tiny time interval, to identify the clock readings in S' with those in Z. This
is not a rigorous procedure, as we saw in Chapter 9. The approximations
explained there are the ones that also apply to the paper now under consideration.
In 1911 the four main issues were the same as in 1907: the equivalence prin-
ciple, the gravity of energy, the red shift, and the bending of light. The main
equations in these two papers are also nearly all identical. However, Einstein now
had new thoughts about each one of these four questions.
THE EQUIVALENCE PRINCIPLE
Let the frame S be at rest and let it carry a homogeneous gravitational field in the
negative z direction. Z is a field-free frame that moves with a constant acceleration
relative to S in the positive z direction. Einstein first reminds the reader of the
equivalence of Newton's mechanical laws in both frames. Then he rephrases this
principle as follows. 'One can speak as little of the absolute acceleration of the
reference frame as one can of the absolute velocity in the ordinary [special] rela-
tivity theory' (his italics). From this he concludes that 'according to this theory,
the equal fall of all bodies in a gravitational field is self-evident1 (my italics).
This seemingly innocent new twist is typical. Einstein had the gift of learning
something new from ancient wisdom by turning it around. In the present instance,
instead of following the reasoning—experimentally known equal time of fall —*•
meaninglessness of constant absolute acceleration—he reverses the direction of the
arrow of logic. Thus in 1911 we discern the first glimpses of the new Einstein
program: to derive the equivalence principle from a new theory of gravitation.
This cannot be achieved within the framework of what he called the ordinary
relativity theory, the special theory. Therefore one must look for a new theory not
only of gravitation but also of relativity. Another point made in this paper likewise
bears on that new program. 'Of course, one cannot replace an arbitrary gravita-
*In the 1911 paper, Einstein denotes the frames S, E, and S' by K, K', and K0, respectively. For
ease of presentation, I continue to use his earlier notation.
196 RELATIVITY, THE GENERAL THEORY
tional field by a state of motion without gravitational field, as little as one can
transform to rest by means of a relativity transformation all points of an arbitrarily
moving medium.' This statement would continue to be true in the ultimate general
theory of relativity.
Einstein concluded his comments on the equivalence principle by stressing
again the great heuristic significance of the assumption that it is true for all phys-
ical phenomena rather than for point mechanics only.
THE GRAVITY OF ENERGY; THE RED SHIFT
In 1907 Einstein had noted that an electromagnetic field is the source not only of
inertial energy but also of an equal amount of gravitational energy (Chapter 9).
He had reached this conclusion by studying the structure of the Maxwell equa-
tions in the frame E. He was now ready to elaborate on this result, but without
recourse to anything as specific as the electromagnetic origins of the energy in
question. His new and broader view was based on general considerations regard-
ing conservation laws. Consider (he said) the energy increase by an amount E of
an arbitrary body. According to the special theory, there is a corresponding
increase E/c2 of its inertial mass. This leads to the 'so satisfactory' conclusion that
the law of conservation of mass merges with the law of conservation of energy.
Suppose now (he continues) that there were no corresponding increase of the grav-
itational mass of the body. Then one would have to maintain a separate conser-
vation law of gravitational mass while, at the same time, there would no longer
exist a separate conservation law for inertial mass. 'This must be considered as
very improbable.' Not only the very existence of the equivalence principle but also
the gravitational properties of energy point to the incompleteness of the special
theory: 'The usual relativity theory [by itself] yields no argument from which we
might conclude that the weight of a body depends on its energy content.' However,
this dependence on energy can be derived in a rather general way if, in addition,
we invoke the equivalence principle. 'We shall show . .. that the hypothesis of the
equivalence of the systems [S and E] yields the gravity of energy as a necessary
consequence. Then he gives the following argument. (At this point the reader may
like to refresh his memory concerning the coordinate systems described in Chapter
9.)
Let there be a light receiver S, in the origin of the frame E and an emitter at a
distance h along the positive z axis, also in E. The emitter S2 emits an amount £2
of radiation energy at just that moment in which the frame S' is coincident with
E. The radiation will arrive at S, approximately after a time h/c. At that time,
S, has the velocity yh/c relative to S', 7 being the acceleration of E. Recall that
clocks in E are judged by using the inertial frame S'. Einstein could therefore use
a result of his 1905 paper on special relativity [E10]: the energy £, arriving at S,
is larger than E2:
THE PRAGUE PAPERS 197
Now go to the frame S with its gravitational field. In that frame, we install the
same equipment S, and S2 in the same relative positions as in E. Then Eq. 11.1
and the equivalence principle yield
where 0, and 02 are tne gravitational potential at positions 1 and 2, respectively.
This is the energy conservation law for the transmission process. It implies that
to an energy E there corresponds a gravitational mass E/c2, the desired result.
Next Einstein treated the red shift in a similar way. First work in E. Let the
light emitted at S2 have the frequency v2. After having traveled the approximate
time h/c, this light is received at S, with frequency i>,. To find the connection
between v2 and c,, work in S'. Then the well-known linear Doppler effect formula
gives
The equivalence principle tells us what happens in S:
Assume that this equation also holds for inhomogeneous fields. Let 2 be the sun
and 1 the earth. Then 4> is negative. A red shift is seen on earth such that &v/v
« 1(T6.
I next interrupt the discussion of the Prague paper in order to make two com-
ments. First, Einstein derives Eq. 11.2 for the energy shift; then he starts 'all over
again' and derives the frequency shift (Eq. 11.4). It is no accident, I am sure, that
he did not derive only one of these equations and from there go to the other one
with the help of
He had had something to do with Eq. 11.5. It cannot have slipped his mind; the
quantum theory never slipped his mind. However, it was Einstein's style forever
to avoid the quantum theory if he could help it—as in the present case of the
energy and the frequency shift. In Chapter 26 I shall come back to discuss at some
length this attitude of his, a main clue to the understanding of his destiny as a
physicist.
Second, in good texts on general relativity the red shift is taught twice. In a first
go-around, it is noted that the red shift follows from special relativity and the
198 RELATIVITY, THE GENERAL THEORY
equivalence principle only. Then, after the tensor equations of general relativity
have been derived and the equivalence principle has been understood to hold
strictly only in the small, the red shift is returned to and a proof is given that it is
sufficient for the derivation of the previous result to consider only the leading
deviations of g^ from its flat-space-time value. If the text is modern enough, one
is treated next to the niceties of second-order effects and to the extreme cases where
expansions break down. All this should be remembered in order to grasp better
Einstein's plight in 1911. He knows that special relativity is to be incorporated
into a more profound theory, but he does not know yet how to do that. With care
he manipulates his three coordinate systems in order to obtain Eqs. 11.1-11.4. He
knows very well that these equations are approximations, but he does not know
to what.
THE BENDING OF LIGHT
What and how can we measure? That prime question of science has a double
entendre. First of all it means, What is conceptually interesting and technically
feasible? Taken in that sense, Einstein's remarks on the red shift and the deflection
of light had given direction to the phenomenology of general relativity even before
that theory existed. The question has also a second meaning, What is a meaning-
ful measurement as a matter of principle? Also in that sense Einstein had con-
tributed by his re-analysis of simultaneity in 1905. In 1907 the study of the Max-
well equations in accelerated frames had taught him that the velocity of light is
no longer a universal constant in the presence of gravitational fields. When he
returned to this problem in 1911 he left aside, once again, these earlier dynamic
considerations. Instead, he turned to the interpretation of Eq. 11.4.
'Superficially seen, [this equation] seems to state something absurd. If light is
steadily transmitted from S2 to S,, then how can a different number of periods per
second arrive at S, than were emitted in S2? The answer is simple, however.' The
apparent trouble lay not with the number of periods but with the second: one must
examine with the greatest care what one means by the rate of clocks in an inho-
mogeneous gravitational field. This demands an understanding of the following
three facts of time.
The Clock Factory. One must first construct 'gleich beschaffene Uhren,' iden-
tically functioning clocks, to use Einstein's language. He does not state how this
is done. However, his subsequent arguments make sense only if the following
procedure is adopted. Construct a clock factory in a (sufficiently small) region of
space in which the gravitational field is constant. Synchronize the clocks by some
standard procedure. Transport these clocks, one of them (U,) to a position 1,
another one (U2) to a position 2, etc.
Local Experiments. Observe the frequency of a spectral line generated at 1
with the clock Uj. Call this frequency v(l,l) (produced at 1, measured with U,).
THE PRAGUE PAPERS 199
Next determine v(2,2), the frequency of the same* spectral line produced at 2,
measured with U2. One will find (Einstein asserts) that i»(l,l) = v(2,2), 'the fre-
quency is independent of where the light source and the [local] clock are placed.'
[Remark. This statement is not true in all rigor: even though we still cannot
calculate the displacement of spectral lines caused by local external gravitational
fields (we have no theory of quantum gravity!), we do know that such a displace-
ment must exist; it should be small within our neighborhood.]
Global Experiments. Determine v(2,l), the frequency of the same spectral
line produced at 2 but now measured at 1 with U]. As Eq. 11.4 implies, v(2,\)
¥= c(l,l). Yet, Einstein insists, we should continue to accept the physical criterion
that the number of wave crests traveling between 2 and 1 shall be independent of
the absolute value of time. This is quite possible since 'nothing forces us to the
assumption that the ["gleich beschaffene"] clocks at different gravitational poten-
tials [i.e., at 1 and at 2] should run equally fast.' (Recall that the synchronization
was achieved in the factory.)
The conclusion is inevitable: the compatibility of Eq. 11.4 with the physical
criterion implies that the clock U2 in 2 runs slower by a factor (1 + 0/c2) than
Ut in 1. This is, of course, compatible with v(2,2) = v(l,\) since the spectral
frequency in 2 also decreases by the same factor. After all, the spectral line is
nothing but a clock itself. In other words, as a result of the transport to places of
different gravitational field strength, clocks become 'verschieden beschaffen,' dif-
ferently functioning. This leads to a 'consequence of... fundamental significance':
where c, and c2 are the local light velocities at 1 and 2 (the difference between c,
and c2 is assumed to be small, so that the symbol c in Eq. 11.6 may stand for
either c, or c2). Thus Einstein restored sanity, but at a price. 'In this theory the
principle of the constancy of light velocity does not apply in the same way as in
. .. the usual relativity theory.'
The final result of the paper is the application of Eq. 11.6 to the deflection of
a light ray coming from 'infinity' and moving in the field of a gravitational point
source (i.e., a \/r potential). From a simple application of Huyghens' principle,
Einstein finds that this ray when going to 'infinity' has suffered a deflection a
toward the source given (in radians) by
where G is the gravitational constant, M the mass of the source, A the distance
of closest approach, and c the (vacuum) light velocity. For a ray grazing the sun,
*I trust that the term the same will not cause confusion.
200 RELATIVITY, THE GENERAL THEORY
A as 7 X 10'° cm, M « 2 X 1033 g, and a = 0?87 (Einstein found (K'83). This
is the answer to which four years later he would supply a further factor of 2.
The paper ends with a plea to the astronomers: 'It is urgently desirable that
astronomers concern themselves with the question brought up here, even if the
foregoing considerations might seem insufficiently founded or even adventurous.'
From this time on, Einstein writes to his friends of his hopes and fears about
gravitation, just as we saw him do earlier about the quantum theory. Shortly after
he completed the paper discussed above, he wrote to Laub:
The relativistic treatment of gravitation creates serious difficulties. I consider it
probable that the principle of the constancy of the velocity of light in its custom-
ary version holds only for spaces with constant gravitational potential. [Ell]
Evidently he did not quite know yet what to believe of his most recent work.
However, he was certain that something new was needed. A few months later, he
wrote to his friend Heinrich Zangger, director of the Institute for Forensic Med-
icine at the University of Zurich: 'Just now I am teaching the foundations of the
poor deceased mechanics, which is so beautiful. What will her successor look like?
With that [question] I torment myself incessantly' [E12].
I conclude this section by paying my respects to the German geodete and astron-
omer Johann Georg von Soldner, who in 1801 became the first to answer New-
ton's query on the bending of light [S3]. 'No one would find it objectionable, I
hope, that I treat a light ray as a heavy body... . One cannot think of a thing
which exists and works on our senses that would not have the property of matter,'
Soldner wrote.* He was motivated by the desire to check on possible corrections
in the evaluation of astronomical data. His calculations are based on Newton's
emission theory, according to which light consists of particles. On this picture the
scattering of light by the sun becomes an exercise in Newtonian scattering theory.
For small mass of the light-particles, the answer depends as little on that mass as
Einstein's wave calculation depends on the light frequency. Soldner made the scat-
tering calculation, put in numbers, and found a = 0''84!!
In 1911 Einstein did not know of Soldner's work. The latter's paper was in fact
entirely unknown in the physics community until 1921. In that turbulent year,
Lenard, in one of his attempts to discredit Einstein, reproduced part of Soldner's
paper in the Annalen der Physik [L2], together with a lengthy introduction in
which he also claimed priority for Hasenohrl in connection with the mass-energy
equivalence.** Von Laue took care of Lenard shortly afterward [L3].
*I have seen not his original paper but only an English translation that was recently published
together with informative historical data [J2].
**See Section 7b.
THE PRAGUE PAPERS 2O1
lie. 1912. Einstein in No Man's Land
Another eight months passed before Einstein made his next move in the theory of
gravitation. A scientific meeting at Karlsruhe, summer lectures at Zurich, and a
few minor papers kept him busy in the meantime. But principally he was once
again otherwise engaged by the quantum theory. This time, however, it was not
so much because that seemed the more compelling subject to him. Rather he had
taken on the obligation to prepare a major report on quantum physics for the first
Solvay Congress (October 30 to November 3, 1911). 'I am harassed by my drivel
for the Brussels Congress,' he wrote to Besso [E13]. He did not look forward to
the 'witches' sabbath in Brussels [El4].
He found the congress interesting and especially admired the way in which
Lorentz presided over the meetings. 'Lorentz is a marvel of intelligence and fine
tact. A living work of art! He was in my opinion still the most intelligent one
among the theoreticians present' [El2]. He was less impressed with the outcome
of the deliberations: ' . . . but no one knows anything. The whole affair would
have been a delight to Jesuit fathers' [E12]. 'The congress gave the impression of
a lamentation at the ruins of Jerusalem' [E15]. Obviously, these were references
to the infringements of quantum physics on classically conditioned minds. Einstein
gave the final address at the congress. His assigned subject was the quantum the-
ory of specific heats. In actual fact, he critically discussed all the problems of quan-
tum theory as they were known to exist at a time when the threats and promises
of the hydrogen atom were yet to be revealed. I shall return to this subject in
Chapter 20. As to Einstein's contribution, drivel it was not.
Then, in rapid succession, Einstein readied two papers on gravitation, one in
February 1912 [E16] and one in March 1912 [E17] (referred to in this section as
I and II, respectively). These are solid pieces of theoretical analysis. It takes some
time to grasp their logic. Yet these 1912 papers give the impression less of finished
products than of well-developed sketches from a notebook. Their style is irresolute.
The reasons for this are clear. In 1907 and 1911 Einstein had stretched the kine-
matic approach to gravitation to its limits. This time he embarked on one of the
hardest problems of the century: to find the new gravitational dynamics. His first
steps are taken gingerly.
These are also the last papers in which time is warped but space is flat. Already,
for the first time in Einstein's published work, the statement appears in paper I
that this treatment of space
is not obviously permissible but contains physical assumptions which might
ultimately prove to be incorrect; for example, [the laws of Euclidean geometry]
most probably do not hold in a uniformly rotating system in which, because of
the Lorentz contraction, the ratio of the circumference to the diameter should
be different from ir if we apply our definition of lengths.
2O2 RELATIVITY, THE GENERAL THEORY
All the same, Einstein continued to adhere to flat space. It is perhaps significant
that, immediately following the lines just quoted, he continued, 'The measuring
rods as well as the coordinate axes are to be considered as rigid bodies. This is
permitted even though the rigid body cannot possess real existence.' The sequence
of these remarks may lead one to surmise that the celebrated problem of the rigid
body in the special theory of relativity stimulated Einstein's step to curved space,
later in 1912.*
It would be as ill-advised to discuss these papers in detail as to ignore them
altogether. It is true that their particular dynamic model for gravitation did not
last. Nevertheless, these investigations proved not to be an idle exercise. Indeed,
in the course of his ruminations Einstein made a number of quite remarkable
comments and discoveries that were to survive. I shall display these in the remain-
der of this chapter, labeling the exhibits A to F. However, in the course of the
following discussion, I shall hold all technicalities to a minimum.
Einstein begins by reminding the reader of his past result that the velocity of
light is not generally constant in the presence of gravitational fields:
A. ' ... this result excludes the general applicability of the Lorentz
transformation.'
At once a new chord is struck. Earlier he had said (I paraphrase), 'Let us see
how far we can come with Lorentz transformations.' Now he says, 'Lorentz trans-
formations are not enough.'
B. 'If one does not restrict oneself to [spatial] domains of constant c, then the
manifold of equivalent systems as well as the manifold of the transformations
which leave the laws of nature unchanged will become a larger one, but in turn
these laws will be more complicated' [!!].
Let us next unveil Einstein's first dynamic Ansatz for a theory of gravitation,
to which he was led by Eq. (11.6). He begins by again comparing a homogeneous
field in the frame S(x,y,z,t) with the accelerated frame E(£,77,fVr).** For small T
—terms O(r3) are neglected—he finds
and the important relation
in which ca is fixed by the speed of the clock at the origin of £; acQ is the accel-
eration of this origin relative to S. Thus Ac = 0 in S. By equivalence Ac = 0 in
S (the A's are the respective Laplacians). 'It is plausible to assume that [Ac = 0]
"This point of view has been developed in more detail by Stachel [S4].
**I use again the notations of Chapter 9, which are not identical with those in I. In the frame S, the
light velocity is taken equal to unity.
THE PRAGUE PAPERS 203
is valid in every mass-free static gravitational field.' The next assumption concerns
the modification of this equation in the presence of a density of matter p:
where k is a constant. The source must be static: 'The equations found by me
shall refer only to the static case of masses at rest' [El8].
This last remark, referring to the gravitational field equation, does not preclude
the study of the motion of a mass point under the action of the external static field
c. This motion (Einstein finds) is given by
where v2 = ~x2. For what follows, it is important to note in what sense this equa-
tion satisfies the equivalence principle: if c is given by Eq. 11.9, then Eq. 11.11
can be transformed to a force-free equation in the accelerated frame Z.
Einstein derived Eq. 11.11 in I by a method which need not concern us. It is
quite important, on the other hand, to note a comment he made about Eq. 11.11
in a note added in proof to paper II. There he showed that this equation can be
derived from the variational principle:
Earlier, Planck had applied Eq. 11.12 to special relativistic point mechanics [P3],
where, of course, c in Eq. 11.13 is the usual constant light velocity in vacuum.
Einstein was stirred by the fact that Eqs. 11.12 and 11.13 still apply if c is a static
field!
C. 'Also, here it is seen—as was shown for the usual relativity theory by
Planck—that the equations of analytical mechanics have a significance which far
exceeds that of the Newtonian mechanics.'
It is hard to doubt that this insight guided Einstein to the ultimate form of the
mechanical equations of general relativity, in which Eq. 11.12 survives, while Eq.
11.13 is generalized further.
Paper II is largely devoted to the question of how the electromagnetic field
equations are affected by the hypothesis that c is a field satisfying Eq. 11.6. The
details are of no great interest except for one remark. The field c, of course, enters
into the Maxwell equations. Hence, there is a coupling between the gravitational
field and the electromagnetic field. However, the latter is not static in general,
whereas the gravitational field is static by assumption. Therefore '[the equations]
might be inexact . . . since the electromagnetic field might be able to influence the
gravitational field in such a way that the latter is no longer a static field.'
It is conceivable that some of my readers, upon reflecting on this last statement,
may ask the same question I did when I first read paper II. What possessed Ein-
204 RELATIVITY, THE GENERAL THEORY
stein? Why would he ever write about a static gravitational field coupled to a
nonstatic Maxwell field and hope to make any sense? I would certainly have asked
him this question, were it not for the fact that I never laid eyes on these papers
until many years after the time I knew him. I can offer nothing better than the
reply I imagine he might have given me.
The time is about 1950. Einstein speaks: 'Ja, wissen Sie, that time in Prague,
that was the most confusing period in my life as far as physics was concerned.
Before I wrote down my equation Ac = kcp, I had, of course, thought of using
the Dalembertian instead of the Laplacian. That would look more elegant. I
decided against that, however, because I already knew that gravitation would have
to lead me beyond the Lorentz transformations. Thus I saw no virtue in writing
down DC = kcp, since Lorentz in variance was no longer an obvious criterion to
me, especially in the case of the dynamics of gravitation. For that reason, I never
believed what Abraham and others were doing at that time. Poor Abraham. I did
not realize, I must admit, that one can derive an equation for a time-dependent
scalar gravitational field that does satisfy the weak equivalence principle. No, that
has nothing to do with the wrong value for the perihelion obtained from a scalar
theory. That came some years later. I thought again about a scalar theory when
I was at first a bit overawed by the complexity of the equations which Grossmann
and I wrote down a little later. Yes, there was confusion at that time, too. But it
was not like the Prague days. In Zurich I was sure that I had found the right
starting point. Also, in Zurich I believed that I had an argument which showed
that the scalar theory, you know, the Nordstrom theory, was in conflict with the
equivalence principle. But I soon realized that I was wrong. In 1914 I came to
believe in fact that the Nordstrom theory was a good possibility.
'But to come back to Prague. The only thing I believed firmly then was that
one had to incorporate the equivalence principle in the fundamental equations.
Did you know that I had not even heard of the Eo'tvos experiments at that time?
Ah, you knew that. Well, there I was. There was no paradox of any kind. It was
not like the quantum theory in those days. Those Berlin experiments on blackbody
radiation had made it clear that something was badly amiss with classical physics.
On the other hand, there was nothing wrong with the equivalence principle and
Newton's theory. One was perfectly compatible with the other. Yet I was certain
that the Newtonian theory was successful but incomplete. I had not lost my faith
in the special theory of relativity either, but I believed that that theory was likewise
incomplete. So what I did in Prague was something like this. I knew I had to start
all over again, as it were, in constructing a theory of gravitation. Of course, New-
tonian theory as well as the special theory had to reappear in some approximate
sense. But I did not know how to proceed. I was in no-man's land. So I decided
to analyze static situations first and then push along until inevitably I would reach
some contradictions. Then I hoped that these contradictions would in turn teach
me what the next step might be. Sehen Sie, the way I thought then about New-
tonian theory is not so different from the way I think now about quantum
THE PRAGUE PAPERS 205
mechanics. That, too, seens to me to be a naive theory, and I think people should
try to start all over again, first reconsidering the nonrelativistic theory, just as I
did for gravitation in Prague. .. .'*
Here my fabrications end. I now return to the 1912 papers in order to add three
final exhibits.
The inclusion of electromagnetism forced Einstein to generalize the meaning of
p in Eq. 11.10, since the electromagnetic energy has a gravitating mass equivalent:
D. The source of the gravitational field had to be 'the density of ponderable
matter augmented with the [locally measured] energy density.'
Applied to a system of electrically-charged particles and electromagnetic fields,
this would seem to mean that p should be replaced by the sum of a 'mechanical'
and an electromagnetic term. Einstein denoted this sum by the new symbol a.
However, a paradox arose. On closer inspection, he noted that the theory does not
satisfy the conservation laws of energy and momentum, 'a quite serious result
which leads one to entertain doubt about the admissibility of the whole theory
developed here.' However, he found a way in which this paradox could be
resolved.
E. 'If every energy density . . . generates a (negative) divergence of the lines of
force of gravitation, then this must also hold for the energy density of gravitation
itself.' This led him to the final equation for his field c:
He went on to show that the second term in the brackets is the gravitational field
energy density and that the inclusion of this new term guaranteed validity of the
conservation laws. From then on, he was prepared for a nonlinear theory of the
gravitational field!
It had been a grave decision to make this last modification of the c-field equa-
tion, Einstein wrote, 'since [as a result] I depart from the foundation of the uncon-
ditional equivalence principle.' Recall the discussion following Eq. 11.9: it was
that equation and the equivalence principle which had led him to Ac = 0 in the
source-free case. This same reasoning does not apply to Eq. 11.14 with <r = 0!
What was the moral?
F. It seems that [the equivalence principle] holds only for infinitely small
fields. . . . Our derivations of the equation of motion of the material point and
of the electromagnetic [field] are not illusory since [Eqs. 11.8 and 11.9 were]
applied only to infinitely small space domains.
This is the dawn of the correct formulation of equivalence as a principle that holds
only locally.
"The references to other physicists in this piece of fiction have their basis in reality, as will become
clear in later chapters.
206 RELATIVITY, THE GENERAL THEORY
Let us summarize the Prague papers.* By the spring of 1912, Einstein knew
of the red shift and the deflection of light. He had realized that the Lorentz trans-
formations are not generally applicable, that a larger invariance group was
needed, and that the laws of physics would have to be correspondingly more com-
plicated. From the study of a primitive scalar model field theory, his attention had
been drawn to the generality of the variational principle d$ds = 0 for mechanical
systems. He understood that the sources of the gravitational field were not just
ponderable matter but also field energy. He realized that gravitational field energy
is to be included as a source and that the gravitational field equations were there-
fore bound to be nonlinear. He saw that the equivalence principle apparently held
only locally. As yet, he had no theory of gravitation. But he had learned a lot of
physics.
References
El. A. Einstein, letter to Pauline Einstein, April 4, 1910.
Ela. , letter to M. Besso, March 6, 1952; EB, p. 464.
E2. , letter to J. Laub, summer 1910, undated.
E3. , letter to J. Laub, October 11, 1910.
E4. , letter to J. Laub, December 28, 1910.
E5. —, letter to M. Grossmann, March 1911.
E6. —, letter to H. Zangger, August 24, 1911.
£7. , letter to M. Besso, May 13, 1911; EB, p. 19.
E7a. , letter to A. Stern, March 17, 1912.
E8. ,AdP 35, 898(1911).
E9. , Jahrb. Rad. Elektr. 4, 411 (1907).
E10. , AdP 17, 891 (1905), Sec. 8.
Ell. , letter to J. Laub, August 10, 1911.
E12. —, letter to H. Zangger, November 16, 1911.
E13. , letter to M. Besso, September 11, 1911; EB, p. 26.
E14. , letter to M. Besso, September 21, 1911; EB, p. 32.
E15. , letter to M. Besso, December 26, 1911; EB, p. 40.
E16. , AdP 38, 355(1912).
E17. , AdP 38, 443(1912).
E18. , letter to P. Ehrenfest, June 7, 1912.
E19. , Viertelj. Schrift Ger. Medizin, 44, 37 (1912).
Fl. P. Frank, Albert Einstein, Sein Leben und Seine Zeit, p. 137, Vieweg, Braun-
schweig, 1979.
F2. ,[Fl],p. 169.
HI. J. Havranek, Acta Univ. Carolmae 17, 105 (1977).
Jl. R. Jost, Viertelj. Schrift. Naturf. Ges. Zurich 124, 7 (1979).
J2. S. Jaki, Found. Phys. 8, 927 (1978).
*A short third paper on the c-field theory, also written in Prague [E19], will be discussed later.
THE PRAGUE PAPERS 207
Kl. A. Kleiner, letter to an unidentified colleague, January 18, 1911. The original is
in the Staatsarchiv des Kantons Zurich.
K2. M. J. Klein, Paul Ehrenfest, Vol. 1, p. 176. North Holland, Amsterdam, 1970.
K3. , [K2], p. 178.
LI. H. A. Lorentz, A. Einstein, H. Minkowski, and H. Weyl, The Principle of Rela-
tivity (W. Perrett and G. B. Jeffery, Trans.). Dover, New York.
L2. P. Lenard, AdP 65, 593 (1921).
L3. M. von Laue, AdP 66, 283 (1922).
PI. Protokoll des Regierungsrates, No. 1226, July 14, 1910.
P2. Protokoll des Regierungsrates, No. 247, February 10, 1911.
P3. M. Planck, Verh. Deutsch. Phys. Ges. 8, 136 (1906).
51. Se, p. 204.
52. O. Stern, see Biogr. Mem. Nat. Ac. Set. 43, 215 (1973).
53. J. G. von Soldner, Berliner Astr. Jahrb., 1804, p. 161.
54. J. Stachel in General Relativity and Gravitation, GRG Society Einstein Centennial
Volume, Vol. 1, p. 1. Plenum Press, New York, 1980.
