1?
Unified Field Theory
17a. Particles and Fields around 1920
Einstein died early on a Monday morning. The day before, he had asked for his
most recent pages of calculations on unified field theory. The awareness of unfin-
ished work was with him, and not just in those final hours when he knew that
death was near. It had been so throughout his life. Nearly forty years earlier, he
had written to Felix Klein:
However we select from nature a complex [of phenomena] using the criterion
of simplicity, in no case will its theoretical treatment turn out to be forever
appropriate (sufficient). Newton's theory, for example, represents the gravita-
tional field in a seemingly complete way by means of the potential <j>. This
description proves to be wanting; the functions g^, take its place. But I do not
doubt that the day will come when that description, too, will have to yield to
another one, for reasons which at present we do not yet surmise. I believe that
this process of deepening the theory has no limits. [El]
That was written in 1917, shortly before he began his search for the unification
of gravitation and electromagnetism. Those were still the days in which he knew
with unerring instinct how to select complexes from nature to guide his scientific
steps. Even then he already had a keen taste for mathematical elegance as well,
but did not yet believe that formal arguments alone could be relied upon as mark-
ers for the next progress in physics. Thus, later in 1917, when Felix Klein wrote
to him about the conformal invariance of the Maxwell equations [Kl], he replied:
It does seem to me that you highly overrate the value of formal points of view.
These may be valuable when an already found [his italics] truth needs to be
formulated in a final form, but fail almost always as heuristic aids. [E2]
Nothing is more striking about the later Einstein than his change of position in
regard to this advice, given when he was in his late thirties. I do not believe that
his excessive reliance in later years on formal simplicity did him much good,
although I do not accept the view of some that this change was tragic. Nothing in
Einstein's scientific career was tragic, even though some of his work will be
remembered forever and some of it will be forgotten. In any event, when Einstein
embarked on his program for a unified field theory, his motivation was thoroughly
325
326 THE LATER JOURNEY
physical. In order to appreciate this, we must first have a brief look at the physics
of particles and fields around 1920.
During the second decade of the twentieth century, there were advances in the-
oretical physics of the highest calibre. Rutherford discovered the atomic nucleus,
Bohr the quantum theory of the atom, Einstein general relativity. It was also the
time that provided one of the most striking examples of how physicists can tem-
porarily be led astray by the selection of complexes from nature on grounds of
simplicity. The case in point is the model of the nucleus built of protons and
electrons.
Rutherford had discovered the proton (so baptized in 1919), the nucleus of the
lightest atom. Bohr had been the first to realize that beta decay is a process in
which electrons are ejected from the nucleus. What then was more obvious than
to assume that the nuclear weight was almost entirely due to a number of con-
stituent protons equal to the mass number, with the difference between mass num-
ber and charge number equal to the number of constituent electrons? The nucleus
must be considered 'as a very complex structure .. . consisting of positively-
charged particles and electrons, but it is premature (and would serve no useful
purpose) to discuss at the present time the possible structure of the nucleus itself
[Rl]. Thus Rutherford expressed himself on the structure of the atom during a
Royal Society meeting held on March 19, 1914. Even the cautious Rutherford
had but one choice for the nature of the internuclear forces. Again in 1914 he
wrote, 'The nucleus, though of minute dimensions, is in itself a very complex
system consisting of positively and negatively charged bodies bound closely
together by intense electrical forces' [R2] (my italics). Nuclear binding energy, he
conjectured, is an electromagnetic effect. 'As Lorentz has pointed out, the electrical
mass of a system of charged particles, if close together, will depend not only on
the number of these particles, but on the way their fields interact. For the dimen-
sions of the positive and negative electrons considered [a positive electron being a
proton], the packing must be very close in order to produce an appreciable alter-
ation in the mass due to this cause. This may, for example, be the explanation of
the fact that the helium atom has not quite four times the mass of the hydrogen
atom' [R3].
Thus all forces within the atom, whether peripheral or in its core, were initially
perceived to be electrical. This was a natural thought, especially since the nucleus
had been discovered to begin with by the observation that the scattering of alpha
particles on atoms was dominated by a coulomb interaction between the alpha
particle and a near-pointlike atomic core. Not until 1919 did these scatterings give
a first intimation that all was not electrical [R4]. Not until 1921 did experiments
show beyond doubt that the 1/r2 force law breaks down at small distances. 'It is
our task to find some field of force which will represent these effects. . .. The
present experiments . . . show that the forces are of very great intensity'' [Cl].
UNIFIED FIELD THEORY 327
These last words (italicized by me) represent the first instance, as best I know,
where it is stated in the literature that there are strong interactions. It was the
second great discovery by James Chadwick. His first one had been made in 1914:
the primary beta spectrum is continuous [C2]. Until well into the 1920s, this con-
tinuity was believed to have secondary causes. The neutrino was not postulated
until 1929.
Thus nuclear physics began with a nucleus without neutrons, beta decay with-
out neutrinos. Matter was made of protons and electrons. There were neither
weak nor strong interactions. In the beginning there was only electromagnetism.
And, of course, there was gravitation.
Which brings us back to unified field theory.
When Einstein, Weyl, and others began their work on unified field theory, it
was natural to assume that this task consisted exlusively of the union of gravitation
with electromagnetism. To be sure, the separateness of these two fields posed no
conflicts or paradoxes. There were no puzzles such as the Michelson-Morley
experiment nor curious coincidences like the equality of the inertial and the grav-
itational mass. Nevertheless, it seemed physically well-motivated and appealing to
ask, Do nature's only two fields of force, both long-range in character, have a
common origin?
Then it came to pass that physics veered toward a different course, neither led
nor followed by Einstein. First quantum mechanics and then quantum field theory
took center stage. New forces had to be introduced. New particles were proposed
and discovered. Amid all these developments, Einstein stayed with the unification
of gravitation and electromagnetism, the final task he set himself. This insistence
brought the ultimate degree of apartness to his life.
After his death, the urge for unification returned and became widespread, but
both the goals and the methods of pursuit are different now. At the end of this
chapter I shall comment further on this new look of the unification program. I
turn next to an account of Einstein's own efforts at unification. It remains to be
seen whether his methods will be of any relevance for the theoretical physics of
the future. Certainly this work of his did not produce any results of physical inter-
est. I therefore believe it will suffice to indicate (omitting details as much as pos-
sible) the two general directions in which he looked for the realization of his aims.
One of these, based on the extension of space-time to a five-dimensional manifold,
is discussed in the Section 17c. The other, based on generalizations of the geometry
of Riemann, is treated in Section 17e. The discussion of this second category is
preceded by a brief excursion into post-Riemannian geometry and a comment on
the influence of Einstein's general relativity on mathematics.
In the early 1920s, the structure of the nucleus was an interesting but secondary
problem and the unification of forces a minor issue. Quantum phenomena posed
the central challenge. Einstein was well aware of this when, at age forty, he began
328 THE LATER JOURNEY
his search for unification. In fact, by then he already believed that the need to
unify forces and the need to resolve the quantum paradoxes were connected
desiderata. In later years, he was one among few to search for unification and one
among few to be critical of quantum mechanics. He was unique in holding the
view that there was a link between these problem areas. In this chapter, nothing
further will be said on Einstein and quantum physics. However, in Chapter 26
I shall return to his hopes for a new dynamics, based on a generalization of general
relativity, in which quantum mechanics would be explained rather than
postulated.
17b. Another Decade of Gestation
Einstein completed his first paper on unified field theory in January 1922.
Much had happened to him since the strenuous days of November 1915, when
he completed his general relativity theory. He had done his share of applying this
theory to the energy-momentum conservation problem, to gravitational waves,
and to cosmology. He had introduced the A and B coefficients in quantum theory.
He had been ill. He had remarried. After November 1919 he had become a world
figure. He had been in the midst of turmoil in Germany. And he had made his
first trip to the United States. The problem of unification had been on his mind
in the intervening years, even though he had not published on this subject. In 1918
he wrote to Weyl, 'Ultimately it must turn out that action densities must not be
glued together additively. I too, concocted various things, but time and again I
sank my head in resignation' [E3]. His statement to Ehrenfest in 1920, 'I have
made no progress in general relativity theory. The electromagnetic field still stands
there in unconnected fashion' [E4], expressed both his disbelief in Weyl's theory
(to be described in Section 17d) and his conviction that unification is a worthy
cause. When he wrote to Weyl in 1922 about unified theories, 'I believe that in
order to make real progress one must again ferret out some general principle from
nature' [E5], he was still taking his cues from physics.
Nor were his interests in physics in those years confined to general relativity,
whether of the orthodox or of the unified variety. His letters of that period to
Ehrenfest, always filled with physics ideas that intrigued him, deal largely with
the quantum theory. In 1921 he was excited about his new proposal for an exper-
iment to test quantum aspects in Doppler phenomena [E6]. In 1922 he was
intrigued by the Stern-Gerlach experiment [E7]. His January 1922 paper on
unified field theory, written with Grommer [E8], is never mentioned in these let-
ters, but a few weeks after its completion he wrote of his work with Grommer on
quantum problems [E9]. In 1923 he and Ehrenfest worked on the quantum the-
ory of radiative equilibrium [E10], and, together with another friend,* he pub-
lished his last paper on experimental physics, a determination of the width of
*See the entry about Miihsam in Chapter 29.
UNIFIED FIELD THEORY 329
capillaries in membranes [Ell]. Late in 1924 and early in 1925, his three papers
on the Bose-Einstein gas were completed (see Chapter 23).
Meanwhile he was not altogether idle in regard to unified field theory. There
is the Einstein-Grommer paper of 1922 in response to the Kaluza theory (see
Section 17c). There are several papers in 1923 (to be discussed in Section 17e)
elaborating an attempt at unification due to Eddington. But it is not until 1925
that we witness his first truly deep immersion in this subject, as he came forth
with an invention all his own of a new version of unification.
From that time on, the character of Einstein's scientific output changes. In 1926
he wrote three papers of that playful but not at all flippant variety which he had
so often produced in earlier years, one on the meandering of rivers [E12], two on
the light emission by canal rays [El3, El4]. They were his last in this genre. The
later period begins. He is nearly fifty years old. Occasionally there are papers on
conventional general relativity, such as those on the problem of motion. But uni-
fied field theory now becomes the main thrust of his efforts, along with the search
for an alternative that deprives quantum mechanics of its status as a fundamental
theory. I have already alluded to the fact that these two themes were—in his
view—intimately related, a subject to which I shall return at more length in Sec-
tion 26e.
Heisenberg's first paper on matrix mechanics [HI] and Einstein's first privately
created unified field theory [E15] were both completed in July 1925; Schroedin-
ger's first paper on wave mechanics in January 1926 [SI]. Einstein's gestation
period before he made the real plunge into unified field theory had lasted about a
decade, just as it had been for the special and the general theories of relativity.
This time, however, it was not he but others who in the end ushered in the new
physics. So it was to remain in the next decade, and the next and the next, until
he laid down his pen and died. His work on unification was probably all in vain,
but he had to pursue what seemed centrally important to him, and he was never
afraid to do so. That was his destiny.
Let us see next what he did, first with five-dimensional theories.
17c. The Fifth Dimension
1. Kaluza and Oskar Klein. The two pioneers of unified field theory were both
mathematicians. The first unification, based on a generalization of Riemannian
geometry in the usual four space-time dimensions, was proposed by Hermann
Weyl in 1918 (see Section 17d). With the same aim in mind, and inspired by
Weyl's paper, the mathematician and consummate linguist Theodor Kaluza
became the first to suggest that unification might be achieved by extending space-
time to a five-dimensional manifold.* His one paper on this subject was published
*In 1914 Nordstrom had already proposed to use a five-dimensional space for the unification of
electromagnetism with a scalar gravitational field [Nl].
330 THE LATER JOURNEY
in 1921 [K2], but he already had this idea in 1919, for in April of that year
Einstein wrote to him, 'The idea of achieving [a unified theory] by means of a
five-dimensional cylinder world never dawned on me. ... At first glance I like
your idea enormously' [E16]. Still very much in the Machian mood, Einstein
added that one ought to examine whether this new theory would allow for a sen-
sible solution of the cosmological problem.* A few weeks later, he wrote to him
again, 'The formal unity of your theory is startling'[E18]. In 1921 he communi-
cated Kaluza's work to the Prussian Academy. (I do not know why this publica-
tion was delayed so long.)
Kaluza's well-written paper contains nearly all the main points of the five-
dimensional approach:
1. The introduction of an invariant line element
in which the metric tensor 7^ satisfies two constraints. First, the 7^ shall
depend only on the space-time coordinates x', i' = 1,. . ,4:
Secondly, 755 is assumed to be a positive numerical invariant that may be nor-
malized such that
Thus we deal with a cylinder world, the fifth axis is preferred, the fifth direc-
tion is space-like. Equation 17.3 has become known as the cylinder condition.
2. 7,5, a 4-vector field relative to the Riemannian space-time submanifold R4, is
assumed to be proportional to the electromagnetic potential.
3. The field equations are
where R^ and R are the familiar functions of the F^ and their first derivatives
and Tw is the energy-momentum tensor exclusive of the purely electromag-
netic contribution. Kaluza considered only the case where the source is a single
point particle with mass m and charge e, T1" = mu^u", u" = dx^/ds, and
showed that for ;u, v = i, j, one obtains the gravitational field equations; /n, v
= i, 5, yield the Maxwell equations; /*, v — 5, 5, reduces to a trivial identity.
The identification of the Maxwell equations requires that w5 be proportional
to e/m. Thus mil* is the 5-vector of 'momentum-energy-charge.'
4. A geodesic in the cylinder world can be identified with the trajectory of a
charged test particle moving in a combined gravitational-electromagnetic field.
*As was mentioned in Section 15e, Einstein had used the cosmological term in 1919 for the purpose
of linking electromagnetism to gravitation [E17].
where Rw is the curvature scalar in /?4. Thus /?(5) is the unified Lagrangian
for gravitation and electromagnetism! Equation 17.8 makes clear why the fac-
tor VZK was introduced in Eq. 17.6a and why it is important that 755 be taken
positive (and normalized to +1).
5. In 1926 Klein already believed that the fifth dimension might have something
to do with quantization [K4], an idea that stayed with him for many years
*In the same year, the five-dimensional unification was discovered independently by Mandel [Ml];
see also [M2] and [Fl].The relations 17.2 and 17.3 are invariant under G5.
2. Define g^ by(17.5)
(17.6)UNIFIED FIELD THEORY 331
Kaluza proved his results only for the case where the fields are weak (i.e.,
g,u, = Vw + h^, | /z,J «1, Tj55 = 1) and the velocity is small (y/c«l). An impor-
tant advance was made by Oskar Klein, who showed in 1926* that these two
constraints are irrelevant [K3]. Unification (at least this version) has nothing to
do with weak fields and low velocities. The resulting formulation has since become
known as the Kaluza-Klein theory. Its gist can be stated as follows.
1. Start with the quadratic form Eq. 17.1 and demand that it be invariant under
a group G5 of transformations that is the product of the familiar group of point
transformation G4 in R4 and the group S,, defined by
which shows that S\ is a geometrized version of the local electromagnetic gauge
group.
4. Let /?<5) be the curvature scalar in five-space. A straightforward calculation
shows thatThey are a four-vector under G4 and (since Eq. 17.1 is invariant under G5)
thev transform under S, as
(17.7)(17.6a)The g,k are symmetric; they are a tensor under G4 and are invariant under 5,.
Thus we can define g^ dx'dxk as the standard line element in R4.
3. Define the electromagnetic potentials $, by
(17.8)
(17.9)
where Ne is the charge of the particle considered and e is the charge of the
electron. Now, Klein argued [K4], since nature tells us that N is an integer,
'[Eq. 17.12] suggests that the atomicity of electricity may be interpreted as a
quantum theoretical law. In fact, if the five-dimensional space is assumed to be
closed in the direction of x5 with a period /, and if we apply the formalism of
quantum mechanics to our geodesies, we shall expect />5 to be governed by the
following rule:
Klein conjectured that '[the] smallness [of /] may explain the nonapp .-arance
of the fifth dimension in ordinary experiments as the result of averaging over
the fifth dimension.'* This same suspicion that there might be some reality to
the fifth dimension was also on Einstein's mind when, in the late 1930s, he
*In those years immediately following the discovery of quantum mechanics, there were also quite
different speculations to the effect that the fifth dimension had something to do with the new mechan-
ics. For example, it was suggested that 755 should be taken as a scalar field (rather than as a constant)
which might play the role of the Schroedinger wavefield [Gl].
George Uhlenbeck told me, 'I remember that in the summer of 1926, when Oskar Klein told us
of his ideas which would not only unify the Maxwell with the Einstein equations but also bring in
the quantum theory, I felt a kind of ecstasy! Now one understands the world!'such that /J5 is constant along a geodesic. For i = 1,... , 4, the corresponding
equations of motion yield Kaluza's result for the geodesic motion in a gravi-
tational-electromagnetic field (see, e.g., Pauli's review article [PI]) provided
one chooses
(17.12)(17.11)(17.10)332 THE LATER JOURNEY
[K5]. In particular he noted that the Lagrangian L for a particle with mass
m
(where ds is given by Eq. 17.1 and where dr is the differential proper time)
leads to five conjugate momenta p^.
Thus a length / enters the theory given by(17.13)
(17.14)
UNIFIED FIELD THEORY 333
worked for some years on the Kaluza-Klein theory. However, Einstein had
already become actively interested in Kaluza's ideas before the appearance of
Klein's papers in 1926.
2. Einstein and the Kaluza-Klein Theory. In 1922 Einstein and Grommer
addressed the question, Does Eq. 17.4 have any particle-like solutions in the
absence of 'sources,' that is, if Tm = 0? It was a question Einstein had pondered
earlier in the context of conventional general relativity. For that case we do not
know, he reasoned, how to nail down Tik(i,k = 1,... , 4) as firmly as the left-
hand side of the gravitational equations. Could we do without a TA altogether?
Perhaps, he said, since the equations for pure gravitation are nonlinear. The pos-
sibility that there are nonsingular particle-like solutions for vanishing Tik ought
to be considered. In what follows, we shall see that time and time again Einstein
kept insisting on the existence of singularity-free solutions of source-free equations
as a condition that must be met by a theory acceptable to him.
Transcribed to the Kaluza theory, the question of zero Tik becomes the question
of zero T^. Einstein and Grommer [E8] showed that 'the Kaluza theory possesses
no centrally symmetric solution which depends on the g^ only and which might
be interpreted as a (singularity-free) electron,' a conclusion which of course has
nothing to do with unified field theory per se, since it could equally well have been
asked in the context of ordinary general relativity theory.
Einstein's next papers on the five-dimensional theory are two short communi-
cations in February 1927 [E19, E20]. I should explain why these papers are a
mystery to me. Recall that in 1926 (in April, to be precise) Klein had presented
an improved version of the Kaluza theory. In August 1926 Einstein wrote to
Ehrenfest that Grommer had drawn his attention to Klein's paper: 'Subject:
Kaluza, Schroedinger, general relativity' [E21]. Ten days later, he wrote to him
again: 'Klein's paper is beautiful and impressive, but I find Kaluza's principle too
unnatural' [E22]. Then come Einstein's own two papers just mentioned, followed
by a letter to Lorentz: 'It appears that the union of gravitation and Maxwell's
theory is achieved in a completely satisfactory way by the five-dimensional theory
(Kaluza-Klein-Fock)' [E23, Fl].
There is nothing unusual in Einstein's change of opinion about a theory being
unnatural at one time and completely satisfactory some months later. What does
puzzle me is a note added to the second paper [E20]: 'Herr Mandel points out to
me that the results communicated by me are not new. The entire content is found
in the paper by O. Klein.' An explicit reference is added to Klein's 1926 paper
[K3]. I fail to understand why he published his two notes in the first place.
Einstein then remained silent on the subject of five dimensions until 1931, when
he and Walther Mayer (see Chapter 29) presented a new formalism 'which is
psychologically connected with the known theory of Kaluza but in which an exten-
sion of the physical continuum to five dimensions is avoided' [E24]. He wrote
enthusiastically to Ehrenfest that this theory 'in my opinion definitively solves the
problem in the macroscopic domain' [E25] (for the last four words read: excluding
334 THE LATER JOURNEY
quantum phenomena). This was his motivation: 'It is anomalous to replace the
four-dimensional continuum by a five-dimensional one and then subsequently to
tie up artificially one of these five dimensions in order to account for the fact that
it does not manifest itself. We have succeeded in formulating a theory which for-
mally approximates Kaluza's theory without being exposed to the objection just
stated. This is accomplished by the introduction of an entirely new mathematical
concept' [E26].
The new mathematics presented by Einstein and Mayer in two papers [E24,
E27] does not involve the embedding of the Riemann manifold R4 in a five-space.
Instead, a five-dimensional vector space M5 is associated with each point of R4
and the local Minkowski space (call it M4) is embedded in the local M5, which
has (4 + l)-metric. Prescriptions are introduced for decomposing tensors in M5
with respect to M4. The transport of 5-tensors from one M5 to another M5
attached to a neighboring point in R4 is defined. This involves a five-dimensional
connection of which (so it is arranged) some components are identified with the
Riemannian connection in R^ while, in addition, only an antisymmetrical tensor
Fu appears, which is identified with the electromagnetic field.* However (as Ein-
stein noted in a letter to Pauli [E28]), one has to assume that Fkl is the curl of a
4-vector; also, the Einstein-Mayer equations are not derivable from a variational
principle. After 1932 we find no trace of this theory in Einstein's work.
In a different environment, he made one last try at a five-dimensional theory.
He was in America now. His old friend Ehrenfest was gone. The year was 1938.
This time he had in mind not to make x* less real than Kaluza-Klein, but more
real. At first he worked with Peter Bergmann; later Valentin Bargmann joined
them. Altogether, their project was under active consideration for some three
years. Bergmann's textbook tells us what the motivation was:
It appeared impossible for an iron-clad four-dimensional theory ever to account
for the results of quantum theory, in particular for Heisenberg's indeterminacy
relation. Since the description of a five-dimensional world in terms of a four-
dimensional formalism would be incomplete, it was hoped that the indetermi-
nacy of 'four dimensional' laws would account for the indeterminacy relation
and that quantum phenomena would, after all, be explained by a [classical]
field theory. [Bl]
Their approach was along the lines of Klein's idea [K4] that the 5-space is closed
in the fifth direction with a fixed period. The group is again G5 (see Eq. 17.5).
The line element (Eq. 17.1), the condition (Eq. 17.3) on yss, and the definition
(Eq. 17.6) of gik are also maintained, but Eq. 17.2 is generalized. It is still assumed
that the 7,5 (the electromagnetic potentials) depend only on x', but (and this is
new) the gik are allowed to depend periodically on x5. The resulting formalism is
'These rules are summarized in papers by Pauli and Solomon [P2] that have been reproduced in
Pauli's collected works [P3].
Bargmann and Bergmann told me that Einstein thought that the higher Fourier
components might somehow be related to quantum fields. He gave up the five-
dimensional approach for good when these hopes did not materialize.
3. Addenda. Other attempts to use five- or more-dimensional manifolds for
a description of the physical world continue to be made.
a) Soon after the Einstein-Mayer theory, another development in five-dimen-
sional theory began, known as projective relativity, to which many authors con-
tributed.* In this theory the space-time coordinates xl are assumed to be homo-
geneous functions of degree zero in five coordinates AT1*. A Riemann metric with
invariant line element ds2 = gia,dX"dX" is introduced in the projective 5-space
(which has signature 4 + 1). The condition
where <pk are the electromagnetic potentials and F is an arbitrary homogeneous
function of degree one in the X". Thus the projective coordinates themselves are
directly related to the potentials up to a 5-gauge transformation.
The Dirac equation in projective space was discussed by Pauli [ P4]. Variational
methods were applied to this theory by Pais [P5] with the following results. Let
*For detailed references, see especially [S2]. The best introduction to this subject is a pair of papers
by Pauli [P4].
**The mathematical connection between this theory and the Kaluza-KIein theory is discussed in
[Bl].UNIFIED FIELD THEORY 335
discussed in much detail in Bergmann's book (see also [B2] and [PI]). Two ver-
sions of the theory were considered. In the first one [E29], the field equations are
derived from a variational principle. Because of the new x" dependence, they are
integro-differential equations (an integration over xs remains). They also contain
several arbitrary constants because the action can contain new invariants (depend-
ing on derivatives of the gik with respect to x5). In a second version [E30], the
variational principle is abandoned and Bianchi identities which constrain these
constants are postulated.
In theories of this kind, the g,k can be represented by (the period is normalized
to ZTT):
(17.15)
(17.16)
takes the place of the cylinder condition. The quantities 7* = dxk/dX" project
from the 5-space to the 4-space.** One proves that
(17.17)
five conservation laws which are shown to be the differential laws for conservation
of energy, momentum, and charge.
b) A number of authors, in particular Jordan [Jl], have studied an extension
of this formalism to the case where the right-hand side of Eq. 17.16 is replaced
by a scalar field. Bergmann informed me that he and Einstein also had worked
on this generalization [B3].
c) In the 1980s, particle physicists have taken up the study of field equations in
(4 + 7V)-dimensional manifolds, where '4' refers to space-time and where the
extra N variables span a compact space-like TV-dimensional domain which is sup-
posed to be so small as not to influence the usual physics in inadmissible ways.
Various values of N are being considered for the purpose of including non-Abe-
lian gauge fields. Some authors advocate dropping constraints of the type 17.2 and
17.3, hoping that the compactness in the additional dimensions will result from
'spontaneous compactification,' a type of spontaneous symmetry breaking. The
future will tell what will come of these efforts. It seems fitting to close this section
by noting that, in 1981, a paper appeared with the title 'Search for a Realistic
Kaluza-Klein Theory' [Wl].*
4. Two Options. Einstein spent much less energy on five-dimensional theories
than on a second category of unification attempts in which the four-dimensional
manifold is retained but endowed with a geometry more general than Riemann's.
At this point the reader is offered two options.
Option 1. Take my word for it that' these attempts have led nowhere thus far,
skip the next section, skim the two sections thereafter, and turn to the quantum
theory.
Option 2. If he is interested in what not only Einstein but also men like Edding-
ton and Schroedinger tried to do with these geometries, turn to the next section.
17d. Relativity and Post-Riemannian Differential Geometry
In his address on general relativity and differential geometry to the Einstein Cen-
tennial Symposium in Princeton [C3], the eminent mathematician Shiing-Shen
*In that paper, one will find references to other recent work in this direction.be the variational principle, where R is the 5-curvature scalar. All that is given
about X is that it is a scalar function of field variables and their covariant deriv-
atives. In addition, one must admit an explicit dependence of ^~on the coordinates
X". By extending the Noether methods to this more general situation, one can
derive an explicit expression for the source tensor T** in terms of jC and deriv-
atives of X with respect to the fields and to X". This tensor satisfies(17.18)THE LATER JOURNEY 336
(17.19)
UNIFIED FIELD THEORY 337
Ghern made two statements which apply equally well to the present section: 'It
is a strange feeling to speak on a topic of which I do not know half the title', and
'I soon saw the extreme difficulty of his [Einstein's] problem and the difference
between mathematics and physics.' Otherwise the overlap between this section and
Chern's paper is minor. Chern deals mainly with modern global problems of dif-
ferential geometry, such as the theory of fiber bundles, subjects which Einstein
himself never wrote about or mentioned to me. My own aim is to give an account
of unified field theory in Einstein's day, when the concerns were uniquely with
local differential geometry and when the now somewhat old-fashioned (and glob-
ally inadequate) general Ricci calculus was the main tool. Hence the main pur-
pose of this section: to give the main ideas of this calculus in one easy lesson.* A
simple way of doing this is first to consider a number of standard equations and
results of Riemannian geometry, found in any good textbook on general relativity,
and then to generalize from there.
In Riemannian geometry, we have a line element
is a tensor of the second rank. Covariant derivatives of higher covariant tensors
are deduced in the standard way. In particular, Q^, defined by
"The interested reader is urged to read Schroedinger's wonderful little book on this subject [S3].(17.20)
(17.21)invariant under all continuous point transformations x' —*• x1' = x'\x}) and a
connection Fj, related to the g^ by
ror later purposes i aistmguisn two groups 01 properties.
The First Group
\. A covariant vector field Af and a contravariant vector field B1' transform as
(17.22)
from which one deduces the transformation of higher-rank tensors by the standard
rules.
2. Contraction of a tensor of rank n (> 2) yields a tensor of rank n — 2.
3. The covariant derivative of A,., defined bv
(17.23)
THE LATER JOURNEY
(17.24)
(17.25)
(17.26)
(17.27)
(17.28)The Second Group6. The Ricci tensor Rm is defined byThis tensor plays a central role in all unified field theories discussed hereafter.5. There is a curvature tensor defined by4. The connection transforms asis a tensor of the third rank.338
1.
2.
3.
4.(17.29)
(17.30)
(17.31)
5. If A* is a contra variant vector field with a covariant derivative defined by
(17.32)
then
6. The quantity R defined by(17.33)
(17.34)
is a scalar.
7.
8. The equations(17.35)
(17.36)
UNIFIED FIELD THEORY 339
are necessary and sufficient conditions for a Riemann space to be everywhere flat
(pseudo-Euclidean).
Now comes the generalization. Forget Eqs. 17.20 and 17.21 and the second
group of statements. Retain the first group. This leads not to one new geometry
but to a new class of geometries, or, as one also says, a new class of connections.
Let us note a few general features.
a) There is no longer a metric. There are only connections. Equation 17.25,
now imposed rather than derived from the transformation properties of gm, is
sufficient to establish that AK, and R^ are tensors. Thus we still have a tensor
calculus.
b) A general connection is defined by the 128 quantities F^ and f^,. If these are
given in one frame, then they are given in all frames provided we add the rule
that even if Fj, =£ fj, then fj, still transforms according to Eq. 17.25.
c) In the first group, we retained one reference to g^, in Eq. 17.24. The reason
for doing so is that in these generalizations one often introduces a fundamental
tensor g^, but not via the invariant line element. Hence this fundamental tensor
no longer deserves the name metrical tensor. A fundamental tensor g^ is never-
theless of importance for associating with any contravariant vector A* a covariant
vector Af by the rule Af = g^A" and likewise for higher-rank tensors. The g^
does not in general obey Eq. 17.31, nor need it be symmetric (if it is not, then, of
course, g^ A' =£ g^A').
d) Since Eq. 17.28 does not necessarily hold, the order of the ju,j> indices in Eq.
17.23 is important and should be maintained. For unsymmetric Fj,, the replace-
ment of Fj, in Eq. 17.23 by F^ also defines a connection, but a different one.
e) Even if Fj, is symmetric in /i and v, it does not follow that R^ is symmetric:
we may use Eq. 17.27 but not Eq. 17.30. This remark is of importance for the
Weyl and Eddington theories discussed in what follows.
f) For any symmetric connection, the Bianchi identities
(17.37)
die vtiiiu.
g) R1^, is still a tensor, but R^, = 0 does not in general imply flatness; see the
theory of distant parallelism discussed in the next section.
h) We can always contract the curvature tensor to the Ricci tensor, but, in the
absence of a fundamental tensor, we cannot obtain the curvature scalar from the
Ricci tensor.
i) the contracted Bianchi identities Eq. 17.35 are in general not valid, nor even
defined. These last two observations already make clear to the physicist that the
use of general connections means asking for trouble.
The theory of connections took off in 1916, starting with a paper by the math-
ematician Gerhard Hessenberg [H2]. These new developments were entirely a
340 THE LATER JOURNEY
consequence of the advent of general relativity, as is seen from persistent reference
to that theory in all papers on connections which appeared in the following years,
by authors like Weyl, Levi-Civita, Schouten, Struik, and especially Elie Cartan,
who introduced torsion in 1922 [C4], and whose memoir 'Sur les Varietes a Con-
nexion Affine et la theorie de la Relativite Generalisee' [C5] is one of the papers
which led to the modern theory of fiber bundles [C3]. Thus Einstein's labors had
a major impact on mathematics.
The first book on connections, Schouten's Der Ricci-Kalkiil [S4], published in
1924, lists a large number of connections distinguished (see [S4], p. 75) by the
relative properties of FJ, and Fj,, the symmetry properties of Fj,, and the prop-
erties of Q^. It will come as a relief to the reader that for all unified-field theories
to be mentioned below, Eq. 17.33 does hold. This leads to considerable simplifi-
cations since then, and only then, product rules of the kind
(17.38)
hold true. Important note: the orders of indices in Eqs. 17.23 and 17.32 are
matched in such a way that Eq. 17.38 is also true for nonsymmetric connections.
Let us consider the Weyl theory of 1918 [W2] as an example of this formalism.
This theory is based on Eq. 17.33, on a symmetric (also called affine) connection,
and on a symmetric fundamental tensor g^ However, Qw does not vanish.
Instead:
(17.39)
(which reduces to Q^ = 0 for 4>p = 0). </>p is a 4-vector. This equation is invar-
iant under
(17.40)
(17.41)
(17.42)
where X is an arbitrary function of x". Equations 17.40-17.42 are compatible
since Eq. 17.39 implies that
(17.43)
where F*^ is the Riemannian expression given by the right-hand side of Eq.
17.21. Weyl's group is the product of the point transformation group and the
group of X transformations specified by Eqs. 17.40 and 17.41. The xx are
unchanged by X transformations, so that the thing ds2 = g^dx^dx^^-Xds2. If we
dare to think of the thing ds as a length, then length is regauged (in the same
sense the word is used for railroad tracks), whence the expression gauge transfor-
mations, which made its entry into physics in this unphysical way. The quantities
R1^ and F^ defined by
are both gauge-invariant tensors. So, therefore, is R^ (which is not symmetric
now); R is a scalar but is not gauge invariant: R' =\~1R, sinceg*"' = \~lg^.
It is obvious what Weyl was after: F^ is to be the electromagnetic field. In
addition, he could show that his group leads automatically to the five conservation
laws for energy, momentum, and charge. His is not a unified theory if one
demands that there be a unique underlying Lagrangian L that forces the validity
of the gravitational and electromagnetic field equations, since to any L one can
add an arbitrary multiple of the gauge-invariant scalar ^F^F^yg d*x. For a
detailed discussion and critique of this theory, see books by Pauli [PI] and by
Bergmann [Bl].
When Weyl finished this work, he sent a copy to Einstein and asked him to
submit it to the Prussian Academy [W3]. Einstein replied, 'Your ideas show a
wonderful cohesion. Apart from the agreement with reality, it is at any rate a
grandiose achievement of the mind' [E31]. Einstein was of course critical of the
fact that the line element was no longer invariant. The lengths of rods and the
readings of clocks would come to depend on their prehistory [E32], in conflict with
the fact that all hydrogen atoms have the same spectrum irrespective of their
provenance. He nevertheless saw to the publication of Weyl's paper, but added a
note in which he expressed his reservations [E33].* Weyl's response was not con-
vincing. Some months later, he wrote to Einstein, '[Your criticism] very much
disturbs me, of course, since experience has shown that one can rely on your intu-
ition' [W4].
This theory did not live long. But local gauge transformations survived, though
not in the original meaning of regauging lengths and times. In the late 1920s,
Weyl introduced the modern version of these transformations: local phase trans-
formations of matter wave functions. This new concept, suitably amplified, has
become one of the most powerful tools in theoretical physics.
17e. The Later Journey: a Scientific Chronology
The last period of Einstein's scientific activities was dominated throughout by
unified field theory. Nor was quantum theory ever absent from his mind. In all
those thirty years, he was as clear about his aims as he was in the dark about the
methods by which to achieve them. On his later scientific journey he was like a
traveler who is often compelled to make many changes in his mode of transpor-
tation in order to reach his port of destination. He never arrived.
The most striking characteristics of his way of working in those years are not
all that different from what they had been before: devotion to the voyage, enthu-
*In 1921, Einstein wrote a not very interesting note in which he explored, in the spirit of Weyl, a
relativity theory in which only g^dx'dx' = 0 is invariant [E34].UNIFIED FIELD THEORY
(17.44)141
(recall that R^ = 0 in the Riemannian case because of Eq. 17.29). Eddington
therefore suggested that R^ play the role of electromagnetic field.
Note further that
(17.47)
(17.48)is a scalar, where A is some constant. Define g^ by(17.46)(17.45)
where the first (second) term is the symmetric (antisymmetric) part. Not only is
R(^ antisymmetric, it is a curl: according to Eq. 17.27342 THE LATER JOURNEY
siasm, and an ability to drop without pain, regrets, or afterthought, one strategy
and to start almost without pause on another one. For twenty years, he tried the
five-dimensional way about once every five years. In between as well as thereafter
he sought to reach his goal by means of four-dimensional connections, now of one
kind, then of another. He would also spend time on problems in general relativity
(as was already discussed in Chapter 15) or ponder the foundations of quantum
theory (as will be discussed in Chapter 25).
Returning to unified field theory, I have chosen the device of a scientific chro-
nology to convey how constant was his purpose, how manifold his methods, and
how futile his efforts. The reader will find other entries (that aim to round off a
survey of the period) interspaced with the items on unification. The entries dealing
with the five-dimensional approach, already discussed in Section 17b, are marked
with a f. Before I start with the chronology, I should stress that Einstein had three
distinct motives for studying generalizations of general relativity. First, he wanted
to join gravity with electromagnetism. Second, he had been unsuccessful in obtain-
ing singularity-free solutions of the source-free general relativistic field equations
which could represent particles; he hoped to have better luck with more general
theories. Third, he hoped that such theories might be of help in understanding the
quantum theory (see Chapter 26).
1922.} A study with Grommer on singularity-free solutions of the Kaluza
equations.
1923. Four short papers [E35, E36, E37, E38] on Eddington's program for
a unified field theory. In 1921 Eddington had proposed a theory inspired by
Weyl's work [E39]. As we just saw, Weyl had introduced a connection and a
fundamental tensor, both symmetric, as primary objects. In Eddington's proposal
only a symmetric F^, is primary; a symmetric fundamental tensor enters through
a back door. A theory of this kind contains a Ricci tensor /?„, that is not symmetric
(even though the connection is symmetric). Put
UNIFIED FIELD THEORY 343
an equation akin to an Einstein equation with a cosmological constant. Then from
Eqs. 17.47 and 17.48 we derive rather than postulate a metric.
It is all rather bizarre, a Ricci tensor which is the sum of a metric and an
electromagnetic field tensor. In 1923 Weyl declared the theory not fit for discus-
sion ('undiskutierbar') [W5], and Pauli wrote to Eddington, 'In contrast to you
and Einstein, I consider the invention of the mathematicians that one can found a
geometry on an affine connection without a [primary] line element as for the pres-
ent of no significance for physics' [P6].
Einstein's own initial reaction was that Eddington had created a beautiful
framework without content [E40]. Nevertheless, he began to examine what could
be made of these ideas and finally decided that 'I must absolutely publish since
Eddington's idea must be thought through to the end' [E41]. That was what he
wrote to Weyl. Three days later, he wrote to him again about unified field theo-
ries: 'Above stands the marble smile of implacable Nature which has endowed us
more with longing than with intellectual capacity' [E42].* Thus, romantically,
began Einstein's adventures with general connections, adventures that were to
continue until his final hours.
Einstein set himself the task of answering a question not fully treated by
Eddington: what are the field equations for the forty fundamental FjJ, that take
the place of the ten field equations for the g^ in general relativity? The best equa-
tions he could find were of the form
*' . . . Dariiber steht das marmorne Lacheln der unerbittlichen Natur, die uns mehr Sehnsucht als
Geist verliehen hat.'(17.49)
where F*J, is the rhs of Eq. 17.21 and where the i had to be interpreted as the
sources of the electromagnetic field. Then he ran into an odd obstacle: it was
impossible to derive source-free Maxwell equations! In addition, there was the old
lament: 'The theory .. . brings us no enlightenment on the structure of electrons'
[E38], there were no singularity-free solutions.
In 1925 Einstein referred to these two objections at the conclusion to an appen-
dix for the German edition of Eddington's book on relativity. 'Unfortunately, for
me the result of this consideration consists in the impression that the Weyl-
Eddington [theories] are unable to bring progress in physical knowledge' [E43].
1924-5. Three papers on the Bose-Einstein gas, Einstein's last major innova-
tive contribution to physics (see Chapter 23).
7925. Einstein's first homemade unified field theory, also the first example of a
publicly expressed unwarranted optimism for a particular version of a unified
theory followed by a rapid rejection of the idea. 'After incessant search during the
last two years, I now believe I have found the true solution,' he wrote in the open-
ing paragraph of this short paper [E44].
Both the connection and a primary fundamental tensor s^ are nonsymmetric
344 THE LATER JOURNEY
in this new version. Thus there are eighty fundamental fields, all of which are to
be varied independently in his variational principle
where /?„, is once again the Ricci tensor (still a tensor, as was noted earlier).
Equation 17.50 looks, of course, very much like the variational principle in gen-
eral relativity. Indeed, Eq. 17.21 is recovered in the symmetric limit (not surpris-
ing since in that case the procedure reduces to the Palatini method [PI]). In the
general case, relations between 1^, and g^ can be obtained only up to the intro-
duction of an arbitrary 4-vector.
Einstein attempted to identify the symmetric part of gm with gravitation, the
antisymmetric part 0^ with the electromagnetic field. However, </>„, is in general
not a curl. The closest he could come to the first set of Maxwell equations was to
show that in the weak-field limit
There the paper ends. Einstein himself realized soon after the publication of
this work that the results were not impressive. He expressed this in three letters
to Ehrenfest. In the first one, he wrote, 'I have once again a theory of gravitation-
electricity; very beautiful but dubious' [E45]. In the second one, 'This summer I
wrote a very beguiling paper about gravitation-electricity .. . but now I doubt
again very much whether it is true' [E46]. Two days later, 'My work of last
summer is no good' [E47]. In a paper written in 1927 he remarked, 'As a result
of numerous failures, I have now arrived at the conviction that this road [ Weyl
—» Eddington -* Einstein] does not bring us closer to the truth' [E48].
[Remark. Einstein's work was done independently of Cartan, who was the first
to introduce nonsymmetric connections (the antisymmetric parts of the Fj, are now
commonly known as Cartan torsion coefficients). There is considerable interest by
general relativists in theories of this kind, called Einstein-Cartan theories [H3].
Their main purpose is to link torsion to spin. This development has, of course,
nothing to do with unification, nor was Einstein ever active in this direction].
1921.\ Einstein returns to the Kaluza theory. His improved treatment turns
out to be identical with the work of Klein. In January 1928 he writes to Ehrenfest
that this is the right way to make progress. 'Long live the fifth dimension' [E49].
Half a year later, he was back at the connections.
1928. All attempts at unification mentioned thus far have in common that one
could imagine or hope for standard general relativity to reappear somehow,
embedded in a wider framework. Einstein's next try is particularly unusual, since
the most essential feature of the 'old' theory is lost from the very outset: the exis-
tence of a nonvanishing curvature tensor expressed in terms of the connection by
Eq. 17.26.
It began with a purely mathematical paper [E50], a rarity in Einstein's oeuvre,
in which he invented distant parallelism (also called absolute parallelism or tele-
where 1"^ is defined by the rhs ot Eq. 17.21 (it follows Irom Eq. 17.25 that A^
is a true tensor). He hoped to be able to identify A\ with the electromagnetic
potential, but even for weak fields he was unable to find equations in which grav-
*See a letter from Cartan to Einstein [C6] (in which Cartan also notes that he had alluded to this
geometry in a discussion with Einstein in 1922) reproduced in the published Cartan-Einstein cor
respondence [Dl]. In 1929, Einstein wrote a review of this theory [E51] to which, at his suggestion,
Cartan added a historical note [C7].UNIFIED FIELD THEORY 345
parallelism). Transcribed in the formalism of the previous section, this geometry
looks as follows. Consider a contravariant Vierbein field, a set of four orthonormal
vectors h"a, a = 1,2, 3, 4; a numbers the vectors, v their components. Imagine that
it is possible for this Vierbein as a whole to stay parallel to itself upon arbitrary
displacement, that is, h'av = 0 for each a, or, in longhand,
for each a. If this is possible, then one can evidently define the notion of a straight
line (not to be confused with a geodesic) and of parallel lines. Let hm be the nor-
malized minor of the determinant of the h"a. Then (summation over a is under-
stood)(17.52)
(17.53)
The notation is proper since h,a is a covariant vector field. From Eqs. 17.52 and
17.53 we can solve for the connection:
(17.54)
H7.571)(17.56)(17.55)from which one easily deduces that
Thus distant parallelism is possible only for a special kind of nonsymmetric con-
nection in which the sixty-four FJ,, are expressible in terms of sixteen fields and
in which the curvature tensor vanishes. When Einstein discovered this, he did not
know that Cartan was already aware of this geometry.*
All these properties are independent of any metric. However, one can define an
invariant line element ds2 = g^dx"dx" with
The resulting geometry, a Riemannian geometry with torsion, was the one Ein-
stein independently invented. A week later he proposed to use this formalism for
unification [E51a]. Of course, he had to do something out of the ordinary since he
had no Ricci tensor. However, he had found a new tensor A^, to play with, defined
by346 THE LATER JOURNEY
itational and electromagnetic fields are separated, an old difficulty. There the mat-
ter rested for several months, when odd things began to happen.
On November 4, 1928, The New York Times carried a story under the heading
'Einstein on verge of great discovery; resents intrusion,' followed on November 14
by an item 'Einstein reticent on new work; will not "count unlaid eggs." ' Einstein
himself cannot have been the direct source of these rumors, also referred to in
Nature [N2], since these stories erroneously mentioned that he was preparing a
book on a new theory. In actual fact, he was at work on a short paper dealing
with a new version of unification by means of distant parallelism. On January 11,
1929, he issued a brief statement to the press stating that 'the purpose of this work
is to write the laws of the fields of gravitation and electromagnetism under a
unified view point' and referred to a six-page paper he had submitted the day
before [E52]. A newspaper reporter added the following deathless prose to Ein-
stein's statement. 'The length of this work—written at the rate of half a page a
year—is considered prodigious when it is considered that the original presentation
of his theory of relativity [on November 25, 1915] filled only three pages' [N3].
'Einstein is amazed at stir over theory. Holds 100 journalists at bay for a week,'
the papers reported a week later, adding that he did not care for this publicity at
all. But Einstein's name was magic, and shortly thereafter he heard from Edding-
ton. 'You may be amused to hear that one of our great department stores in Lon-
don (Selfridges) has posted on its window your paper (the six pages pasted up
side by side) so that passers-by can read it all through. Large crowds gather
around to read it!' [E53]. The 'Special Features' section of the Sunday edition of
The New York Times of February 3, 1929, carried a full-page article by Einstein
on the early developments in relativity, ending with remarks on distant parallelism
in which his no doubt bewildered readers were told that in this geometry paral-
lelograms do not close.* So great was the public clamor that he went into hiding
for a while [N4].
It was much ado about very little. Einstein had found that
(17.58)
is a third-rank tensor (as follows at once from Eq. 17.25) and now identified B^,
with the electromagnetic potentials. He did propose a set of field equations, but
added that 'further investigations will have to show whether [these] will give an
interpretation of the physical qualities of space' [E52]. His attempt to derive his
equations from a variational principle [E54] had to be withdrawn [E55]. Never-
theless, in 1929 he had 'hardly any doubt' that he was on the right track [E56].
He lectured on his theory in England [E57] and in France [E58] and wrote about
distant parallelism in semipopular articles [E59, E60, E61, E62]. One of his co-
workers wrote of 'the theory which Einstein advocates with great seriousness and
emphasis since a few years' [LI].
"Consider four straight lines LI,..., L4. Let L] and L2 be parallel. Let L3 intersect L, and L2.
Through a point of L, not on L3 draw L4 parallel to L3. Then L4 and L2 need not intersect.
UNIFIED FIELD THEORY 347
Einstein's colleagues were not impressed. Eddington [E63] and Weyl [W6]
were critical (for other views, see [L2] and [W7]). Pauli demanded to know what
had become of the perihelion of Mercury, the bending of light, and the conser-
vation laws of energy-momentum [P7]. Einstein had no good answer to these
questions [ E64], but that did not seem to overly concern him, since one week later
he wrote to Walther Mayer, 'Nearly all the colleagues react sourly to the theory
because it puts again in doubt the earlier general relativity' [E65]. Pauli on the
other hand, was scathing in a review of this subject written in 1932: '[Einstein's]
never-failing inventiveness as well as his tenacious energy in the pursuit of [uni-
fication] guarantees us in recent years, on the average, one theory per annum. . . .
It is psychologically interesting that for some time the current theory is usually
considered by its author to be the "definitive solution" ' [P8].
Einstein held out awhile longer. In 1930 he worked on special solutions of his
equations [E66] and began a search for identities which should play a role (with-
out the benefit of a variational principle) similar to the role of the Bianchi ident-
ities in the usual theory [E67]. One more paper on identities followed in 1931
[E68]. Then he gave up. In a note to Science, he remarked that this was the wrong
direction [E26] (for his later views on distant parallelism, see [S5]). Shortly there-
after, he wrote to Pauli, 'Sie haben also recht gehabt, Sie Spitzbube,' You were
right after all, you rascal [E69]. Half a year after his last paper on distant par-
allelism he was back at the five dimensions.
1931-2\. Work on the Einstein-Mayer theory of local 5-vector spaces.
1933. The Spencer lecture, referred to in Chapter 16, in which Einstein
expressed his conviction that pure mathematical construction enables us to dis-
cover the physical concepts and the laws connecting them [E70]. I cannot believe
that this was the same Einstein who had warned Felix Klein in 1917 against
overrating the value of formal points of view 'which fail almost always as heuristic
aids' [E2].
1935. Work with Rosen and Podolsky on the foundations of the quantum the-
ory.
1935-8. Work on conventional general relativity—alone on gravitational
lenses, with Rosen on gravitational waves and on two-sheeted spaces, and with
Infeld and Hoffmann on the problem of motion.
1938-41\, Last explorations of the Kaluza-Klein theory, with Bergmann and
Bargmann.
The early 1940s. In this period, Einstein became interested in the question of
whether the most fundamental equations of physics might have a structure other
than the familiar partial differential equations. His work with Bargmann on
bivector fields [E71, E72]* must be considered an exploration of this kind. It was
not meant to necessarily have anything to do with physics. Other such investiga-
tions in collaboration with Ernst Straus [S6] remained unpublished.**
*See Chapter 29.
**I am grateful to Professors Bargmann and Straus for discussions about this period.
348 THE LATER JOURNEY
From 1945 until the end. The final Einstein equations. Einstein, now in his
mid-sixties, spent the remaining years of his life working on an old love of his,
dating back to 1925: a theory with a fundamental tensor and a connection which
are both nonsymmetric. Initially, he proposed [E73] that these quantities be com-
plex but hermitian (see also [E74]). However, without essential changes one can
revert to the real nonsymmetric formulation (as he did in later papers) since the
group remains the G^ of real point transformations which do not mix real and
imaginary parts of the g's and the F's. The two mentioned papers were authored
by him alone, as were two other contributions, one on Bianchi identities [E75] and
one on the place of discrete masses and charges in this theory [E76]. The major
part of this work was done in collaboration, however, first with Straus [E77] (see
also [S7]), then with Bruria Kaufman [E78, E79], his last assistant. Shortly after
Einstein's death, Kaufman gave a summary of this work at the Bern conference
[K6]. In this very clear and useful report is also found a comparison with the near-
simultaneous work on nonsymmetric connections by Schroedinger [S3] and by
Behram Kursunoglu [K7].*
As the large number of papers intimates, Einstein's efforts to master the non-
symmetric case were far more elaborate during the last decade of his life than they
had been in 1925. At the technical level, the plan of attack was modified several
times. My brief review of this work starts once again from the general formalism
developed in the previous section, where it was noted that the properties of the
third-rank tensor Q^ defined by Eq. 17.24 are important for a detailed specifi-
cation of a connection. That was Einstein's new point of departure. In 1945 he
postulated the relation
plays a role; T^ is a 4-vector (use Eq. 17.25) which vanishes identically in the
Riemann case. The plan was to construct from these ingredients a theory such
that (as in 1925) the symmetric and antisymmetric parts of g^, would correspond
to the metric and the electromagnetic field, respectively, and to see if the theory
*Schroedinger treats only the connection as primary and introduces the fundamental tensor via the
cosmological-term device of Eddington. Kursunoglu's theory is more like Einstein's but contains one
additional parameter. For further references to nonsymmetric connections, see [L3, S8, and Tl].(17.60)From the transformation properties of the g^ (which, whether symmetric or not,
transform in the good old way; see Eq. 17.22 and the comment following it) and
of the rj, (Eq. 17.25), it follows that Eq. 17.59 is a covariant postulate. Further-
more, now that we are cured of distant parallelism, we once again have nontrivial
curvature and Ricci tensors given by Eqs. 17.26 and 17.27, respectively. In addi-
tion F,,. defined by(17.59)
UNIFIED FIELD THEORY 349
could have particle-like solutions. This plan had failed in 1925. It failed again this
time. I summarize the findings.
a) The order of the indices of the F's in Eq. 17.59 is important and was chosen
such that Eq. 17.59 shall remain valid if g^ —» g^ and Fj, —» rJM. Einstein and
Kaufman extended this rule to the nontrivial constraint that all final equations of
the theory shall be invariant under this transposition operation. (R^ is not invar-
iant under transposition; the final equations are. Note that the indices in Eq. 17.26
have been written in such an order that they conform to the choice made by Ein-
stein and his co-workers.)
b) In the symmetric case, Eq. 17.21 is a consequence of Eq. 17.59. This is not
true here.
c) gf, is a reducible representation of the group; the symmetric and antisym-
metric parts do not mix under G4. Therefore, the unification of gravitation and
electromagnetism is formally arbitrary. Tor this reason, Pauli sticks out his
tongue when I tell him about [the theory]' [E80]. An attempt to overcome this
objection by extending G4 was not successful.*
d) As in 1925, the variational principle is given by Eq. 17.50. After lengthy
calculations, Einstein and his collaborators found the field equations to be
the first of which is identical with Eq. 17.59, which therefore ceases to be a pos-
tulate and becomes a consequence of the variational principle. The R^ and /?„,
are the respective symmetric and antisymmetric parts of R^.
These are Einstein's final field equations.
In his own words (written in December 1954), 'In my opinion, the theory pre-
sented here is the logically simplest relativistic field theory which is at all possible.
But this does not mean that nature might not obey a more complex field theory'
[E81]. It must be said, however, that, once again, logical simplicity failed not only
to produce something new in physics but also to reproduce something old. Just as
in 1925 (see Eq. 17.51), he could not even derive the electromagnetic field equa-
tions in the weak-field approximation (see [K6], p. 234). It is a puzzle to me why
he did not heed this result of his, obtained thirty years earlier. Indeed, none of
Einstein's attempts to generalize the Riemannian connection ever produced the
free-field Maxwell equations.
In 1949 Einstein wrote a new appendix for the third edition of his The Mean-
ing of'Relativity in which he described his most recent work on unification. It was
"The idea was to demand invariance under FJ, —» FJ, + 6° d\/dx', where X is an arbitrary scalar
function. This forces FJ, to be nonsymmetric and at the same time leaves R,, invariant. However,
the final equation F, = 0 is not invariant under this new transformation.(17.61)
350 THE LATER JOURNEY
none of his doing* that a page of his manuscript appeared on the front page of
The New York Times under the heading 'New Einstein theory gives a master key
to the universe' [N5]. He refused to see reporters and asked Helen Dukas to relay
this message to them: 'Come back and see me in twenty years' [N6]. Three years
later, Einstein's science made the front page one last time. He had rewritten his
appendix for the fourth edition, and his equations (Eq. 17.61) appeared in the
Times under the heading 'Einstein offers new theory to unify law of the cosmos'
[N7].
'It is a wonderful feeling to recognize the unifying features of a complex of
phenomena which present themselves as quite unconnected to the direct experi-
ence of the senses' [E82]. So Einstein had written to Grossmann, in 1901, after
completing his very first paper on statistical physics. This wonderful feeling sus-
tained him through a life devoted to science. It kept him engaged, forever lucid.
Nor did he ever lose his sense of scientific balance. The final words on unified
field theory should be his own:
The skeptic will say, 'It may well be true that this system of equations is rea-
sonable from a logical standpoint, but this does not prove that it corresponds to
nature.' You are right, dear skeptic. Experience alone can decide on truth.
[E83]
17f. A Postscript to Unification, a Prelude to Quantum Theory
The unification of forces is now widely recognized to be one of the most important
tasks in physics, perhaps the most important one. It would have made little dif-
ference to Einstein if he had taken note of the fact—as he could have—that there
are other forces in nature than gravitation and electromagnetism. The time for
unification had not yet come.
Pauli, familiar with and at one time active in unified field theory, used to play
Mephisto to Einstein's Faust. He was fond of saying that men shall not join what
God has torn asunder, a remark which, as it turned out, was more witty than
wise. In the 1970s, unification achieved its first indubitable successes. Electro-
magnetism has been joined not to gravitation but to the weak interactions.
Attempts to join these two forces to the strong interactions have led to promising
but not as yet conclusive schemes known as grand unified theories.
The unification of gravitation with the other known fundamental forces remains
now as much of a dream as it was in Einstein's day. It is just barely possible that
supergravity** may have something to do with this supreme union and may end
our ignorance, so often justly lamented by Einstein, about T^.
*The Princeton University Press displayed the manuscript at an AAAS meeting in New York City.
**For an authoritative account of the status of supergravity, see [Zlj.
UNIFIED FIELD THEORY 351
In his attempts to generalize general relativity, Einstein had from the very
beginning two aims in mind. One of these, to join gravitation to electromagnetism
in such a way that the new field theory would yield particle-like singularity-free
solutions, was described in the preceding pages.
His second aim was to lay the foundations of quantum physics, to unify, one
might say, relativity and quantum theory.
Einstein's vision of the grand synthesis of physical laws will be described toward
the end of the next part of this book, devoted to the quantum theory. As that part
begins, we are back with the young Einstein in that radiant year 1905.
References
Bl. P. Bergmann, Introduction to the Theory of Relativity, p. 272, Prentice-Hall, New
York, 1942.
B2. , Phys. Today, March 1979, p. 44.
B3. —, Ann. Math. 49, 255, (1948).
Cl. J. Chadwick and E. S. Bieler, Phil. Mag. 42, 923 (1921).
C2. , Verh. Deutsch. Phys. Ges. 16, 383, (1914).
C3. S. Chern, in Some Strangeness in the Proportion (H. Woolf, Ed.) p. 271, Addison-
Wesley, Reading, Mass., 1980.
C4. E. Cartan, C. R. Ac. Sci. Pans 174, 437, 593 (1922).
C5. , Ann. EC. Norm. 40, 325 (1923); 41, 1 (1924). reprinted in Oeuvres Com-
pletes, Vol. 3, p. 569. Gauthier-Villars, Paris, 1955.
C6. , letter to A. Einstein, May 8, 1929.
C7. , Math. Ann. 102, 698 (1929).
Dl. R. Debever (Ed.), Elie Cartan-Albert Einstein Letters on Absolute Parallelism.
Princeton University Press, Princeton, N.J., 1979.
El. A. Einstein, letter to F. Klein, March 4, 1917.
E2. , letter to F. Klein, December 12, 1917.
E3. , letter to H. Weyl, September 27, 1918.
E4. , letter to P. Ehrenfest, April 7, 1920.
E5. , letter to H. Weyl, June 6, 1922.
E6. , PAW, 1921, p. 882.
E7. and P. Ehrenfest, Z. Phys. 11, 31 (1922).
E8. and J. Grommer, Scripta Jerusalem Univ. 1, No. 7 (1923).
E9. , letter to P. Ehrenfest, February 20, 1922.
E10. and P. Ehrenfest, Z. Phys. 19, 301 (1923).
Ell. and H. Muhsam, Deutsch. Medizin. Wochenschr. 49, 1012 (1923).
E12. , Naturw. 14, 223 (1926).
E13. , Naturw. 14, 300 (1926).
E14. , PAW, 1926, P. 334.
El5. , PAW, 1925, p. 414.
E16. , letter to T. Kaluza, April 21, 1919.
E17. , PAW, 1919, pp. 349, 463.
E18. , letter to T. Kaluza, May 5, 1919.
352 THE LATER JOURNEY
E19. , PAW, 1927, p. 23.
E20. , PAW, 1927, p. 26.
E21. , letter to P. Ehrenfest, August 23, 1926.
E22. , letter to P. Ehrenfest, September 3, 1926.
E23. , letter to H. A. Lorentz, February 16, 1927.
E24. and W. Mayer, PAW, 1931, p. 541.
E25. , letter to P. Ehrenfest, September 17, 1931.
E26. , Science 74, 438 (1931).
E27. and W. Mayer, PAW, 1932, p. 130.
E28. , letter to W. Pauli, January 22, 1932.
E29. and P. Bergmann, Ann. Math. 39, 683 (1938).
E30. , V. Bargmann, and P. Bergmann, T. von Kdrmdn Anniversary Volume, p.
212. California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, 1941.
E31. , letter to H. Weyl, April 8, 1918.
E32. , letter to H. Weyl, April 15, 1918.
E33. —, PAW, 1918, p. 478.
E34. , PAW, 1921, p. 261.
E35. —, PAW, 1923, p. 32.
E36. , PAW, 1923, p. 76.
E37. —, PAW, 1923, p. 137.
E38. , Nature 112, 448 (1923).
E39. A. S. Eddington, Proc. Roy. Soc. 99, 104 (1921).
E40. A. Einstein, letter to H. Weyl, June 6, 1922.
E41. , letter to H. Weyl, May 23, 1923.
E42. , letter to H. Weyl, May 26, 1923.
E43. , appendix to A. S. Eddington, Relativitdtstheorie. Springer, Berlin, 1925.
E44. , PAW, 1925, p. 414.
E45. , letter to P. Ehrenfest, August 18, 1925.
E46. —, letter to P. Ehrenfest, September 18, 1925.
E47. , letter to P. Ehrenfest, September 20, 1925.
E48. , Math Ann. 97, 99 (1927).
E49. , letter to P. Ehrenfest, January 21, 1928.
E50. , PAW, 1928, p. 217.
E51. , Math Ann. 102, 685 (1929).
E51a. , PAW, 1928, p. 224.
E52. , PAW, 1929, p. 2.
E53. A. S. Eddington, letter to A. Einstein, February 11, 1929.
E54. A. Einstein, PAW, 1929, p. 156.
E55. , PAW, 1930, p. 18.
E56. Festschrift Prof. Dr. A. Stodola p. 126. Fussli, Zurich, 1929.
E57. , Science 71, 608 (1930).
E58. , Ann. Inst. H. Poincare 1, 1 (1930).
E59. , Die Karaite, 1930, pp. 486-7.
E60. , Forum Philosophicum 1, 173 (1930).
E61. , The Yale University Library Gazette 6, 3 (1930).
E62. , Die Quelle 82, 440 (1932).
E63. A. S. Eddington, Nature 123, 280 (1929).
UNIFIED FIELD THEORY 353
E64. A. Einstein, letter to W. Pauli, December 24, 1929.
E65. , letter to W. Mayer, January 1, 1930.
E66. and W. Mayer, PAW, 1930, p. 110.
E67. , PAW, 1930, p. 401.
E68. and W. Mayer, PAW, 1931, p. 257.
E69. , letter to W. Pauli, January 22, 1932.
E70. , On the Method of Theoretical Physics. Oxford University Press, Oxford,
1933.
E71. and V. Bargmann, Ann. Math. 45, 1 (1944).
E72. —, Ann. Math. 45, 15 (1944).
E73. , Ann. Math. 46, 578 (1945).
E74. , Rev. Mod. Phys. 20, 35 (1948).
E75. , Can. J. Math. 2, 120 (1950).
E76. , Phys. Rev. 89, 321 (1953).
E77. and E. Straus, Ann. Math. 47, 731 (1946).
E78. and B. Kaufman, Ann. Math. 59, 230 (1954).
E79. and , Ann. Math. 62, 128 (1955).
E80. , letter to E. Schroedinger, January 22, 1946.
E81. , The Meaning of Relativity (5th edn.), p. 163. Princeton University Press,
Princeton, N.J. 1955.
E82. , letter to M. Grossmann, April 14, 1901.
E83. , Sci. Am., April 1950, p. 17.
Fl. V. Fock, Z. Phys. 39, 226 (1926).
Gl. F. Gonseth and G. Juret, C. R. Ac. Sci. Paris 185, 448, 535 (1927).
HI. W. Heisenberg, Z. Phys. 33, 879 (1926).
H2. G. Hessenberg, Math. Ann. 78, 187 (1916).
H3. F. Hehl, P. von der Heyde, G. D. Kerlick, and J. Nester, Rev. Mod. Phys. 48, 393
(1976).
Jl. P. Jordan, Schwerkraft und Weltall (2nd edn.). Vieweg, Braunschweig, 1955.
Kl. F. Klein, Gesammelte Mathematische Abhandungen, Vol. 1, p. 533. Springer,
Berlin, 1921.
K2. T. Kaluza, PAW,\<)2\, p. 966.
K3. O. Klein, Z. Phys. 37, 895 (1926).
K4. , Nature 118, 516 (1926).
K5. , Helv. Phys. Acta, Suppl. IV, 58 (1956).
K6. B. Kaufman, Helv. Phys. Acta, Suppl. IV, 227 (1956).
K7. B. Kursunoglu, Phys. Rev. 88, 1369 (1952).
LI. C. Lanczos, Erg. Ex. Naturw. 10, 97 (1931).
L2. T. Levi-Civita, Nature 123, 678 (1929).
L3. A. Lichnerowicz, Theories Relativistes de la Gravitation et de I'Electromagnetisme,
Chap. 4. Masson, Paris, 1955.
Ml. H. Mandel, Z. Phys. 39, 136 (1926).
M2. H. Mandel. Z. Phys. 45, 285 (1927).
Nl. G. Nordstrom, Phys. Zeitschr. 15, 504 (1914).
N2. Nature, 123, 174 (1929).
N3. New York Times, January 12, 1929.
N4. New York Times, February 4, 1929.
354 THE LATER JOURNEY
N5. New York Times, December 27, 1949.
N6. New York Times, December 28, 1949.
N7. New York Times, March 30, 1953.
PI. W. Pauli, Theory of Relativity (G. Field, Tran.), Supplementary Note 23. Perga-
mon Press, London, 1958.
P2. and J. Solomon, /. Phys. Radium 3, 452, 582 (1932).
P3. , Collected Scientific papers (R. Kronig and V. Weisskopf, Eds.), Vol. 2, p.
461. Interscience, New York, 1964.
P4. , AdP 18, 305, 337 (1933); Collected Papers, Vol. 2, p. 630. Interscience, New
York, 1964.
P5. A. Pais, Physica 8, 1137 (1941).
P6. W. Pauli, letter to A. S. Eddington, September 20, 1923. Reprinted in Scientific
Correspondence, p. 115. Springer, New York, 1979.
P7. , letter to A. Einstein, December 19, 1929. reprinted in Scientific Correspon-
dence, Vol. 1, p. 526.
P8. , Naturw. 20, 186 (1932); Collected Papers, Vol. 2. p. 1399.
Rl. E. Rutherford, Proc. Roy. Soc. A90, addendum (1914).
R2. , Scientia 16, 337 (1914).
R3. , Phil. Mag. 27, 488 (1914).
R4. , Phil. Mag. 37, 537 (1919).
51. E. Schroedinger, AdP 79, 361 (1926).
52. E. Schmutzer, Relativistische Physik, Chap. 10. Teubner, Leibzig, 1968.
53. E. Schroedinger, Space-Time Structure. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
1950.
54. J. Schouten, Der Ricci-Kalkul. Springer, Berlin, 1924.
55. H. Salzer, Arch. Hist. Ex. Sci. 12, 88 (1973).
56. E. Straus in Some Strangeness in the Proportion (H. Woolf, Ed.), p. 483. Addison-
Wesley, Reading, Mass., 1980.
57. E. Straus, Rev. Mod. Phys. 21, 414 (1949).
58. J. Schouten, Ricci-Calculus (2nd edn.), Chap. 3, Sec. 11. Springer, Berlin, 1954.
Tl. M. A. Tonnelat, Einstein's Unified Field Theory. Gordon and Breach, New York,
1966.
Wl. E. Witten, Nucl. Phys. B186, 412 (1981).
W2. H. Weyl, PAW, 1918, p. 465.
W3. —, letter to A. Einstein, April 5, 1918.
W4. , letter to A. Einstein, December 10, 1918.
W5. , Raum, Zeit, Materie (5th edn.), Appendix 4. Springer, Berlin, 1923.
W6. , Z. Phys. 56, 330 (1929).
W7. N. Wiener and M. Vallarta, Nature 123, 317 (1929).
Zl. B. Zumino, Einstein Symposium Berlin, p. 114. Springer, New York, 1979.
VI
THE QUANTUM THEORY
Apart, adv., 4. Away from others in action or function; separately,
independently, individually. . . .
Oxford English Dictionary
This page intentionally left blank 