21
The Photon
2 la. The Fusion of Particles and Waves and Einstein's Destiny
I now continue the tale of the light-quantum, a subject on which Einstein pub-
lished first in 1905, then again in 1906. Not long thereafter, there began the period
I earlier called 'three and a half years of silence,' during which he was again
intensely preoccupied with radiation and during which he wrote to Laub, 'I am
incessantly busy with the question of radiation.. .. This quantum question is so
uncommonly important and difficult that it should concern everyone' [El]. Our
next subject will be two profound papers on radiation published in 1909. The first
one [E2] was completed while Einstein was still a technical expert second class at
the patent office. The second one [E3] was presented to a conference at Salzburg
in September, shortly after he had been appointed associate professor in Zurich.
These papers are not as widely known as they should be because they address
questions of principle without offering any new experimental conclusion or pre-
diction, as had been the case for the first light-quantum paper (photoeffect) and
the paper on specific heats.
In 1909 KirchhofFs theorem was half a century old. The blackbody radiation
law had meanwhile been found by Planck. A small number of physicists realized
that its implications were momentous. A proof of the law did not yet exist. Never-
theless, 'one cannot think of refusing [to accept] Planck's theory,' Einstein said in
his talk at Salzburg. That was his firmest declaration of faith up to that date. In
the next sentence, he gave the new reason for his conviction: Geiger and Ruther-
ford's value for the electric charge had meanwhile been published and Planck's
value for e had been 'brilliantly confirmed' (Section 19a).
In Section 4c, I explained Einstein's way of deriving the energy fluctuation
formula
(21.1)
where (e2) is the mean square energy fluctuation and {E) the average energy for
a system in contact with a thermal bath at temperature T. As is so typical for
Einstein, he derived this statistical physics equation in a paper devoted to the
quantum theory, the January 1909 paper. His purpose for doing so was to apply
402
THE PHOTON 403
this result to energy fluctuations of blackbody radiation in a frequency interval
between v and v + dv. In order to understand how this refinement is made, con-
sider a small subvolume v of a cavity filled with thermal radiation. Enclose v with
a wall that prevents all frequencies but those in dv from leaving v while those in
dv can freely leave and enter v. We may then apply Eq. 21.1 with (E) replaced
by pvdv, so that (€2) is now a function of v and T and we have
This equation expresses the energy fluctuations in terms of the spectral function
p in a way that is independent of the detailed form of p. Consider now the follow-
ing three cases.
1. p is given by the Rayleigh-Einstein-Jeans law (eq. 19.17). Then
2. p is given by the Wien law (Eq. 19.7). Then
3. p is given by the Planck law (Eq. 19.6). Then(21.3)
(21.4)
(21.5)
(I need not apologize for having used the same symbol p in the last three equations
even though p is a different function of v and T in each of them.)*
In his discussion of Eq. 21.5, Einstein stressed that 'the current theory of radia-
tion is incompatible with this result.' By current theory, he meant, of course, the
classical wave theory of light. Indeed, the classical theory would give only the
second term in Eq. 21.5, the 'wave term' (compare Eqs. 21.5 and 21.3). About the
first term of Eq. 21.5, Einstein had this to say: 'If it alone were present, it would
result in fluctuations [to be expected] if radiation were to consist of independently
moving pointlike quanta with energy hi>.' In other words, compare Eqs. 21.4 and
21.5. The former corresponds to Wien's law, which in turn holds in the regime
in which Einstein had introduced the light-quantum postulate.
Observe the appearance of a new element in this last statement by Einstein.
The word pointlike occurs. Although he did not use the term in either of his 1909
papers, he now was clearly thinking of quanta as particles. His own way of refer-
ring to the particle aspect of light was to call it 'the point of view of the Newtonian
emission theory.' His vision of light-quanta as particles is especially evident in a
letter to Sommerfeld, also dating from 1909, in which he writes of 'the ordering
of the energy of light around discrete points which move with light velocity' [E4].
'Equations 21.3 and 21.4 do not explicitly occur in Einstein's own paper.
(21. 2)404 THE QUANTUM THEORY
Equation 21.5 suggests (loosely speaking) that the particle and wave aspects of
radiation occur side by side. This is one of the arguments which led Einstein in
1909 to summarize his view on the status of the radiation theory in the following
way!*
I already attempted earlier to show that our current foundations of the radiation
theory have to be abandoned. ... It is my opinion that the next phase in the
development of theoretical physics will bring us a theory of light that can be
interpreted as a kind of fusion of the wave and the emission theory. . . . [The]
wave structure and [the] quantum structure ... are not to be considered as
mutually incompatible. ... It seems to follow from the Jeans law [Eq. 19.17]
that we will have to modify our current theories, not to abandon them
completely.
This fusion now goes by the name of complementarity. The reference to the
Jeans law we would now call an application of the correspondence principle.
The extraordinary significance for twentieth century physics of Einstein's sum-
ming up hardly needs to be stressed. I also see it as highly meaningful in relation
to the destiny of Einstein the scientist if not of Einstein the man. In 1909, at age
thirty, he was prepared for a fusion theory. He was alone in this. Planck certainly
did not support this vision. Bohr had yet to arrive on the scene. Yet when the
fusion theory arrived in 1925, in the form of quantum mechanics, Einstein could
not accept the duality of particles and waves inherent in that theory as being fun-
damental and irrevocable. It may have distressed him that one statement he made
in 1909 needed revision: moving light-quanta with energy hv are not pointlike.
Later on, I shall have to make a number of comments on the scientific reasons
that changed Einstein's apartness from that of a figure far ahead of his time to
that of a figure on the sidelines. As I already indicated earlier, I doubt whether
this change can be fully explained on the grounds of his scientific philosophy
alone.
(As a postscript to the present section, I add a brief remark on Einstein's energy
fluctuation formula. Equations 21.3-21.5 were obtained by a statistical reasoning.
One should also be able to derive them in a directly dynamic way. Einstein himself
had given qualitative arguments for the case of Eq. 21.3. He noted that the fluc-
tuations come about by interference between waves with frequencies within and
without the dv interval. A few years later, Lorentz gave the detailed calculation,
obtaining Eq. 21.3 from classical electromagnetic theory [LI]. However, difficul-
ties arose with attempts to derive the Planck case (Eq. 21.5) dynamically. These
were noted in 1919 by Leonard Ornstein and Frits Zernike, two Dutch experts
on statistical physics [Ol]. The problem was further elaborated by Ehrenfest [E5].
*In the following quotation, I combine statements made in the January and in the October paper.
THE PHOTON 405
It was known at that time that one can obtain Planck's expression for p by
introducing the quantum prescription* that the electromagnetic field oscillators
could have only energies nhv. However, both Ornstein and Zernike, and Ehren-
fest found that the same prescription applied to the fluctuation formula gave the
wrong answer. The source of the trouble seemed to lie in Einstein's entropy
additivity assumption (see Eq. 4.21). According to Uhlenbeck (private communi-
cation), these discrepancies were for some years considered to be a serious prob-
lem. In their joint 1925 paper, Born, Heisenberg, and Jordan refer to it as a
fundamental difficulty [Bl]. In that same paper, it was shown, however, that the
new quantum mechanics applied to a set of noninteracting oscillators does give the
Einstein answer. The noncommutativity of coordinates and momenta plays a role
in this derivation. Again, according to Uhlenbeck (private communication), the
elimination of this difficulty was considered one of the early successes of quantum
mechanics. (It is not necessary for our purposes to discuss subsequent improve-
ments on the Heisenberg-Born-Jordan treatment.))**
21 b. Spontaneous and Induced Radiative Transitions
After 1909 Einstein continued brooding about the light-quantum for almost
another two years. As mentioned in Chapter 10, in May 1911 he wrote to Besso,
'I do not ask anymore whether these quanta really exist. Nor do I attempt any
longer to construct them, since I now know that my brain is incapable of fath-
oming the problem this way' [E6]. For the time being, he was ready to give up.
In October 1911 Einstein (now a professor in Prague) gave a report on the quan-
tum theory to the first Solvay Congress [E7], but by this time general relativity
had already become his main concern and would remain so until November 1915.
In 1916, he returned once again to blackbody radiation and made his next
advance. In November 1916 he wrote to Besso, 'A splended light has dawned on
me about the absorption and emission of radiation' [E8]. He had obtained a deep
insight into the meaning of his heuristic principle, and this led him to a new der-
ivation of Planck's radiation law. His reasoning is contained in three papers, two
of which appeared in 1916 [E9, E10], the third one early in 1917 [Ell]. His
method is based on general hypotheses about the interaction between radiation
and matter. No special assumptions are made about intrinsic properties of the
objects which interact with the radiation. These objects 'will be called molecules
in what follows' [E9]. (It is completely inessential to his arguments that these
molecules could be Planck's oscillators!)
Einstein considered a system consisting of a gas of his molecules interacting
with electromagnetic radiation. The entire system is in thermal equilibrium.
"The elementary derivation due to Debye is found in Section 24c.
"The reader interested in these further developments is referred to a paper by Gonzalez and Werge-
land, which also contains additional references to this subject [Gl].
The A coefficient corresponds to spontaneous transitions m —» n, which occur with
a probability that is independent of the spectral density p of the radiation present.
The B terms refer to induced emission and absorption. In Eqs. 21.7 and 21.8, p
is a function of v and T, where 'we shall assume that a molecule can go from the
state En to the state Em by absorption of radiation with a definite frequency v, and
[similarly] for emission' [E9]. Microscopic reversibility implies that dWmri =
dWnm. Using Eq. 21.6, we therefore havewhere pm is a weight factor. Consider a pair of levels Em, Ea, Em > Ea. Einstein's
new hypothesis is that the total number dW of transitions in the gas per time
interval dt is given by
(21.7)
(21.8)(21.6)400 THE QUANTUM THEORY
Denote by Em the energy levels of a molecule and by Nm the equilibrium number
of molecules in the level Em. Then
(Note that the second term on the right-hand side corresponds to induced emission.
Thus, if there were no induced emission we would obtain Wien's law.) Einstein
remarked that 'the constants A and B could be computed directly if we were to
possess an electrodynamics and mechanics modified in the sense of the quantum
hypothesis' [E9]. That, of course, was not yet the case. He therefore continued his
argument in the following way. For fixed Em — £„ and T -* oo, we should get
the Rayleigh-Einstein-Jeans law (Eq. 19.17). This implies that(21.9)
(21.10)
(21.11)whence
where «„„, = A^/B^. Then he concluded his derivation by appealing to the uni-
versality of p and to Wien's displacement law, Eq. 19.4: 'a^, and Em — Ea cannot
depend on particular properties of the molecule but only on the active frequency
v, as follows from the fact that p must be a universal function of v and T. Further,
it follows from Wien's displacement law that «„„, and Em — En are proportional
to the third and first powers of v, respectively. Thus one has
(21.12)
where h denotes a constant' [E9].
The content of Eq. 21.12 is far more profound than a definition of the symbol
THE PHOTON 407
v (and h). It is a compatibility condition. Its physical content is this: in order that
Eqs. 21.7 and 21.8 may lead to Planck's law, it is necessary that the transitions
m ^5 n are accompanied by a single monochromatic radiation quantum. By this
remarkable reasoning, Einstein therefore established a bridge between blackbody
radiation and Bohr's theory of spectra.
About the assumptions he made in the above derivation, Einstein wrote, 'The
simplicity of the hypotheses makes it seem probable to me that these will become
the basis of the future theoretical description.' That turned out to be true.
Two of the three papers under discussion [E10, Ell] contained another result,
one which Einstein himself considered far more important than his derivation of
the radiation law: light-quanta carry a momentum hv/c. This will be our next
topic.
21c. The Completion of the Particle Picture
1. Light-Quantum and Photon. A photon is a state of the electromagnetic field
with the following properties.
1. It has a definite frequency v and a definite wave vector k.
2. Its energy E,
(21.13)
(21.14)
(21.15)and its momentum p,
satisfy the dispersion law
characteristic of a particle of zero rest mass.*
3. It has spin one and (like all massless particles with nonzero spin) two states of
polarization. The single particle states are uniquely specified by these three
properties [Wl].
The number of photons is in general not conserved in particle reactions and
decays. I shall return to the nonconservation of photon number in Chapter 23, but
would like to note here an ironic twist of history. The term photon first appeared
in the title of a paper written in 1926: 'The Conservation of Photons.' The author:
the distinguished physical chemist Gilbert Lewis from Berkeley. The subject: a
speculation that light consists of 'a new kind of atom .. . uncreatable and inde-
structible [for which] I ... propose the name photon' [L2]. This idea was soon
forgotten, but the new name almost immediately became part of the language. In
*There have been occasional speculations that the photon might have a tiny nonzero mass. Direct
experimental information on the photon mass is therefore a matter of interest. The best determina-
tions of this mass come from astronomical observations. The present upper bound is 8 X 10~49 g
[Dl]. In what follows, the photon mass is taken to be strictly zero.
408 THE QUANTUM THEORY
October 1927 the fifth Solvay conference was held. Its subject was 'electrons et
photons.'
When Einstein introduced light-quanta in 1905, these were energy quanta sat-
isfying Eq. 21.13. There was no mention in that paper of Eqs. 21.15 and 21.14.
In other words, the full-fledged particle concept embodied in the term photon was
not there all at once. For this reason, in this section I make the distinction between
light-quantum ('E — hv only') and photon. The dissymmetry between energy and
momentum in the 1905 paper is, of course, intimately connected with the origins
of the light-quantum postulate in equilibrium statistical mechanics. In the statis-
tical mechanics of equilibrium systems, important relations between the overall
energy and other macroscopic variables are derived. The overall momentum plays
a trivial and subsidiary role. These distinctions between energy and momentum
are much less pronounced when fluctuations around the equilibrium state are con-
sidered. It was via the analysis of statistical fluctuations of blackbody radiation
that Einstein eventually came to associate a definite momentum with a light-quan-
tum. That happened in 1916. Before I describe what he did, I should again draw
the attention of the reader to the remarkable fact that it took the father of special
relativity theory twelve years to write down the relation p = hv/c side by side
with E = hv. I shall have more to say about this in Section 25d.
2. Momentum Fluctuations: 1909. Einstein's first results bearing on the
question of photon momentum are found in the two 1909 papers. There he gave
a momentum fluctuation formula that is closely akin to the energy fluctuation
formula Eq. 21.5. He considered the case of a plane mirror with mass m and area
/ placed inside the cavity. The mirror moves perpendicular to its own plane and
has a velocity v at time t. During a small time interval from t to t + T, its momen-
tum changes from mv to mv — Pvr + A. The second term describes the drag
force due to the radiation pressure (P is the corresponding friction constant). This
force would eventually bring the mirror to rest were it not for the momentum
fluctuation term A, induced by the fluctuations of the radiation pressure. In ther-
mal equilibrium, the mean square momentum m2(v2) should remain unchanged
over the interval T. Hence* (A2) = 2mPr{v2). The equipartition law applied to
the kinetic energy of the mirror implies that m(v2) = kT. Thus
Einstein computed P in terms of p for the case in which the mirror is fully trans-
parent for all frequencies except those between v and v + dv, which it reflects
perfectly. Using Planck's expression for p, he found that(21.16)
(21.17)
"Terms O(T ) are dropped, and (v A) =0 since v and A are uncorrelated.
THE PHOTON 409
The parallels between Eqs. 21.5 and 21.17 are striking. The respective first terms
dominate if hv/kT S> 1, the regime in which p is approximated by Wien's expo-
nential law. Recall that Einstein had said of the first term in Eq. 21.5 that it
corresponds to 'independently moving pointlike quanta with energy hv.' One
might therefore expect that the first term in Eq. 21.17 would lead Einstein to
state, in 1909, the 'momentum quantum postulate': monochromatic radiation of
low density behaves in regard to pressure fluctuations as if it consists of mutually
independent momentum quanta of magnitude hv/' c. It is unthinkable to me that
Einstein did not think so. But he did not quite say so.
What he did say was, 'If the radiation were to consist of very few extended
complexes with energy hv which move independently through space and which
are independently reflected—a picture that represents the roughest visualization
of the light-quantum hypothesis—then as a consequence of fluctuations in the
radiation pressure there would act on our plate only such momenta as are repre-
sented by the first term of our formula [Eq. 21.17].' He did not refer explicitly to
momentum quanta or to the relativistic connection between E = hv and p =
hv/c. Yet a particle concept (the photon) was clearly on his mind, since he went
on to conjecture that 'the electromagnetic fields of light are linked to singular
points similar to the occurrence of electrostatic fields in the theory of electrons'
[E3]. It seems fair to paraphrase this statement as follows: light-quanta may well
be particles in the same sense that electrons are particles. The association between
the particle concept and a high degree of spatial localization is typical for that
period. It is of course not correct in general.
The photon momentum made its explicit appearance in that same year, 1909.
Johannes Stark had attended the Salzburg meeting at which Einstein discussed
the radiative fluctuations. A few months later, Stark stated that according to the
light-quantum hypothesis, 'the total electromagnetic momentum emitted by an
accelerated electron is different from zero and ... in absolute magnitude is given
by hv/c [SI]. As an example, he mentioned Bremsstrahlung, for which he wrote
down the equation
the first occasion on record in which the photon enters explicitly into the law of
momentum conservation for an elementary process.
3. Momentum Fluctuations: 1916. Einstein himself did not explicitly intro-
duce photon momentum until 1916, in the course of his studies on thermal equi-
librium between electromagnetic radiation and a molecular gas [E10, Ell]. In
addition to his new discussion of Planck's law, Einstein raised the following prob-
lem. In equilibrium, the molecules have a Maxwell distribution for the transla-
tional velocities. How is this distribution maintained in time considering the fact
that the molecules are subject to the influence of radiation pressure? In other
words, what is the Brownian motion of molecules in the presence of radiation?(21.18)
410 THE QUANTUM THEORY
Technically, the following issue arises. If a molecule emits or absorbs an
amount e of radiative energy all of which moves in the same direction, then it
experiences a recoil of magnitude (./ c. There is no recoil if the radiation is not
directed at all, as for a spherical wave. Question: What can one say about the
degree of directedness of the emitted or absorbed radiation for the system under
consideration? Einstein began the discussion of this question in the same way he
had treated the mirror problem in 1909. Instead of the mirror, he now considered
molecules that all move in the same direction. Then there is again a drag force,
PUT, and a fluctuation term, A. Equipartition gives again m(v2) = kT, and one
arrives once more at Eq. 21.16.
Next comes the issue of compatibility. With the help of Eqs. 21.7 and 21.8,
Einstein could compute separately expressions for (A2) as well as for P in terms
of the A and B terms and p, where p is now given by Planck's law.* I shall not
reproduce the details of these calculations, but do note the crux of the matter. In
order to obtain the same answer for the quantities on both sides of Eq. 21.16, he
had to invoke a condition of directedness: 'if a bundle of radiation causes a mole-
cule to emit or absorb an energy amount hv, then a momentum hv/c is transferred
to the molecule, directed along the bundle for absorption and opposite the bundle
for [induced] emission' [El 1]. (The question of spontaneous emission is discussed
below.) Thus Einstein found that consistency with the Planck distribution (and
Eqs. 21.7 and 21.8) requires that the radiation be fully directed (this is often called
Nadelstrahlung). And so with the help of his trusted and beloved fluctuation
methods, Einstein once again produced a major insight, the association of momen-
tum quanta with energy quanta. Indeed, if we leave aside the question of spin,
we may say that Einstein abstracted not only the light-quantum but also the more
general photon concept entirely from statistical mechanical considerations.
21d. Earliest Unbehagen about Chance
Einstein prefaced his statement about photon momentum just quoted with the
remark that this conclusion can be considered 'als ziemlich sicher erwiesen,' as
fairly certainly proven. If he had some lingering reservations, they were mainly
due to his having derived some of his equations on the basis of 'the quantum
theory, [which is] incompatible with the Maxwell theory of the electromagnetic
field' [Ell]. Moreover, his momentum condition was a sufficient, not a necessary,
condition, as was emphasized by Pauli in a review article completed in 1924:
'From Einstein's considerations, it could . .. not be seen with complete certainty
that his assumptions were the only ones that guarantee thermodynamic-statistical
equilibrium' [PI]. Nevertheless, his 1917 results led Einstein to drop his caution
and reticence about light-quanta. They had become real to him. In a letter to
*In 1910, Einstein had made a related calculation, together with Hopf [E12]. At that time, he used
the classical electromagnetic theory to compute (A2) and P. This cast Eq. 21.16 into a differential
equation for p. Its solution is Eq. 19.17.
THE PHOTON 411
Besso about the needle rays, he wrote, 'Damit sind die Lichtquanten so gut wie
gesichert' [E13].* And, in a phrase contained in another letter about two years
later, 'I do not doubt anymore the reality of radiation quanta, although I still
stand quite alone in this conviction,' he underlined the word 'Realitat' [E14].
On the other hand, at about the same time that Einstein lost any remaining
doubts about the existence of light-quanta, we also encounter the first expressions
of his Unbehagen, his discomfort with the theoretical implications of the new
quantum concepts in regard to 'Zufall,' chance. This earliest unease stemmed
from the conclusion concerning spontaneous emission that Einstein had been
forced to draw from his consistency condition (Eq. 21.16): the needle ray picture
applies not only to induced processes (as was mentioned above) but also to spon-
taneous emission. That is, in a spontaneous radiative transition, the molecule suf-
fers a recoil hv/c. However, the recoil direction cannot be predicted! He stressed
(quite correctly, of course) that it is 'a weakness of the theory .. . that it leaves
time and direction of elementary processes to chance' [Ell]. What decides when
the photon is spontaneously emitted? What decides in which direction it will go?
These questions were not new. They also apply to another class of emission
processes, the spontaneity of which had puzzled physicists since the turn of the
century: radioactive transformations. A spontaneous emission coefficient was in
fact first introduced by Rutherford in 1900 when he derived** the equation dN
= —\Ndt for the decrease of the number N of radioactive thorium emanation
atoms in the time interval dt [R2]. Einstein himself drew attention to this simi-
larity: 'It speaks in favor of the theory that the statistical law assumed for [spon-
taneous] emission is nothing but the Rutherford law of radioactive decay' [E9]. I
have written elsewhere about the ways physicists responded to this baffling life-
time problem [ P2]. I should now add that Einstein was the first to realize that the
probability for spontaneous emission is a nonclassical quantity. No one before
Einstein in 1917 saw as clearly the depth of the conceptual crisis generated by the
occurrence of spontaneous processes with a well-defined lifetime. He expressed
this in prophetic terms:
The properties of elementary processes required by [Eq. 21.16] make it seem
almost inevitable to formulate a truly quantized theory of radiation. [Ell]
Immediately following his comment on chance, Einstein continued, 'Neverthe-
less, I have full confidence in the route which has been taken' [Ell]. If he was
confident at that time about the route, he also felt strongly that it would be a long
one. The chance character of spontaneous processes meant that something was
amiss with classical causality. That would forever deeply trouble him. As early as
March 1917, he had written on this subject to Besso, 'I feel that the real joke that
the eternal inventor of enigmas has presented us with has absolutely not been
* With that, [the existence of] light-quanta is practically certain.
**Here a development began which, two years later, culminated in the transformation theory for
radioactive substances [Rl].
412 THE QUANTUM THEORY
understood as yet' [E15]. It is believed by nearly all of us that the joke was under-
stood soon after 1925, when it became possible to calculate Einstein's Amn and
fimn from first principles. As I shall discuss later, Einstein eventually accepted
these principles but never considered them to be first principles. Throughout the
rest of his life, his attitude was that the joke has not been understood as yet. One
further example may show how from 1917 on he could not make his peace with
the quantum theory. In 1920 he wrote as follows to Born:
That business about causality causes me a lot of trouble, too. Can the quantum
absorption and emission of light ever be understood in the sense of the complete
causality requirement, or would a statistical residue remain? I must admit that
there I lack the courage of a conviction. However, I would be very unhappy to
renounce complete causality. [E16]
21e. An Aside: Quantum Conditions for Nonseparable Classical Motion
In May 1917, shortly after Einstein finished his triple of papers on the quantum
theory of radiation, he wrote an article on the restrictions imposed by the 'old'
quantum theory on classically allowed orbits in phase space [El7], to which he
added a brief mathematical sequel a few months later [E18]. He never returned
to this subject nor, for a long time, did others show much interest in it. However,
recently the importance and the pioneering character of this work has been rec-
ognized by mathematicians, quantum physicists, and quantum chemists. The only
logic for mentioning this work at this particular place is that it fits with the time
sequence of Einstein's contributions to quantum physics.
What Einstein did was to generalize the Bohr-Sommerfeld conditions for a
system with / degrees of freedom. These conditions are Jp,<^<?, = nth, i =
1, ... , I, where the (?, are the coordinates, the p{ their conjugate momenta, and
the n, the integer quantum numbers. These conditions had been derived for the
case where one can find a coordinate system in which the classical motion is sep-
arable in the coordinates. Thus, the conditions, if at all realizable, depend on the
choice of a suitable coordinate system. Einstein found a coordinate-invariant gen-
eralization of these conditions which, moreover, did not require the motion to be
separable, but only to be multiply periodic. The generalization of this result has
become a problem of interest to mathematicians. Its relevance to modern physics
and chemistry stems from the connection between the orbits of the old quantum
theory and the semiclassicai (WKB) limit of quantum mechanics. For example,
a semiclassicai treatment of the nuclear motion in a molecule can be combined
with a Born-Oppenheimer treatment of the electronic motion. For references to
recent literature, see, e.g., [B2] and [Ml].
21f. The Compton Effect
I return to the photon story and come to its denouement.
Since, after 1917, Einstein firmly believed that light-quanta were here to stay,
Why were these elementary equations not published five or even ten years earlier,
as well they could have been? Even those opposed to quantized radiation might
have found these relations to their liking since (independent of any quantum
dynamics) they yield at once significant differences from the classical theories of
the scattering of light by matter** and therefore provide simple tests of the photon
idea.
I have no entirely satisfactory answer to this question. In particular, it is not
clear to me why Einstein himself did not consider these relations. However, there
are two obvious contributing factors. First, because photons were rejected out of
hand by the vast majority of physicists, few may have felt compelled to ask for
tests of an idea they did not believe to begin with. Second, it was only in about
1922 that strong evidence became available for deviations from the classical pic-
ture. This last circumstance impelled both Compton and Debye to pursue the
quantum alternative.f Debye, incidentally, mentioned his indebtedness to Ein-
stein's work on needle radiation [D2]. Compton in his paper does not mention
Einstein at all.
The same paper in which Compton discussed Eqs. 21.19 and 21.20 also con-
tains the result of a crucial experiment. These equations imply that the wave-
length difference AX between the final and the initial photon is given by
where 6 is the photon scattering angle. Compton found this relation to be satisfied
* Einstein attached great importance to an advance in another direction that took place in the inter-
vening years: the effect discovered by Otto Stern and Walther Gerlach [E21]. Together with Ehren-
fest, he made a premature attempt at its interpretation [E22].
**For details on these classical theories, see Stuewer's fine monograph on the Compton effect [S2].
| Nor is it an accident that these two men came forth with the photon kinematics at about the same
time. In his paper, Debye acknowledges a 1922 report by Compton in which the evidence against
the classical theory was reviewed. A complete chronology of these developments in 1922 and 1923 is
found in [S2], p. 235. For a detailed account of the evolution of Compton's thinking, see [S2J, Chap-
ter 6.THE PHOTON 413
it is not surprising that he would look for new ways in which the existence of
photons might lead to observable deviations from the classical picture. In this he
did not succeed. At one point, in 1921, he thought he had found a new quantum
criterion [E19], but it soon turned out to be a false lead [E20, Kl]. In fact, after
1917 nothing particularly memorable happened in regard to light-quanta until
capital progress was achieved* when Arthur Compton [Cl] and Debye [D2]
independently derived the relativistic kinematics for the scattering of a photon off
an electron at rest:
(21.19)
(21.20)
414 THE QUANTUM THEORY
within the error.* The quality of the experiment is well demonstrated by the value
he obtained for the Compton wavelength: h/mc « 0.024-2 A, which is within less
than one per cent of the modern value (for the current state of the subject, see
[W2]). Compton concluded, 'The experimental support of the theory indicates
very convincingly that a radiation quantum carries with it directed momentum as
well as energy.'**
This discovery 'created a sensation among the physicists of that time' [Al].
There were the inevitable controversies surrounding a discovery of such major
proportions. Nevertheless, the photon idea was rapidly accepted. Sommerfeld
incorporated the Compton effect in his new edition of Atombau und Spektrallinien
with the comment, 'It is probably the most important discovery which could have
been made in the current state of physics' [S3].
What about Einstein's response? A year after Compton's experiments, Einstein
wrote a popular article for Berliner Tageblatt, which ends as follows: 'The posi-
tive result of the Compton experiment proves that radiation behaves as if it con-
sisted of discrete energy projectiles, not only in regard to energy transfer but also
in regard to Stosswirkung (momentum transfer)' [E24]. Here then, in projectile
(that is, particle) language, is the 'momentum postulate,' phrased in close analogy
to the energy quantum postulate in 1905. In both cases, we encounter the phra-
seology, 'Radiation . . . behaves ... as if it consists of. . . .'
Still, Einstein was not (and would never be) satisfied. There was as yet no real
theory. In the same article he also wrote, 'There are therefore now two theories
of light, both indispensable, and—as one must admit today despite twenty years
of tremendous effort on the part of theoretical physicists—without any logical
connection.'
The years 1923-24 mark the end of the first phase of Einstein's apartness in
relation to the quantum theory. Yet there remained one important bastion of
resistance to the photon, centering around Niels Bohr.
References
Al. S. K. Allison, Biogr. Mem. Nat. Acad. Sci. 38, 81 (1965).
Bl. M. Born, W. Heisenberg, and P. Jordan, Z. Phys. 35, 557 (1925).
B2. M. V. Berry, Ann. N.Y. Ac. Set. 357, 183 (1980).
Cl. A. H. Compton, Phys. Rev. 21, 483 (1923).
Dl. L. Davis, A. S. Goldhaber, and M. M. Nieto, Phys. Rev. Lett. 35, 1402 (1975).
D2. P. Debye, Phys. Zeitschr. 24, 161 (1923).
*K-line X-rays from a molybdenum anticathode were scattered off graphite. Compton stressed that
one should use only light elements as scatterers so that the electrons will indeed be quasi-free. Scat-
tered X-rays at 45°, 90°, and 135° were analyzed.
**The work of Compton and Debye led Pauli to extend Einstein's work of 1917 to the case of
radiation in equilibrium with free electrons [P3]. Einstein and Ehrenfest subsequently discussed the
connection between Pauli's and Einstein's Stosszahlansatz [E23].
THE PHOTON 415
El. A. Einstein, letter to J. Laub, undated, 1908. Quoted in Se, p. 103.
E2. , Phys. Zeitschr. 10, 185 (1909).
E3. , Phys. Zeitschr. 10, 817 (1909).
E4. , letter to A. Sommerfeld, September 29, 1909.
E5. P. Ehrenfest, Z. Phys. 34, 362 (1925).
E6. A. Einstein, letter to M. Besso, May 13, 1911; EB, p. 19.
E7. , in La Theorie du Rayonnement et les Quanta (P. Langevin and M. de Brog-
lie, Eds.), p. 407. Gauthier-Villars, Paris, 1912.
E8. , letter to M. Besso, November 18, 1916; EB, p. 78.
E9. , Verh. Deutsch. Phys. Ges. 18, 318 (1916).
E10. —, Mitt. Phys. Ges. Zurich 16, 47 (1916).
Ell. , Phys. Zeitschr. 18, 121 (1917).
E12. , and L. Hopf, AdP 33, 1105 (1910).
E13. , letter to M. Besso, September 6, 1916; EB, p. 82.
E14. , letter to M. Besso, July 29, 1918; EB, p. 130.
E15. , letter to M. Besso, March 9, 1917.
E16. , letter to M. Born, January 27, 1920; in M. Born (Ed.), The Born-Einstein
Letters, p. 23. Walker, New York, 1971.
E17. , Verh. Deutsch. Phys. Ges. 19, 82 (1917).
E18. , PAW, 1917, p. 606.
El9. , PAW, 1921, p. 882.
E20. , PAW, 1922, p. 18.
E21. , letter to M. Besso, May 24, 1924; EB, p. 201.
E22. , and P. Ehrenfest, Z. Phys. 11, 31 (1922).
E23. and , Z. Phys. 19, 301 (1923).
E24. , Berliner Tageblatt, April 20, 1924.
Gl. J. J. Gonzales and H.Wergeland, K. Nor. Vidensk. Selsk. Skr., No. 4, 1973.
Kl. M. Klein, Hist. St. Phys. Sci. 2, 1 (1970).
LI. H. A. Lorentz, Les Theories Statistiques en Thermodynamique, p. 59. Teubner,
Leipzig, 1916.
L2. G. N. Lewis, Nature 118, 874 (1926).
Ml. R. A. Marcus, Ann. N.Y. Ac. Sci. 357, 169 (1980).
Ol. L. S. Ornstein and F. Zernike, Proc. K. Ak. Amsterdam 28, 280 (1919).
PI. W. Pauli, Collected Scientific Papers, Vol. l,p. 630. Interscience, New York, 1964.
P2. A. Pais, Rev. Mod. Phys. 49; 925 (1977).
P3. W. Pauli, Z. Phys. 18, 272 (1923).
Rl. E. Rutherford and F. Soddy, Phil. Mag. 4, 370, 569 (1902).
R2. —, Phil. Mag. 49, 1 (1900).
51. J. Stark, Phys. Zeitschr. 10, 902 (1909).
52. R. H. Stuewer, The Compton Effect. Science History, New York, 1975.
53. A. Sommerfeld, Atombau und Spektrallinien (4th ed.), p. VIII. Vieweg, Braun-
schweig, 1924.
Wl. E. P. Wigner, Ann. Math. 40, 149 (1939).
W2. B. Williams (Ed.), Compton Scattering. McGraw-Hill, New York, 1977.
