!9
The Light - Quantum
19a. From Kirchhoff to Planck
In the last four months of 1859, there occurred a number of events that were to
change the course of science.
On the twelfth of September, Le Verrier submitted to the French Academy of
Sciences the text of his letter to Faye concerning an unexplained advance of the
perihelion of Mercury (see Section 14c), the effect explained by Einstein in
November 1915. On the twenty-fourth of November, a book was published in
London entitled On the Origin of Species by Means of Natural Selection, or the
Preservation of Favoured Races in the Struggle for Life, by Charles Robert Dar-
win. Meanwhile on the twentieth of October, Gustav Kirchhoff from Heidelberg
submitted his observation that the dark D lines in the solar spectrum are darkened
still further by the interposition of a sodium flame [Kl]. As a result, a few weeks
later he proved a theorem and posed a challenge. The response to Kirchhoff's
challenge led to the discovery of the quantum theory.
Consider a body in thermal equilibrium with radiation. Let the radiation
energy which the body absorbs be converted to thermal energy only, not to any
other energy form. Let E,dv denote the amount of energy emitted by the body per
unit time per cm2 in the frequency interval dv. Let A, be its absorption coefficient
for frequency v. Kirchhoff's theorem [K2] states that EJA» depends only on v
and the temperature T and is independent of any other characteristic of the body:
Kirchhoff called a body perfectly black if A, = 1. Thus J(v, T) is the emissive
power of a blackbody. He also gave an operational definition for a system, the
'Hohlraumstrahlung,' which acts as a perfect blackbody: 'Given a space enclosed
by bodies of equal temperature, through which no radiation can penetrate, then
every bundle of radiation within this space is constituted, with respect to quality
and intensity, as if it came from a completely black body of the same temperature.'
Kirchhoff challenged theorists and experimentalists alike: 'It is a highly impor-
tant task to find this function [/]. Great difficulties stand in the way of its exper-
imental determination. Nevertheless, there appear grounds for the hope that it has
364(19.1)
THE LIGHT-QUANTUM 365
a simple form, as do all functions which do not depend on the properties of indi-
vidual bodies and which one has become acquainted with before now' [K2].
Kirchhoff's emphasis on the experimental complexities turned out to be well
justified. Even the simple property of / that it has one pronounced maximum
which moves to lower v with decreasing T was not firmly established experimen-
tally until about twenty years later [K3]. Experimentalists had to cope with three
main problems: (1) to construct manageable bodies with perfectly black properties,
(2) to devise radiation detectors with adequate sensitivity, and (3) to find ways of
extending the measurements over large frequency domains. Forty years of exper-
imentation had to go by before the data were sufficient to answer Kirchhoff's
question.
Kirchhoff derived Eq. 19.1 by showing that its violation would imply the pos-
sibility of a perpetuum mobile of the second kind. The novelty of his theorem was
not so much its content as the precision and generality of its proof, based exclu-
sively on the still-young science of thermodynamics. A quarter of a century passed
before the next theoretical advance in blackbody radiation came about.
In 1879 Josef Stefan conjectured on experimental grounds that the total energy
radiated by a hot body varies with the fourth power of the absolute temperature
[SI]. This statement is not true in its generality. The precise formulation was
given in 1884, when Boltzmann (then a professsor of experimental physics in
Graz) proved theoretically that the strict T4 law holds only for bodies which are
black. His proof again involved thermodynamics, but combined this time with a
still younger branch of theoretical physics: the electromagnetic theory of Maxwell.
For the case of Hohlraumstrahlung, the radiation is homogeneous, isotropic,
and unpolarized, so that
one had come as far as possible on the basis of thermodynamics and general elec-
tromagnetic theory. (Proofs of Eqs. 19.3 and 19.4 are found in standard texts.)
Meanwhile, proposals for the correct form of p had begun to appear as early
as the 1860s. All these guesses may be forgotten except for one, Wien's exponential
law, proposed in 1896 [W2]:(19.4)This law was the very first thermodynamic consequence derived from Maxwell's
theorem, according to which the numerical value of the radiation pressure equals
one third of the energy per unit volume. When in 1893 Wilhelm Wien proved his
displacement law [Wll(19.3;where p(v,T), the spectral density, is the energy density per unit volume for fre-
quency v. In this case, the Stefan-Boltzmann law reads (V is the volume of the
cavity)(19.2)
Experimental techniques had sufficiently advanced by then to put this formula to
the test. This was done by Friedrich Paschen from Hannover, whose measure-
ments (very good ones) were made in the near infrared, X = 1-8 fim (and T =
400-1600 K). He published his data in January 1897. His conclusion: 'It would
seem very difficult to find another function [of v and T, Eq. 19.5] that represents
the data with as few constants' [PI]. For a brief period, it appeared that Wien's
law was the final answer. But then, in the year 1900, this conclusion turned out
to be premature and the correct response to Kirchhoff's challenge was found. Two
factors were decisive. One was a breakthrough in experimental techniques in the
far infrared. The other was the persistence and vision of Planck.
It happened in Berlin. At the Physikalisch Technische Reichsanstalt, at that
time probably the world's best-equipped physics laboratory, two teams were
independently at work on blackbody radiation experiments. The first of these,
Otto Lummer and Ernst Pringsheim, had tackled the problem in an as yet unex-
plored wavelength region, X = 12-18 /an (and T = 300-1650 K). In February
1900 they stated their conclusion: Wien's law fails in that region [LI].* The sec-
ond team, consisting of Heinrich Rubens and Ferdinand Kurlbaum, moved even
farther into the infrared: X = 30-60 urn (and T = 200-1500° C). They arrived
at the same conclusion [Rl].
I need to say more about the latter results, but I should like to comment first
on the role of experiment in the discovery of the quantum theory. The Rubens-
Kurlbaum paper is a classic. The work of these authors, as well as that of Paschen
and of Lummer and Pringsheim, was of a pioneering nature. By the middle of the
nineteenth century, wavelengths had been measured up to X « 1.5/im. Progress
was slow in the next forty years, as demonstrated by a question raised by Samuel
Pierpont Langley in a lecture given in 1885 before the AAAS meeting in Ann
Arbor: 'Does [the] ultimate wavelength of 2.7 pm which our atmosphere transmits
correspond to the lowest [frequency] which can be obtained from any terrestrial
source?' [L2]. The great advance came in the 1890s. The first sentence of the first
paper in the first issue of the Physical Review reads as follows: 'Within a few
years the study of obscure radiation has been greatly advanced by systematic
inquiry into the laws of dispersion of the infrared rays.' This was written in 1893,
by Ernest Fox Nichols. At about that time, new techniques were developed which
culminated in the 'Reststrahlen,' residual rays, method of Rubens and Nichols
[R2]: one eliminates short wavelengths from a beam of radiation by subjecting it
to numerous reflections on quartz or other surfaces. This procedure leads to the
isolation of the long wavelengths in the beam. These experimental developments
are of fundamental importance for our main subject, the quantum theory, since
they were crucial to the discovery of the blackbody radiation law.
* There had been earlier indications of deviations from Wien's law, but these were not well
documented.366 THE QUANTUM THEORY
(19.5)
THE LIGHT-QUANTUM367
Sample of the Rubens-Kurlbaum data which led Planck to guess his radiation formula
[Rl]. P is plotted versus Tfor X = 51.2/un. ("berechnet nach" means "computed after",
"beobachtet" means "observed".) The curves marked "Wien" and "Lord Rayleigh" refer
to best fits to the Eqs. (19.5), (19.17), respectively. The curves marked "Thiesen" and
"Lummer-Jahnke" refer to theoretical proposals which are not discussed in this book.
Planck's formula is not yet plotted.
The paper by Rubens and Kurlbaum was presented to the Prussian Academy
on October 25, 1900. The figure above shows some of the measured points they
recorded* and some theoretical curves with which they compared their findings.
One of these was the Wien curve, which did not work. Neither did a second curve,
proposed by Rayleigh (I shall return to Rayleigh's work in section 19c). I shall
leave aside the two other comparison curves they drew and turn to the all-impor-
tant 'fifth formula, given by Herr M. Planck after our experiments had already
'These refer to observations at X = 51.2f«n. This wavelength was isolated by multiple reflections
off rock salt. The blackbody radiation intensity is plotted as a function of T. (Recall that after mul-
tiple reflection, those specific frequencies predominantly survive which correspond to the ionic vibra-
tions in the crystal lattice chosen as reflector.)
368 THE QUANTUM THEORY
been concluded .. . [and which] reproduces our observations [from —188° to
1500°C] within the limits of error' [Rl].
Kirchhoff had moved from Heidelberg to Berlin to take the chair in theoretical
physics. After his death, this position was offered to Boltzmann, who declined.
Then Heinrich Hertz was approached; he also declined. The next candidate was
Planck, to whom the offer of extraordinarius (associate professor) was made.
Planck accepted and was soon promoted to full professor. His new position
brought him close to the experimental developments outlined above. This nearness
was to be one of the decisive factors in the destiny of this most unusual man.
Planck most probably* discovered his law in the early evening of Sunday,
October 7. Rubens and his wife had called on the Plancks on the afternoon of that
day. In the course of the conversation, Rubens mentioned to Planck that he had
found p(v, 7) to be proportional to T for small v. Planck went to work after the
visitors left and found an interpolation between this result and Wien's law, Eq.
19.5. He communicated his formula by postcard to Rubens that same evening and
stated it publicly [P3] in a discussion remark on October 19, following the pre-
sentation of a paper by Kurlbaum. Expressed in notations introduced by Planck
two months later, he proposed that
which is indeed correct in the quantum regime hv/kT 3> 1, a condition that is
well satisfied in Paschen's experiment mentioned earlier (hv/kT ~ 15 for T =
1000 K and X = 1 /urn). Strange as it may sound, the quantum theory was dis-
covered only after classical deviations from the quantum regime had been observed
in the far infrared.
It would do grave injustice to Planck if I left the reader with the impression
that Planck's discovery was exclusively the result of interpolating experimental
data. For years, it had been his ambition to derive the correct radiation law from
first principles. Thus the rapidity of his response to Ruben's remark is less sur-
prising than the correctness of his answer. I must refrain from discussing Planck's
earlier research (cf. [K4]), nor shall I describe how he made his guess. However,
it is very important for an understanding of Einstein's starting point in 1905 and
of the subsequent reactions to the light-quantum hypothesis to give a brief account
of Planck's activities from October to December 1900, the heroic period of his life.
*Here I rely on the obituary of Rubens by Gerhard Hettner [HI], himself an experimental expert
on blackbody radiation. Hettner's account differs slightly from the recollections that Planck himself
wrote in his late eighties [P2].(19.6)
(19.7)Equation 19.6 contains Wien's law of 1896:
THE LIGHT-QUANTUM 369
Even if Planck had stopped after October 19, he would forever be remembered
as the discoverer of the radiation law. It is a true measure of his greatness that he
went further. He wanted to interpret Eq. 19.6. That made him the discoverer of
the quantum theory. I shall briefly outline the three steps he took [P4].
The Electromagnetic Step. This concerns a result Planck had obtained some
time earlier [P5]. Consider a linear oscillator with mass m and charge e in inter-
action with a monochromatic, periodic electric field (with frequency oj) in the
direction of its motion. The equation of motion is
Let v denote the frequency of the free oscillator, f/m = (2irv)2. Consider in par-
ticular the case in which the radiation damping due to the 'x term is very small,
that is, 7 <sC v, where 7 = Si^eV/Smc3. Then one may approximate 'x by —
(2irv)2x. The solution of Eq. 19.8 can be written (see [P6]) x = C cos (2-irait —
a). One can readily solve for C and a. The energy E of the oscillator equals
m(2irv)2C2/2, and one finds that(19.8)
(19.9)
(19.10)
;i9.11)Next, let the electric field consist of an incoherent isotropic superposition of fre-
quencies in thermal equilibrium at temperature T. In that case, the equilibrium
energy U of the oscillator is obtained by replacing the electric field energy density
F2/2 in Eq. 19.9 by 4irp(o), T)du>/?> and by integrating over co:
Since 7 is very small, the response of the oscillator is maximal if w = v. Thus we
may replace p(w, T) by p(v, T) and extend the integration from — oo to + oo. This
yields
This equation for the joint equilibrium of matter and radiation, one of Planck's
important contributions to classical physics, was the starting point for his discovery
of the quantum theory. As we soon shall see, this same equation was also the point
of departure for Einstein's critique in 1905 of Planck's reasoning and for his quan-
tum theory of specific heats.
The Thermodynamic Step. Planck concluded from Eq. 19.11 that it suffices
to determine U in order to find p. (There is a lot more to be said about this
seemingly innocent statement; see Section 19b.) Working backward from Eqs.
19.6 and 19.11, he found U. Next he determined the entropy S of the linear
Equation 19.6 follows if one can derive Eq. 19.12.
The Statistical Step. I should rather say, what Planck held to be a statistical
step. Consider a large number N of linear oscillators, all with frequency v. Let
UN = NUandSN = NS be the total energy and entropy of the system, respectively
Put SN = kin WN, where WN is the thermodynamic probability. Now comes the
quantum postulate.
The total energy UN is supposed to be made up of finite energy elements c.UN
= Pe, where P is a large number. Define WN to be the number of ways in which
the P indistinguishable energy elements can be distributed over N distinguishable
oscillators. Example: for N = 2, P = 3, the partitions are (3e,0), (2e,e), (6,2e),
(0,3e). In general,(19.12;370 THE QUANTUM THEORY
oscillator by integrating TdS = dU, where T is to be taken as a function of U
(for fixed v). This yields
(19.13)
Insert this in SN = k\n WN, use P/N = U/e, SN = NS and apply the Stirling
approximation. This gives
(19.14)
It follows from Eqs. 19.4 and 19.11, and from TdS = dU, that S is a function
of U/v only. Therefore
(19.15)
Thus one recovers Eq. 19.12. And that is how the quantum theory was born. This
derivation was first presented on December 14, 1900 [P4].
From the point of view of physics in 1900 the logic of Planck's electromagnetic
and thermodynamic steps was impeccable, but his statistical step was wild. The
latter was clearly designed to argue backwards from Eqs. 19.13-19.15 to 19.12.
In 1931 Planck referred to it as 'an act of desperation. ... I had to obtain a positive
result, under any circumstances and at whatever cost' [H2]. Actually there were
two desperate acts rather than one. First, there was his unheard-of step of attach-
ing physical significance to finite 'energy elements' [Eq. 19.15]. Second, there was
his equally unheard-of counting procedure given by Eq. 19.13. In Planck's opin-
ion, 'the electromagnetic theory of radiation does not provide us with any starting
point whatever to speak of such a probability [ WN] in a definite sense' [PI]. This
statement is, of course, incorrect. As will be discussed in Section 19b, the classical
equipartition theorem could have given him a quite definite method for determin-
THE LIGHT-QUANTUM 37!
ing all thermodynamic quantities he was interested in—but would not have given
him the answer he desired to derive.
However, let us leave aside for the moment what Planck did not do or what he
might have done and return to his unorthodox handling of Boltzmann's principle.
In his papers, Planck alluded to the inspiration he had received from Boltzmann's
statistical methods.* But in Boltzmann's case the question was to determine the
most probable way in which a fixed number of distinguishable gas molecules with
fixed total energy are distributed over cells in phase space. The corresponding
counting problem, discussed previously in Section 4b, has nothing to do with
Planck's counting of partitions of indistinguishable objects, the energy elements.
In fact, this new way of counting, which prefigures the Bose-Einstein counting of
a quarter century later, cannot be justified by any stretch of the classical imagi-
nation. Planck himself knew that and said so. Referring to Eq. 19.13, he wrote:
Experience will prove whether this hypothesis [my italics] is realized in nature.
[P7]**
Thus the only justification for Planck's two desperate acts was that they gave him
what he wanted. His reasoning was mad, but his madness has that divine quality
that only the greatest transitional figures can bring to science. It cast Planck, con-
servative by inclination, into the role of a reluctant revolutionary. Deeply rooted
in nineteenth century thinking and prejudice, he made the first conceptual break
that has made twentieth century physics look so discontinuously different from
that of the preceding era. Although there have been other major innovations in
physics since December 1900, the world has not seen since a figure like Planck.
From 1859 to 1926, blackbody radiation remained a problem at the frontier of
theoretical physics, first in thermodynamics, then in electromagnetism, then in the
old quantum theory, and finally in quantum statistics. From the experimental
point of view, the right answer had been found by 1900. As Pringsheim put it in
a lecture given in 1903, 'Planck's equation is in such good agreement with exper-
iment that it can be considered, at least to high approximation, as the mathemat-
ical expression of Kirchhoff's function' [P8]. That statement still holds true. Sub-
sequent years saw only refinements of the early results.
The quality of the work by the experimental pioneers can best be illustrated by
the following numbers. In 1901 Planck obtained from the available data the value
h = 6.55 X 10~27 erg-s for his constant [P9]. The modern value is 6.63 X 10~27.
For the Boltzmann constant, he found k = 1.34 X 10~'6 erg-K"1; the present
best value is 1.38 X 10~16. Using his value for k, he could determine Avogadro's
number N from the relation R = Nk, where R is the gas constant. Then from
Faraday's law for univalent electrolytes, F = Ne, he obtained the value e = 4.69
X 10^10 esu [P7]. The present best value is 4.80 X 10~10. At the time of Planck's
*In January 1905 and again in January 1906, Planck proposed Boltzmann for the Nobel prize.
**The interesting suggestion has been made that Planck may have been led to Eq. 19.13 by a math-
ematical formula in one of Boltzmann's papers [K4].
372 THE QUANTUM THEORY
determination of e, J. J. Thomson [Tl] had measured the charge of the electron
with the result e = 6.5 X 10~10! Not until 1908, when the charge of the alpha
particle was found to be 9.3 X 10~10 [R3] was it realized how good Planck's value
for e was.
From the very start, Planck's results were a source of inspiration and bewil-
derment to Einstein. Addressing Planck in 1929, he said 'It is twenty-nine years
ago that I was inspired by his ingenious derivation of the radiation formula which
. . . applied Boltzmann's statistical method in such a novel way' [El]. In 1913,
Einstein wrote that Planck's work 'invigorates and at the same time makes so
difficult the physicist's existence.... It would be edifying if we could weigh the
brain substance which has been sacrified by the physicists on the altar of the [Kirch-
hoff function]; and the end of these cruel sacrifices is not yet in sight!' [E2]. Of his
own earliest efforts, shortly after 1900, to understand the quantum theory, he
recalled much later that 'all my attempts ... to adapt the theoretical foundations
of physics to this [new type of] knowledge failed completely. It was as if the ground
had been pulled from under one, with no firm foundation to be seen anywhere'
[E3].
From my discussions with Einstein, I know that he venerated Planck as the
discoverer of the quantum theory, that he deeply respected him as a human being
who stood firm under the inordinate sufferings of his personal life and of his coun-
try, and that he was grateful to him: 'You were the first to advocate the theory of
relativity' [El]. In 1918 he proposed Planck for the Nobel prize.* In 1948, after
Planck's death, Einstein wrote, 'This discovery [i.e., the quantum theory] set sci-
ence a fresh task: that of finding a new conceptual basis for all of physics. Despite
remarkable partial gains, the problem is still far from a satisfactory solution' [E4].
Let us now return to the beginnings of the quantum theory. Nothing further
happened in quantum physics after 1901 until Einstein proposed the light-quan-
tum hypothesis.
19b. Einstein on Planck: 1905.
The Rayleigh-Einstein-Jeans Law
The first sentence on the quantum theory published by Einstein was written in
the month of March, in the year 1905. It is the title of his first paper on light-
quanta, 'On a heuristic point of view concerning the generation and conversion of
light' [E5, Al]. (In this chapter, I shall call this paper the March paper.) Web-
ster's Dictionary contains the following definition of the term heuristic: 'providing
aid and direction in the solution of a problem but otherwise unjustified or inca-
pable of justification.' Later on, I shall mention the last sentence published by
Einstein on scientific matters, also written in March, exactly one half-century
•See Chapter 30.
THE LIGHT-QUANTUM 373
later. It also deals with the quantum theory. It has one thing in common with the
opening sentence mentioned above. They both express Einstein's view that the
quantum theory is provisional in nature. The persistence of this opinion of Ein-
stein's is one of the main themes of this book. Whatever one may think of the
status of the quantum theory in 1955, in 1905 this opinion was, of course, entirely
justified.
In the March paper, Einstein referred to Eq. 19.6 as 'the Planck formula,
which agrees with all experiments to date.' But what was the meaning of Planck's
derivation of that equation? 'The imperfections of [that derivation] remained at
first hidden, which was most fortunate for the development of physics' [E3]. The
March paper opens with a section entitled 'on a difficulty concerning the theory
of blackbody radiation,' in which he put these imperfections in sharp focus.
His very simple argument was based on two solid consequences of classical
theory. The first of these was the Planck equation (Eq. 19.11). The second was
the equipartition law of classical mechanics. Applied to f/in Eq. (19.11), that is,
to the equilibrium energy of a one-dimensional material harmonic oscillator, this
law yields
(19.16)
where R is the gas constant, N Avogadro's number, and R/N (= k) the Boltz-
mann constant (for a number of years, Einstein did not use the symbol k in his
papers). From Eqs. 19.10 and 19.16, Einstein obtained
^ T i-.
and went on to note that this classical relation is in disagreement with experiment
and has the disastrous consequence that a = oo, where a is the Stefan-Boltzmann
constant given in Eq. 19.3.
'If Planck had drawn this conclusion, he would probably not have made his
great discovery,' Einstein said later [E3]. Planck had obtained Eq. 19.11 in 1897.
At that time, the equipartition law had been known for almost thirty years. Dur-
ing the 1890s, Planck had made several errors in reasoning before he arrived at
his radiation law, but none as astounding and of as great an historical significance
as his fortunate failure to be the first to derive Eq. 19.17. This omission is no
doubt related to Planck's decidedly negative attitude (before 1900) towards Boltz-
mann's ideas on statistical mechanics.
Equation 19.17, commonly known as the Rayleigh-Jeans law, has an inter-
esting and rather hilarious history, as may be seen from the following chronology
of events.
June 1900. There appears a brief paper by Rayleigh [R4]. It contains for the
first time the suggestion to apply to radiation 'the Maxwell -Boltzmann doctrine
of the partition of energy' (i.e., the equipartition theorem). From this doctrine,
Rayleigh goes on to derive the relation p = c^v2 T but does not evaluate the con-
. slant c,. It should be stressed that Rayleigh's derivation of this result had the
This expression became known as the Rayleigh law. Already in 1900 Rubens and
Kurlbaum (and also Lummer and Pringsheim) found this law wanting, as was
seen on page 367.
Thus the experimentalists close to Planck were well aware of Rayleigh's work.
One wonders whether or not Planck himself knew of this important paper, which
appeared half a year before he proposed his own law. Whichever may be the case,
in 1900 Planck did not refer to Rayleigh's contribution.!
March 17 and June 9, 1905. Einstein gives the derivation of Eq. 19.17 dis-
cussed previously. His paper is submitted March 17 and appears on June 9.
May 6 and 18, 1905. In a letter to Nature (published May 18), Rayleigh
returns to his ^T^law and now computes c,. His answer for ct is off by a factor
of 8[R5].
June 5, 1905. James Hopwood Jeans adds a postscript to a completed paper,
in which he corrects Rayleigh's oversight. The paper appears a month later [Jl].
In July 1905 Rayleigh acknowledges Jeans' contribution [R6].
It follows from this chronology (not that it matters much) that the Rayleigh-
Jeans law ought properly to be called the Rayleigh-Einstein-Jeans law.
The purpose of this digression about Eq. 19.17 is not merely to note who said
what first. Of far greater interest is the role this equation played in the early
reactions to the quantum theory. From 1900 to 1905, Planck's radiation formula
was generally considered to be neither more nor less than a successful represen-
tation of the data (see [Bl]). Only in 1905 did it begin to dawn, and then only on
* Planck derived his radiation law in a circuitous way via the equilibrium properties of his material
oscillators. He did so because of his simultaneous concern with two questions, How is radiative
equilibrium established? What is the equilibrium distribution? The introduction of the material
oscillators would, Planck hoped, show the way to answer both questions. Rayleigh wisely concen-
trated on the second question only. He considered a cavity filled with 'aetherial oscillators' assumed
to be in equilibrium. This enabled him to apply equipartition directly to these radiation oscillators.
**This same observation was also made independently by Einstein in 1905 [E5].
fNeither did Lorentz, who in 1903 gave still another derivation of the v2T law [L3]. The details
need not concern us. It should be noted that Lorentz gave the correct answer for the constant ct.
However, he did not derive the expression for ct directly. Rather he found c\ by appealing to the
long-wavelength limit of Planck's law.(19.18)374 THE QUANTUM THEORY
distinct advantage over Planck's reasoning of dispensing altogether with the lat-
ter's material oscillators.* Rayleigh also realizes that this relation should be inter-
preted as a limiting law: 'The suggestion is then that [p = c^T], rather than
[Wien's law, Eq. 19.5] may be the proper form when [ T/v\ is great' (my ital-
ics).** In order to suppress the catastrophic high frequency behavior, he intro-
duces next an ad hoc exponential cutoff factor and proposes the overall radiation
law
THE LIGHT-QUANTUM 375
a few, that a crisis in physics was at hand [E6]. The failure of the Rayleigh-
Einstein-Jeans law was the cause of this turn of events.
Rayleigh's position on the failure of Eq. 19.17 as a universal law was that 'we
must admit the failure of the law of equipartition in these extreme cases' (i.e., at
high frequencies) [R5]. Jeans took a different view: the equipartition law is cor-
rect but 'the supposition that the energy of the ether is in equilibrium with that
of matter is utterly erroneous in the case of ether vibrations of short wavelength
under experimental conditions' [J2]. Thus Jeans considered Planck's constant h
as a phenomenological parameter well-suited as an aid in fitting data but devoid
of fundamental significance. The nonequilibrium-versus-failure-of-equipartition
debate continued for a number of years [H2]. The issue was still raised at the first
Solvay Congress in 1911, but by then the nonequilibrium view no longer aroused
much interest.
The March paper, the first of Einstein's six papers written in 1905, was com-
pleted almost exactly one year after he had finished the single article he published
in 1904 [E7], in which Planck is mentioned for the first time (see Section 4c). The
middle section of that paper is entitled 'On the meaning of the constant K in the
kinetic atomic energy,' K being half the Boltzmann constant. In the final section,
'Application to radiation,' he had discussed energy fluctuations of radiation near
thermal equilibrium. He was on his way from studying the second law of ther-
modynamics to finding methods for the determination of k or—which is almost
the same thing—Avogadro's number N. He was also on his way from statistical
physics to quantum physics. After the 1904 paper came a one-year pause. His
first son was born. His first permanent appointment at the patent office came
through. He thought long and hard in that year, I believe. Then, in Section 2 of
the March paper, he stated the first new method of the many he was to give in
1905 for the determination of N: compare Eq. 19.17 with the long-wavelength
experimental data. This gave him
(19.19)
1 his value is just as good as the one Planck had tound trom his radiation law,
but, Einstein argued, if I use Eq. 19.17 instead of Planck's law (Eq. 19.6), then
I understand from accepted first principles what I am doing.
Einstein derived the above value for N in the light-quantum paper, completed
in March 1905. One month later, in his doctoral thesis, he found N — 2.1 X
1023. He did not point out either that the March value was good or that the April
value left something to be desired, for the simple reason that TV was not known
well at that time. I have already discussed the important role that Einstein's May
1905 method, Brownian motion, played in the consolidation of the value for N.
We now leave the classical part of the March paper and turn to its quantum
part.
376 THE QUANTUM THEORY
19c. The Light-Quantum Hypothesis and the Heuristic Principle
I mentioned in Chapter 3 that the March paper was Einstein's only contribution
that he himself called revolutionary. Let us next examine in detail what this rev-
olution consisted of.
In 1905, it was Einstein's position that Eq. 19.6 agreed with experiment but
not with existing theory, whereas Eq. 19.17 agreed with existing theory but not
with experiment. He therefore set out to study blackbody radiation in a new way
'which is not based on a picture of the generation and propagation of radiation'—
that is, which does not make use of Planck's equation (Eq. 19.11). But then some-
thing had to be found to replace that equation. For that purpose, Einstein chose
to reason 'im Anschluss an die Erfahrung,' phenomenologically. His new starting
point was the experimentally known validity of Wien's guess (Eq. 19.5) in the
region of large (3v/T, the Wien regime. He extracted the light-quantum postulate
from an analogy between radiation in the Wien regime and a classical ideal gas
of material particles.
Einstein began by rederiving in his own way the familiar formula for the finite
reversible change of entropy S at constant T for the case where n gas molecules
in the volume v0 are confined to a subvolume v:
(19.20)
Two and a half pages of the March paper are devoted to the derivation and dis-
cussion of this relation. What Einstein had to say on this subject was described
following Eq. 4.15.
Now to the radiation problem. Let <j>(v,T)dv be the entropy density per unit
volume in the frequency interval between v and v + dv. Then (p is again the
spectral density)
(19.21)
Assume that Wien's guess (Eq. 19.5) is applicable. Then
(19.22)
Let the radiation be contained in a volume v. Then S(v,v,T} = fyvdv and E(v,
v, T) = pvdv are the total entropy and energy in that volume in the interval v to
v + dv, respectively. In the Wien regime, S follows trivially from Eq. 19.22 and
one finds that
(19.23)
Compare Eqs. 19.23 and 19.20 and we have Einstein's
THE LIGHT-QUANTUM 377
Light-quantum hypothesis: Monochromatic radiation of low density [i.e.,
within the domain of validity of the Wien radiation formula] behaves in ther-
modynamic respect as if it consists of mutually independent energy quanta of
magnitude Rftv/N (ft = h/k, R/N = k, Rftv/N = hv).
This result, which reads like a theorem, was nevertheless a hypothesis since it
was based on Wien's guess, which itself still needed proof from first principles.
To repeat, the derivation is based on a blend of purely classical theoretical physics
with a piece of experimental information that defies description in classical terms.
The genius of the light-quantum hypothesis lies in the intuition for choosing the
right piece of experimental input and the right, utterly simple, theoretical ingre-
dients. One may wonder what on earth moved Einstein to think of the volume
dependence of the entropy as a tool for his derivation. That choice is less surprising
if one recalls* that a year earlier the question of volume dependence had seemed
quite important to him for the analysis of the energy fluctuations of radiation.
Einstein's introduction of light-quanta in the Wien regime is the first step
toward the concept of radiation as a Bose gas of photons. Just as was the case for
Planck's derivation of his radiation law, Einstein's derivation of the light-quantum
hypothesis grew out of statistical mechanics. The work of both men has a touch
of madness, though of a far more subtle kind in Einstein's case. To see this, please
note the words mutually independent in the formulation of the hypothesis. Since
1925, we have known (thanks to Bose and especially to Einstein) that the photon
gas obeys Bose statistics for all frequencies, that the statistical independence of
energy quanta is not true in general, and that the gas analogy which makes use
of the Boltzmann statistics relation (Eq. 19.20) is not true in general either. We
also know that it is important not to assume—as Einstein had tacitly done in his
derivation—that the number of energy quanta is in general conserved. However,
call it genius, call it luck, in the Wien regime the counting according to Boltzmann
and the counting according to Bose happen to give the same answer while non-
conservation of photons effectively plays no role. This demands some explanation,
which I shall give in Chapter 23.
So far there is still no revolution. The physicist of 1905 could take or leave the
light-quantum hypothesis as nothing more than a curious property of pure radia-
tion in thermal equilibrium, without any physical consequence. Einstein's
extraordinary boldness lies in the step he took next, a step which, incidentally,
gained him the Nobel prize in 1922.
The heuristic principle: If, in regard to the volume dependence of the entropy,
monochromatic radiation (of sufficiently low density) behaves as a discrete
medium consisting of energy quanta of magnitude Rfiv/' N, then this suggests
an inquiry as to whether the laws of the generation and conversion of light are
also constituted as if light were to consist of energy quanta of this kind.
*See the discussion following Eq. 4.14.
378 THE QUANTUM THEORY
In other words, the light-quantum hypothesis is an assertion about a quantum
property of free electromagnetic radiation; the heuristic principle is an extension
of these properties of light to the interaction between light and matter. That,
indeed, was a revolutionary step.
I shall leave Einstein's applications of the heuristic principle to Section 19e and
shall describe next how, in 1906, Einstein ceased assiduously avoiding Planck's
equation (Eq. 19.11) and embraced it as a new hypothesis.
19d. Einstein on Planck: 1906
In 1906 Einstein returned once more to Planck's theory of 1900. Now he had
much more positive things to say about Planck's radiation law. This change in
attitude was due to his realization that 'Planck's theory makes implicit use of the
. . . light-quantum hypothesis' [E8]. Einstein's reconsideration of Planck's reason-
ing and of its relation to his own work can be summarized in the following way:
1. Planck had used the p- U relation, Eq. 19.11, which follows from classical
mechanics and electrodynamics.
2. Planck had introduced a quantization related to U, namely, the prescription
U = Phv/N(sce Eqs. 19.12-19.15).
3. If one accepts step 2, which is alien to classical theory, then one has no reason
to trust Eq. 19.11, which is an orthodox consequence of classical theory.
4. Einstein had introduced a quantization related to p: the light-quantum hypoth-
esis. In doing so, he had not used the p- U relation (Eq. 19.11).
5. The question arises of whether a connection can be established between
Planck's quantization related to U and Einstein's quantization related to p.
Einstein's answer was that this is indeed possible, namely, by introducing a
new assumption: Eq. 19.11 is also valid in the quantum theory! Thus he proposed
to trust Eq. 19.11 even though its theoretical foundation had become a mystery
when quantum effects are important. He then re-examined the derivation of
Planck's law with the help of this new assumption. I omit the details and only
state his conclusion. 'We must consider the following theorem to be the basis of
Planck's radiation theory: the energy of a [Planck oscillator] can take on only those
values that are integral multiples of hv; in emission and absorption the energy of
a [Planck oscillator] changes by jumps which are multiples of hv.' Thus already
in 1906 Einstein correctly guessed the main properties of a quantum mechanical
material oscillator and its behavior in radiative transitions. We shall see in Section
19f that Planck was not at all prepared to accept at once Einstein's reasoning,
despite the fact that it lent support to his own endeavors. As to Einstein himself,
his acceptance of Planck's Eq. 19.11, albeit as a hypothesis, led to a major advance
in his own work: the quantum theory of specific heats, to be discussed in the next
chapter.
THE LIGHT-QUANTUM 379
19e. The Photoelectric Effect: The Second Coming of h
The most widely remembered part of Einstein's March paper deals with his inter-
pretation of the photoelectric effect. The present discussion of this subject is orga-
nized as follows. After a few general remarks, I sketch its history from 1887 to
1905. Then I turn to Einstein's contribution. Finally I outline the developments
up to 1916, by which time Einstein's predictions were confirmed.
These days, photoelectron spectroscopy is a giant field of research with its own
journals. Gases, liquids, and solids are being investigated. Applications range from
solid state physics to biology. The field has split into subdisciplines, such as the
spectroscopy in the ultraviolet and in the X-ray region. In 1905, however, the
subject was still in its infancy. We have a detailed picture of the status of photo-
electricity a few months before Einstein finished his paper on light-quanta: the
first review article on the photoelectric effect, completed in December 1904 [S2],
shows that at that time photoelectricity was as much a frontier subject as were
radioactivity, cathode ray physics, and (to a slightly lesser extent) the study of
Hertzian waves.
In 1905 the status of experimental techniques was still rudimentary in all these
areas; yet in each of them initial discoveries of great importance had already been
made. Not suprisingly, an experimentalist mainly active in one of these areas
would also work in some of the others. Thus Hertz, the first to observe a photo-
electric phenomenon (if we consider only the so-called external photoelectric
effect), made this discovery at about the same time he demonstrated the electro-
magnetic nature of light. The high school teachers Julius Elster and Hans Geitel
pioneered the study of photoelectric effects in vacuum tubes and constructed the
first phototubes [E9]; they also performed fundamental experiments in radioac-
tivity. Pierre Curie and one of his co-workers were the first to discover that pho-
toelectric effects can be induced by X-rays [Cl]. J. J. Thomson is best remem-
bered for his discovery of the electron in his study of cathode rays [T2]; yet
perhaps his finest experimental contribution deals with the photoeffect.
Let us now turn to the work of the pioneers.
1887: Hertz. Five experimental observations made within the span of one
decade largely shaped the physics of the twentieth century. In order of appearance,
they are the discoveries of the photoelectric effect, X-rays, radioactivity, the Zee-
man effect, and the electron. The first three of these were made accidentally. Hertz
found the photoeffect when he became intrigued by a side effect he had observed
in the course of his investigations on the electromagnetic wave nature of light
[H3]. At one point, he was studying spark discharges generated by potential dif-
ferences between two metal surfaces. A primary spark coming from one surface
generates a secondary spark on the other. Since the latter was harder to see, Hertz
built an enclosure around it to eliminate stray light. He was struck by the fact
that this caused a shortening of the secondary spark. He found next that this effect
was due to that part of the enclosure that was interposed between the two sparks.
380 THE QUANTUM THEORY
It was not an electrostatic effect, since it made no qualitative difference whether
the interposed surface was a conductor or an insulator. Hertz began to suspect
that it might be due to the light given off by the primary spark. In a delightful
series of experiments, he confirmed his guess: light can produce sparks. For exam-
ple, he increased the distance between the metal surfaces until sparks ceased to be
produced. Then he illuminated the surfaces with a nearby electric arc lamp: the
sparks reappeared. He also came to the (not quite correct) conclusion that 'If the
observed phenomenon is indeed an action of light, then it is only one of ultraviolet
light.'
1888: Hallwachs. Stimulated by Hertz's work, Wilhelm Hallwachs showed
next that irradiation with ultraviolet light causes uncharged metallic bodies to
acquire a positive charge [H4].
The earliest speculations on the nature of the effect predate the discovery of the
electron in 1897. It was suggested in 1889 that ultraviolet light might cause specks
of metallic dust to leave the metal surface [ L4].
1899: J. J. Thomson. Thomson was the first to state that the photoeffect
induced by ultraviolet light consists of the emission of electrons [T3]. He began
his photoelectric studies by measuring the e/m of the particles produced by light,
using the same method he had applied to cathode rays two years earlier (the par-
ticle beams move through crossed electric and magnetic fields). His conclusion:
'The value of m/e in the case of ultraviolet light. ... is the same as for cathode
rays.' In 1897 he had been unable to determine m or e separately for cathode
rays. Now he saw his way clear to do this for photoelectrons. His second conclu-
sion: 'e is the same in magnitude as the charge carried by the hydrogen atom in
the electrolysis of solutions.'
Thomson's method for finding e is of major interest, since it is one of the earliest
applications of cloud chamber techniques. His student Charles Thomson Rees
Wilson had discovered that charged particles can form nuclei for condensation of
supersaturated water vapor. Thomson applied this method to the determination
of the number of charged particles by droplet counting. Their total charge was
determined electrometrically. In view of these technical innovations, his value for
e (6.8 X 10~10 esu) must be considered very respectable.
1902: Lenard. In 1902 Philip Lenard studied the photoeffect using a carbon
arc light as a source. He could vary the intensity of his light source by a factor of
1000. He made the crucial discovery that the electron energy showed 'not the
slightest dependence on the light intensity' [L5]. What about the variation of the
photoelectron energy with the light frequency? One increases with the other; noth-
ing more was known in 1905 [S2].
1905: Einstein. On the basis of his heuristic principle, Einstein proposed the
following 'simplest picture' for the photoeffect. A light-quantum gives all its
energy to a single electron, and the energy transfer by one light-quantum is inde-
pendent of the presence of other light-quanta. He also noted that an electron
ejected from the interior of the body will in general suffer an energy loss before
where v is the frequency of the incident (monochromatic) radiation and P is the
work function, the energy needed to escape the surface. He pointed out that Eq.
19.24 explains Lenard's observation of the light intensity independence of the elec-
tron energy.
Equation 19.24 represents the second coming of h. This equation made very
new and very strong predictions. First, E should vary linearly with v. Second, the
slope of the (E,v) plot is a universal constant, independent of the nature of the
irradiated material. Third, the value of the slope was predicted to be Planck's
constant determined from the radiation law. None of this was known then.
Einstein gave several other applications of his heuristic principle: (1) the fre-
quency of light in photoluminescence cannot exceed the frequency of the incident
light (Stokes's rule) [E5]; (2) in photbionization, the energy of the emitted electron
cannot exceed hv, where v is the incident light frequency [E5];* (3) in 1906, he
discussed the application to the inverse photoeffect (the Volta effect) [E8]; (4) in
1909, he treated the generation of secondary cathode rays by X-rays [Ell]; (5) in
1911, he used the principle to predict the high-frequency limit in Bremsstrahlung
[E12].
7975: Millikan; the Duane-Hunt Limit. In 1909, a second review paper on
the photoeffect appeared [L6]. We learn from it that experiments were in progress
to find the frequency dependence of Em:al but that no definite conclusions could be
drawn as yet. Among the results obtained during the next few years, those of
Arthur Llewellyn Hughes, J. J. Thomson's last student, are of particular interest.
Hughes found a linear E-v relation and a value for the slope parameter that
varied from 4.9 to 5.7 X 10~27, depending on the nature of the irradiated material
[H5]. These and other results were critically reviewed in 1913 and technical res-
ervations about Hughes's results were expressed [P10]. However, soon thereafter
Jeans stated in his important survey of the theory of radiation [ J3] that 'there is
almost general agreement' that Eq. 19.24 holds true. Opinions were divided, but
evidently experimentalists were beginning to close in on the Einstein relation.
In the meantime, in his laboratory at the University of Chicago, Millikan had
already been at work on this problem for several years. He used visible light (a
set of lines in the mercury spectrum); various alkali metals served as targets (these
are photosensitive up to about 0.6|tm). On April 24, 1914, and again on April 24,
1915, he reported on the progress of his results at meetings of the American Phys-
ical Society [Ml, M2]. A long paper published in 1916 gives the details of the
*In 1912, Einstein [E10] noted that the heuristic principle could be applied not only to photonion-
ization but also in a quite similar way to photochemical processes.THE LIGHT-QUANTUM 381
it reaches the surface. Let £max be the electron energy for the case where this
energy loss is zero. Then, Einstein proposed, we have the relation (in modern
notation)
(19.24)
382 THE QUANTUM THEORY
experiments and a summary of his beautiful results: Eq. 19.24 holds very well
and 'Planck's h has been photoelectrically determined with a precision of about
0.5% and is found to have the value h = 6.57 X 10~27.'
The Volta effect also confirmed the heuristic principle. This evidence came
from X-ray experiments performed in 1915 at Harvard by William Duane and
his assistant Franklin Hunt [Dl]. (Duane was one of the first biophysicists in
America. His interest in X-rays was due largely to the role they play in cancer
therapy.) Working with an X-ray tube operated at a constant potential V, they
found that the X-ray frequencies produced have a sharp upper limit v given by
eV = hv, as had been predicted by Einstein in 1906. This limiting frequency is
now called the Duane-Hunt limit. They also obtained the respectable value h
= 6.39 X 10~27.
In Section 18a, I mentioned some of Millikan's reactions to these developments.
Duane and Hunt did not quote Einstein at all in their paper. I turn next to a
more systematic review of the responses to the light-quantum idea.
19f. Reactions to the Light-Quantum Hypothesis
Comments by Planck, Nernst, Rubens, and Warburg written in 1913 when they
proposed Einstein for membership in the Prussian Academy will set the right tone
for what follows next. Their recommendation, which expressed the highest praise
for his achievements, concludes as follows. 'In sum, one can say that there is hardly
one among the great problems in which modern physics is so rich to which Ein-
stein has not made a icmarkable contribution. That he may sometimes have
missed the target in his speculations, as, for example, in his hypothesis of light-
quanta, cannot really be held too much against him, for it is not possible to intro-
duce really new ideas even in the most exact sciences without sometimes taking a
risk' [K5].
/. Einstein's Caution. Einstein's letters provide a rich source of his insights
into physics and people. His struggles with the quantum theory in general and
with the light-quantum hypothesis in particular are a recurring theme. In 1951
he wrote to Besso, 'Die ganzen 50 Jahre bewusster Grubelei haben mich der
Antwort der Frage "Was sind Lichtquanten" nicht naher gebracht' [E13].*
Throughout his scientific career, quantum physics remained a crisis phenome-
non to Einstein. His views on the nature of the crisis would change, but the crisis
would not go away. This led him to approach quantum problems with great cau-
tion in his writings—a caution already evident in the way the title of his March
paper was phrased. In the earliest years following his light-quantum proposal,
Einstein had good reasons to regard it as provisional. He could formulate it clearly
only in the domain hv/kT^>\, where Wien's blackbody radiation law holds. Also,
*A11 these fifty years of pondering have not brought me any closer to answering the question, What
are light quanta?
THE LIGHT-QUANTUM 383
he had used this law as an experimental fact without explaining it. Above all, it
was obvious to him from the start that grave tensions existed between his principle
and the wave picture of electromagnetic radiation—tensions which, in his own
mind, were resolved neither then nor later. A man as perfectly honest as Einstein
had no choice but to emphasize the provisional nature of his hypothesis. He did
this very clearly in 1911, at the first Solvay congress, where he said, 'I insist on
the provisional character of this concept [light-quanta] which does not seem recon-
cilable with the experimentally verified consequences of the wave theory' [El2].
It is curious how often physicists believed that Einstein was ready to retract.
The first of these was his admirer von Laue, who wrote Einstein in 1906, 'To me
at least, any paper in which probability considerations are applied to the vacuum
seems very dubious'[L7], and who wrote him again at the end of 1907, 'I would
like to tell you how pleased I am that you have given up your light-quantum
theory' [L8]. In 1912 Sommerfeld wrote, 'Einstein drew the most far-reaching
consequences from Planck's discovery [of the quantum of action] and transferred
the quantum properties of emission and absorption phenomena to the structure of
light energy in space without, as I believe, maintaining today his original point of
view [of 1905] in all its audacity' [S3]. Referring to the light-quanta, Millikan
stated in 1913 that Einstein 'gave . . . up, I believe, some two years ago' [M3],
and in 1916 he wrote, 'Despite . . . the apparently complete success of the Einstein
equation [for the photoeffect], the physical theory of which it was designed to be
the symbolic expression is found so untenable that Einstein himself, I believe, no
longer holds to it' [M4].
It is my impression that the resistance to the light-quantum idea was so strong
that Einstein's caution was almost hopefully mistaken for vacillation. However,
judging from his papers and letters, I find no evidence that he at any time with-
drew any of his statements made in 1905.
2. Electromagnetism: Free Fields and Interactions. Einstein's March paper
is the second of the revolutionary papers on the old quantum theory. The first one
was, of course, Planck's of December 1900 [P4]. Both papers contained proposals
that flouted classical concepts. Yet the resistance to Planck's ideas—while cer-
tainly not absent—was much less pronounced and vehement than in the case of
Einstein. Why?
First, a general remark on the old quantum theory. Its main discoveries con-
cerned quantum rules for stationary states of matter and of pure radiation. By and
large, no comparable breakthroughs occurred in regard to the most difficult of all
questions concerning electromagnetic phenomena: the interaction between matter
and radiation. There, advances became possible only after the advent of quantum
field theory, when the concepts of particle creation and annihilation were formu-
lated. Since then, progress on the interaction problems has been enormous. Yet
even today this is not by any means a problem area on which the books are closed.
As we saw in Section 19a, when Planck introduced the quantum in order to
describe the spectral properties of pure radiation he did so by a procedure of quan-
384 THE QUANTUM THEORY
tization applied to matter, to his material oscillators. He was unaware of the fact
that his proposal implied the need for a revision of the classical radiation field
itself. His reasoning alleged to involve only a modification of the interaction
between matter and radiation. This did not seem too outlandish, since the inter-
action problem was full of obscurities in any event. By contrast, when Einstein
proposed the light-quantum he had dared to tamper with the Maxwell equations
for free fields, which were believed (with good reason) to be much better under-
stood. Therefore, it seemed less repugnant to accept Planck's extravaganzas than
Einstein's.
This difference in assessment of the two theoretical issues, one raised by Planck,
one by Einstein, is quite evident in the writings of the leading theorists of the day.
Planck himself had grave reservations about light-quanta. In 1907 he wrote to
Einstein:
I am not seeking the meaning of the quantum of action [light-quanta] in the
vacuum but rather in places where absorption and emission occur, and [I]
assume that what happens in the vacuum is rigorously described by Maxwell's
equations. [Pll]
A remark by Planck at a physics meeting in 1909 vividly illustrates his and others'
predilections for 'leaving alone' the radiation field and for seeking the resolution
of the quantum paradoxes in the interactions:
I believe one should first try to move the whole difficulty of the quantum theory
to the domain of the interaction between matter and radiation. [PI2]
In that same year, Lorentz expressed his belief in 'Planck's hypothesis of the
energy elements' but also his strong reservations regarding 'light-quanta which
retain their individuality in propagation' [L9].
Thus by the end of the first decade of the twentieth century, many leading
theorists were prepared to accept the fact that the quantum theory was here to
stay. However, the Maxwell theory of the free radiation field, pure and simple,
provided neither room for modification (it seemed) nor a place to hide one's igno-
rance, in contrast with the less transparent situation concerning the interaction
between matter and radiation. This position did not change much until the 1920s
and remained one of the deepest roots of resistance to Einstein's ideas.
3. The Impact of Experiment. The first three revolutionary papers on the
old quantum theory were those by Planck [P4], Einstein [E5], and Bohr [B2]. All
three contained proposals that flouted classical concepts. Yet the resistance to the
ideas of Planck and Bohr—while certainly not absent—was much less pro-
nounced and vehement than in the case of Einstein. Why? The answer: because
of the impact of experiment.
Physicists—good physicists—enjoy scientific speculation in private but tend to
frown upon it when done in public. They are conservative revolutionaries, resist-
ing innovation as long as possible and at all intellectual cost, but embracing it
THE LIGHT-QUANTUM 385
when the evidence is incontrovertible. If they do not, physics tends to pass them
by.
I often argued with Einstein about reliance on experimental evidence for con-
firmation of fundamental new ideas. In Chapter 25, I shall have more to say on
that issue. Meanwhile, I shall discuss next the influence of experimental devel-
opments on the acceptance of the ideas of Planck, Bohr, and Einstein.
First, Planck. His proximity to the first-rate experiments on blackbody radia-
tion being performed at the Physikalisch Technische Reichsanstalt in Berlin was
beyond doubt a crucial factor in his discovery of 1900 (though it would be very
wrong to say that this was the only decisive factor). In the first instance, experi-
ment also set the pace for the acceptance of the Planck formula. One could (and
did and should) doubt his derivation, as, among others, Einstein did in 1905. At
the same time, however, neither Einstein nor any one else denied the fact that
Planck's highly nontrivial universal curve admirably fitted the data. Somehow he
had to be doing something right.
Bohr's paper [B2] of April 1913 about the hydrogen atom was revolutionary
and certainly not at once generally accepted. But there was no denying that his
expression 2ir2e4m/h}c for the Rydberg constant of hydrogen was remarkably
accurate (to within 6 per cent, in 1913). When, in October 1913, Bohr was able
to give for the ratio of the Rydberg constants for singly ionized helium and hydro-
gen an elementary derivation that was in agreement with experiment to five sig-
nificant figures [B3], it became even more clear that Bohr's ideas had a great deal
to do with the real world. When told of the helium/hydrogen ratio, Einstein is
reported to have said of Bohr's work, 'Then it is one of the greatest discoveries'
[H6].
Einstein himself had little to show by comparison.
To be sure, he had mentioned a number of experimental consequences of his
hypothesis in his 1905 paper. But he had no curves to fit, no precise numbers to
show. He had noted that in the photoelectric effect the electron energy E is con-
stant for fixed light frequency v. This explained Lenard's results. But Lenard's
measurements were not so precise as to prevent men like J. J. Thomson and Som-
merfeld from giving alternative theories of the photoeffect of a kind in which Len-
ard's law does not rigorously apply [S4]. Einstein's photoelectric equation, E =
hv — P, predicts a linear relation between E and v. At the time Einstein proposed
his heuristic principle, no one knew how E depended on v beyond the fact that
one increases with the other. Unlike Bohr and Planck, Einstein had to wait a
decade before he saw one of his predictions, the linear E-v relation, vindicated,
as was discussed in the previous section. One immediate and salutary effect of
these experimental discoveries was that alternative theories of the photoeffect van-
ished from the scene.
Yet Einstein's apartness did not end even then.
I have already mentioned that Millikan relished his result on the photoeffect
but declared that, even so, the light quantum theory 'seems untenable' [M5]. In
386 THE QUANTUM THEORY
1918, Rutherford commented on the Duane-Hunt results, 'There is at present no
physical explanation possible of this remarkable connection between energy and
frequency' [R7]. One can go on. The fact of the matter is that, even after Ein-
stein's photoelectric law was accepted, almost no one but Einstein himself would
have anything to do with light-quanta.
This went on until the early 1920s, as is best illustrated by quoting the citation
for Einstein's Nobel prize in 1922: 'To Albert Einstein for his services to theoret-
ical physics and especially for his discovery of the law of the photoelectric effect'
[A2]. This is not only an historic understatement but also an accurate reflection
on the consensus in the physics community.
To summarize: the enormous resistance to light-quanta found its roots in the
particle-wave paradoxes. The resistance was enhanced because the light-quan-
tum idea seemed to overthrow that part of electromagnetic theory believed to be
best understood: the theory of the free field. Moreover, experimental support was
long in coming and, even after the photoelectric effect predictions were verified,
light-quanta were still largely considered unacceptable. Einstein's own emphasis
on the provisional nature of the light-quantum hypothesis tended to strengthen
the reservations held by other physicists.
Right after March 1905, Einstein sat down and wrote his doctoral thesis. Then
came Brownian motion, then special relativity, and then the equivalence principle.
He did not return to the light-quantum until 1909. However, in 1906 he made
another important contribution to quantum physics, his theory of specific heats.
This will be the subject of the next chapter. We shall return to the light-quantum
in Chapter 21.
References
Al. A. B. Arons and M. B. Peppard, Am. J. Phys. 33, 367 (1965).
A2. S. Arrhenius in Nobel Lectures in Physics, Vol. 1, p. 478. Elsevier, New York,
1965.
Bl. U. Benz, Arnold Sommerfeld, p. 74. Wissenschaftliche Verlagsgesellschaft, Stutt-
gart, 1975.
B2. N. Bohr, Phil. Mag. 26, 1 (1913).
B3. , Nature 92, 231 (1913).
Cl. P. Curie and G. Sagnac, C. R. Acad. Sci. Paris 130, 1013 (1900).
Dl. W. Duane and F. L. Hunt, Phys. Rev. 6, 166 (1915).
El. A. Einstein, Forschungen undFortschritte 5, 248 (1929).
E2. , Naturw. 1, 1077 (1913).
E3. , in Albert Einstein: Philosopher-Scientist (P. A. Schilpp, Ed.), p. 2. Tudor,
New York, 1949.
E4. , in Out of My Later Years, p. 229. Philosophical Library, New York, 1950.
E5. ,AdP 17, 132(1905).
E6. ,Naturw. 1, 1077 (1913).
E7. ,AdP 14, 354 (1904).
THE LIGHT-QUANTUM 387
E8. ,AdP20, 199(1906).
E9. J. Elster and H. Geitel, AdP 41, 166 (1890).
E10. A. Einstein, AdP 37, 832 (1912); 38, 881, 888 (1912).
Ell. , Phys. Zeitschr. 10, 817 (1909).
E12. ——, in Proceedings of the First Solvay Congress (P. Langevin and M. de Broglie,
Eds.), p. 443. Gauthier-Villars, Paris, 1912.
E13. , letter to M. Besso, December 12, 1951, EB p. 453.
HI. G. Hettner, Naturw. 10, 1033 (1922).
H2. A. Hermann, Frilhgeschichte der Quantentheorie 1899-1913, p. 32. Mosbach,
Baden, 1969.
H3. H. Hertz, AdP 33, 983 (1887).
H4. W. Hallwachs, AdP 33, 310 (1888).
H5. A. L. Hughes, Trans. Roy. Soc. 212, 205 (1912).
H6. G. de Hevesy, letter to E. Rutherford, October 14, 1913. Quoted in A. S. Eve,
Rutherford, p. 226. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1939.
Jl. J. H. Jeans, Phil. Mag. 10, 91 (1905).
J2. , Nature 72, 293(1905).
J3. , The Electrician, London, 1914, p. 59.
Kl. G. Kirchhoff, Monatsber. Berlin, 1859, p. 662.
K2. , Ann. Phys. Chem. 109, 275 (I860)
K3. H.Kangro, History of Planck's Radiation Law. Taylor and Francis, London, 1976.
K4. M. Klein in History of Twentieth Century Physics. Academic Press, New York,
1977.
K5. G. Kirsten and H. Korber, Physiker uber Physiker, p. 201. Akademie Verlag, Ber-
lin, 1975.
LI. O. Lummer and E. Pringsheim, Verh. Deutsch. Phys. Ges. 2, 163 (1900).
L2. S. P. Langley, Phil. Mag. 21, 394 (1886).
L3. H. A. Lorentz in Collected Works, Vol. 3, p. 155. Nyhoff, the Hague, 1936.
L4. P. Lenard and M. Wolf, AdP 37, 443 (1889).
L5. ,AdP9, 149(1902).
L6. R. Ladenburg, Jahrb. Rad. Elektr. 17, 93, 273 (1909).
L7. M. von Laue, letter to A. Einstein, June 2, 1906.
L8. , letter to A. Einstein, December 27, 1907.
L9. H. A. Lorentz, letter to W. Wien, April 12, 1909. Quoted in [H2], p. 68.
Ml. R. A. Millikan, Phys. Rev. 4, 73 (1914).
M2. , Phys. Rev. 6, 55 (1915).
M3. , Science 37, 119 (1913).
M4. , Phys. Rev. 7, 355 (1916).
M5. , Phys. Rev. 7, 18 (1916).
PI. W. Paschen, AdP 60, 662 (1897).
P2. M. Planck in M. Planck, Physikalische Abhandlungen und Vortrage (M. von
Laue, Ed.), Vol. 3, p. 374. Vieweg, Braunschweig, 1958.
P3. , Verh. Deutsch. Phys. Ges. 2, 202 (1900): Abhandlungen, Vol. 1, p. 687.
P4. , Verh. Deutsch. Phys. Ges. 2, 237 (1900); Abhandlungen, Vol. 1, p. 698.
P5. , AdP 1, 69 (1900); Abhandlungen, Vol. 1, p. 614.
P6. W. Pauli, Collected Scientific Papers, Vol. 1, pp. 602-7. Interscience, New York,
1964.
388 THE QUANTUM THEORY
P7. M. Planck, AdP 4, 553 (1901); Abhandlungen, Vol. 1, p. 717.
P8. E. Pringsheim, Arch. Math. Phys. 7, 236 (1903).
P9. M. Planck, AdP 4, 564 (1901); Abhandlungen, Vol. 1, p. 728.
P10. R. Pohl and L. Pringsheim, Phil. Mag. 26, 1017 (1913).
Pll. M. Planck, letter to A. Einstein, July 6, 1907.
PI2. , Phys. Zeitschr. 10, 825 (1909).
Rl. H. Rubens and F. Kurlbaum, PAW, 1900, p. 929.
R2. and E. F. Nichols, AdP 60, 418 (1897).
R3. E. Rutherford and H. Geiger, Proc. Roy. Soc. A81, 162 (1908).
R4. J. W. S. Rayleigh, Phil. Mag. 49, 539 (1900).
R5. , Nature 72, 54 (1905).
R6. , Nature, 72, 243 (1905).
R7. E. Rutherford, /. Rdntgen Soc. 14, 81 (1918).
51. J. Stefan, Sitzungsber. Ak. Wiss. Wien, Math. Naturw. Kl,2Abt. 79, 391 (1879).
52. E. von Schweidler, Jahrb. Rad. Elektr. 1, 358 (1904).
53. A. Sommerfeld, Verh. Ges. Deutsch. Naturf. Arzte 83, 31 (1912).
54. R. H. Stuewer, The Compton Effect, Chap. 2. Science History, New York, 1975.
Tl. J. J. Thomson, Phil. Mag. 48, 547 (1899).
T2. , Phil. Mag. 44, 269 (1897).
T3. , Phil. Mag. 48, 547 (1899).
Wl. W. Wien, PAW, 1893, p. 55.
W2. , AdP 58, 662 (1896).
