22
Interlude: The BKS Proposal
Sie haben sich heiss und innig geliebt.
Helen Dukas
In January 1924, Niels Bohr, Hendrik Anton Kramers, and John Clarke Slater
submitted to the Philosophical Magazine an article [Bl] that contained drastic
theoretical proposals concerning the interaction of light and matter. It was written
after Compton's discovery, yet it rejected the photon. It was also written after
Einstein and Bohr had met. This chapter on the BKS proposal serves a twofold
purpose. It is a postscript to the story of the photon and a prelude to the Bohr-
Einstein dialogue which will occupy us more fully later on.
I have already mentioned that Einstein was immediately and strongly impressed
by Bohr's work of 1913. The two men did not yet know each other at that time.
A number of years were to pass before their first encounter; meanwhile, they fol-
lowed each other's published work. Also, Ehrenfest kept Einstein informed of the
progress of Bohr's thinking. 'Ehrenfest tells me many details from Niels Bohr's
Gedankenkiiche [thought kitchen]; his must be a first-rate mind, extremely critical
and far-seeing, which never loses track of the grand design' [El]. Einstein
remained forever deeply respectful of Bohr's pioneering work. When he was
nearly seventy, he wrote 'That this insecure and contradictory foundation [of
physics in the years from 1910 to 1920] was sufficient to enable a man of Bohr's
unique instinct and tact to discover the major laws of the spectral lines and of the
electron shells of the atoms together with their significance for chemistry appeared
to me like a miracle—and appears to me as a miracle even today. This is the
highest form of musicality in the sphere of thought' [E2].
Einstein and Bohr finally met in the spring of 1920, in Berlin. At that time,
they both had already been widely recognized as men of destiny who would leave
their indelible marks on the physics of the twentieth century. The impact of their
encounter was intense and went well beyond a meeting of minds only. Shortly
after his visit, Einstein wrote to Bohr, 'Not often in life has a human being caused
me such joy by his mere presence as you did' [E3]. Two days later, he wrote to
Ehrenfest, 'Bohr was here, and I am as much in love with him as you are. He is
416
INTERLUDE: THE BKS PROPOSAL 417
like an extremely sensitive child who moves around in this world in a sort of
trance' [E4]. The next month, Bohr wrote to Einstein, 'To meet you and to talk
with you was one of the greatest experiences I ever had' [B2]. Some years later,
Einstein began a letter to Bohr, 'Lieber oder viehmehr geliebter Bohr,' Dear or
rather beloved Bohr [E5]. Once when I talked with Helen Dukas about the strong
tie between these two men, she made the comment that is at the head of this
chapter: 'They loved each other warmly and dearly.'
Those also were the years of scientific harmony between the two men. In 1922
Einstein wrote to Ehrenfest, 'At present, I am reading a major lecture by Bohr*
which makes his world of thought wonderfully clear. He is truly a man of genius.
It is fortunate to have someone like that. I have full confidence in his way of
thinking' [E6]. Einstein was particularly impressed at that time with Bohr's enun-
ciation and handling of the correspondence principle [E6], a concept on which he
and Bohr were able to see eye to eye, then and later.
All who have known Bohr will be struck by the perceptive characterization
Einstein gave of him much later. 'He utters his opinions like one perpetually grop-
ing and never like one who believes to be in the possession of definite truth' [E7].
Bohr's style of writing makes clear for all to see how he groped and struggled.
'Never express yourself more clearly than you think,' he used to admonish himself
and others. Bohr's articles are sometimes dense. Having myself assisted him on a
number of occasions when he was attempting to put his thoughts on paper, I know
to what enormous lengths he went to find the most appropriate turn of phrase. I
have no such first-hand information about the way Einstein wrote. But, again for
all to see, there are the papers, translucent. The early Einstein papers are brief,
their content is simple, their language sparse. They exude finality even when they
deal with a subject in flux. For example, no statement made in the 1905 paper on
light-quanta needs to be revised in the light of later developments.
The first meeting of Einstein and Bohr took place in 1920, some years before
they found themselves at scientific odds on profound questions of principle in
physics. They did not meet very often in later times. They did correspond but not
voluminously. I was together a few times with both of them some thirty years after
their first encounter, when their respective views on the foundations of quantum
mechanics had long since become irreconcilable. Neither the years nor later events
had ever diminished the mutual esteem and affection in which they held one
another.
Let us now turn to the BKS proposal.
As already stressed in Section 19f, it was the position of most theoretical phys-
icists during the first decades of the quantum era that the conventional continuous
description of the free radiation field should be protected at all cost and that the
quantum puzzles concerning radiation should eventually be resolved by a revision
'This was presumably the text of Bohr's contribution to the third Solvay conference (April 1921).
Because of ill health, Bohr did not deliver that lecture in person [B3].
418 THE QUANTUM THEORY
of the properties of interaction between radiation and matter. The BKS proposal
represents the extreme example of this position. Its authors suggested that radia-
tive processes have highly unconventional properties 'the cause of [which] we shall
not seek in any departure from the electrodynamic theory of light as regards the
laws of propagation in free space, but in the peculiarities of the interaction
between the virtual field of radiation and the illuminated atoms' [Bl]. Before
describing these properties, I should point out that the BKS paper represents a
program rather than a detailed research report. It contains no formalism what-
soever.* This program was not to be the right way out of the difficulties of the old
quantum theory, yet the paper had a lasting impact in that (as we shall see) it
stimulated important experimental developments. Let us discuss next the two
main paradoxes addressed in BKS.
The first paradox. Consider an atom that emits radiation in a transition from
a higher to a lower state. BKS assume that in this process 'energy [is] of two kinds,
the continuously changing energy of the field and the discontinuously changing
atomic energy' [S2]. But how can there be conservation of an energy that consists
of two parts, one changing discontinuously, the other continuously? The BKS
answer [Bl]: 'As regards the occurrence of transitions, which is the essential fea-
ture of the quantum theory, we abandon ... a direct application of the principles
of conservation of energy and momentum.' Energy and momentum conservation,
they suggested, does not hold true for individual elementary processes but should
hold only statistically, as an average over many such processes.
The idea of energy nonconservation had already been on Bohr's mind a few
years prior to the time of the BKS proposal [B5].** However, it was not Bohr
but Einstein who had first raised—and rejected—this possibility. In 1910 Einstein
wrote to a friend, 'At present, I have high hopes for solving the radiation problem,
and that without light quanta. I am enormously curious as to how it will work
out. One must renounce the energy principle in its present form' [E9]. A few days
later he was disenchanted. 'Once again the solution of the radiation problem is
getting nowhere. The devil has played a rotten trick on me' [E10]. He raised the
issue one more time at the 1911 Solvay meeting, noting that his formula for the
energy fluctuations of blackbody radiation could be interpreted in two ways. 'One
can choose between the [quantum] structure of radiation and the negation of an
absolute validity of the energy conservation law.' He rejected the second alterna-
tive. 'Who would have the courage to make a decision of this kind? . .. We shall
agree that the energy principle should be retained' [Ell]. Others, however, were
apparently not as convinced. In 1916 the suggestion of statistical energy conser-
*The same is true for a sequel to this paper that Bohr wrote in 1925 [B4]. Schroedinger [SI] and
especially Slater [S2] did make attempts to put the BKS ideas on a more formal footing. See also
Slater's own recollections of that period [S3].
**A letter from Ehrenfest to Einstein shows that Bohr's thoughts had gone in that direction at least
as early as 1922 [E8[.
INTERLUDE: THE BKS PROPOSAL 419
vation was taken up by Nernst [Nl].* Not later than January 1922, Sommerfeld
remarked that the 'mildest cure' for reconciling the wave theory of light with
quantum phenomena would be to relinquish energy conservation [S4]. Similar
speculations were made by other physicists as well [Kl]. Thus the BKS proposal
must be regarded as an attempt to face the consequences of an idea that had been
debated for quite some time.
In order to understand Bohr's position in 1924, it is above all important to
realize that to him the correspondence principle was the principal reliable bridge
between classical and quantum physics. However, the correspondence principle
is, of course, no help in understanding light-quanta: the issue of photons versus
waves lies beyond that principle. The photon-wave duality was the earliest
known instance of what was later to be called a complementary situation. The
BKS theory, with its rejection of photons and its insistence on the continuous pic-
ture of light at the price of nonconservation, historically represents the last stand
of the old quantum theory. For very good reasons, this proposal was characterized
some years later by one of the principal architects of quantum mechanics as rep-
resenting the height of the crisis in the old quantum theory [HI]. Nor was non-
conservation of energy and momentum in individual processes the only radical
proposal made by BKS.
The Second Paradox. Another question that had troubled Einstein since 1917
(as we have seen) was, How does an electron know when to emit radiation in
making a spontaneous transition?
In its general form, the BKS answer to this question was that there is no truly
spontaneous emission. They associated with an atom in a given state a 'virtual
radiation field' that contains all the possible transition frequencies to other sta-
tionary states and assumed that 'the transitions which in [the Einstein theory of
1917] are designated as spontaneous are, in our view, induced [my italics] by the
virtual field.' According to BKS, the spontaneous transition to a specific final state
is connected with the virtual field mechanism 'by probability laws analogous to
those which in Einstein's theory hold for induced transitions.' In this way, 'the
atom is under no necessity of knowing what transitions it is going to make ahead
of time' [S2]. Thus, spontaneous emission is ascribed to the action of the virtual
field, but this action is noncausal. I shall not discuss details of the BKS picture of
induced emission and absorption and other radiative processes. Suffice it to say
that all of these are supposed to be due to virtual fields and that in all of these
causality is abandoned. In a paper completed later in 1924, Slater [S2] noted that
the theory 'has unattractive features . .. [but] it is difficult at the present stage to
see how [these are] to be avoided.'
But what about the Compton effect? The successfully verified Eq. 21.21 rests
on the conservation laws Eqs. 21.19 and 21.20. However (BKS argued), these
"The title of Nernst's paper is (in translation) 'On an attempt to revert from quantum-mechanical
considerations to the assumption of continuous energy changes.'
420 THE QUANTUM THEORY
equations do hold in the average and the experiment on AX refers only to the
average change of the wavelength. In fact, at the time of the BKS proposal, there
did not exist any direct experimental proof of energy-momentum conservation or
of causality in any individual process. This is one of the reasons why the objections
to BKS (held by many, 'perhaps the majority' of physicists [PI]* were initially
expressed in a somewhat muted fashion. Thus, Pauli wrote to Bohr that he did
not believe in the latter's theory but that 'one cannot prove anything logically and
also the available data are not sufficient to decide for or against your view' [PI].
All this was to change soon.
There was a second reason, I believe, for the subdued character of comments
by others. The physics community was witness to a rare occurrence. Einstein, of
course, did not care at all for BKS. Earlier he had given thought to energy non-
conservation and rejected it. To give up strict causality went deeply against his
grain. Thus Einstein and Bohr, the two leading authorities of the day, were locked
in conflict (the word conflict was used by Einstein himself**). To take sides meant
choosing between the two most revered physicists. Ideally, personal considerations
of this kind ought to play no role in matters scientific, but this ideal is not always
fully realized. Pauli reflected on this in a letter concerning the BKS issue: 'Even
if it were psychologically possible for me to form a scientific opinion on the
grounds of some sort of belief in authority (which is not the case, however, as you
know), this would be logically impossible (at least in this case) since here the
opinions of two authorities are so very contradictory' [PI].
Even the interaction between the two protagonists was circumspect during that
period. They did not correspond on the BKS issue [El2]. Nor (as best I know)
were there personal meetings between them in those days, even though Bohr had
told Pauli repeatedly how much he would like to know Einstein's opinion [PI].
Heisenberg wrote to Pauli that he had met Einstein in Goettingen and that the
latter had 'a hundred objections' [H2]. Sometime later, Pauli also met Einstein,
whereupon he sent Bohr a detailed list of Einstein's criticisms [PI].
Einstein had given a colloquium on this paper, at which he had raised objec-
tions. The idea (he wrote Ehrenfest) 'is an old acquaintance of mine, which I do
not hold to be an honest fellow, however' ( .. . den ich aber fur keinen reellen
Kerl halte) [E13]. At about that time, he drew up a list of nine objections, which
I shall not reproduce here in detail. Samples: 'What should condition the virtual
field which corresponds to the return of a previously free electron to a Bohr orbit?
(very questionable). .. . Abandonment of causality as a matter of principle should
be permitted only in the most extreme emergency' [El4]. The causality issue
*Born, Schroedinger, and R. Ladenburg were among the physicists who initially believed that BKS
might be a step in the right direction.
**On October 25, 1924, the Danish newspaper Politiken carried an item on the Bohr-Einstein
controversy. This led the editor of a German newspaper to send a query to Einstein [Jl]. Einstein
sent a brief reply [E12], acknowledging that a conflict existed and adding that no written exchanges
between himself and Bohr had resulted.
INTERLUDE: THE BKS PROPOSAL 421
(which had already plagued him for seven years by then) was the one to which he
took exception most strongly. He confided to Born that the thought was unbear-
able to him that an electron could choose freely the moment and direction in which
to move [El5]. This causality question would continue to nag him long after
experiment revealed that the BKS answers to both paradoxes were incorrect.
The Experimental Verdict on Causality. The BKS ideas stimulated Walther
Bothe and Hans Geiger to develop counter coincidence techniques for the purpose
of measuring whether, as causality demands, the secondary photon and the knock-
on electron are produced simultaneously in the Gompton effect [B6]. Their result:
these two particles are both created in a time interval < 10~3 s [B7, B8]. Within
the limits of accuracy, causality had been established and the randomness of the
relative creation times demanded by BKS disproved. Since then, this time interval
has been narrowed down experimentally to < 10~" s [B9].
The Experimental Verdict on Energy-Momentum Conservation. The valid-
ity of these conservation laws in individual elementary processes was established
for the Compton effect by Compton and A. W. Simon. From cloud chamber obser-
vations on photoclectrons and knock-on electrons, they could verify the validity of
the relation
in individual events, where (f>, 6 are the scattering angles of the electron and pho-
ton, respectively, and v is the incident frequency [Cl].
And so the last resistance to the photon came to an end. Einstein's views had
been fully vindicated. The experimental news was generally received with great
relief (see, e.g., [P2]*). Bohr took the outcome in good grace and proposed 'to give
our revolutionary efforts as honorable a funeral as possible' [BIO]. He was now
prepared for an even more drastic resolution of the quantum paradoxes. In July
1925 he wrote, 'One must be prepared for the fact that the required generalization
of the classical electrodynamic theory demands a profound revolution in the con-
cepts on which the description of nature has until now been founded' [B4].
These remarks by Bohr end with references to de Broglie's thesis and also to
Einstein's work on the quantum gas (the subject of the next chapter): the profound
revolution had begun.
References
Bl. N. Bohr, H. A. Kramers, and J. C. Slater, Phil. Mag. 47, 785 (1924).
B2. , letter to A. Einstein, June 24, 1920.
B3. Niels Bohr, Collected Works (L. Rosenfeld, Ed.), Vol. 3, pp. 28, 357. North Hol-
land, New York, 1976.
*Pauli's own description of BKS, written early in 1925, can be found in his collected works [P3].(22.1)
422 THE QUANTUM THEORY
B4. N. Bohr, Z. Phys. 34, 142 (1925).
B5. , Z. Phys. 13, 117 (1923), especially Sec. 4.
B6. W. Bothe and H. Geiger, Z. Phys. 26, 44 (1924).
B7. and , Naturw. 13, 440 (1925).
B8. and , Z. Phys. 32, 639 (1925).
B9. A. Bay, V. P. Henri, and F. McLennon, Phys. Rev. 97, 1710 (1955).
BIO. N. Bohr, letter to R. H. Fowler, April 21, 1925.
Cl. A. H. Compton and A. W. Simon, Phys. Rev. 26, 289 (1925).
El. A. Einstein, postcard to M. Planck, October 23, 1919.
E2. —— in Albert Einstein: Philosopher-Scientist (P. A. Schilpp, Ed.). Tudor, New
York, 1949.
E3. , letter to N. Bohr, May 2, 1920.
E4. —, letter to P. Ehrenfest, May 4, 1920.
E5. , letter to N. Bohr, January 11, 1923.
E6. , letter to P. Ehrenfest, March 23, 1922.
E7. —, letter to B. Becker, March 20, 1954.
E8. P. Ehrenfest, letter to A. Einstein, January 17, 1922.
E9. A. Einstein, letter to J. J. Laub, November 4, 1910.
E10. , letter to J. J. Laub, November 7, 1910.
El 1. in Proceedings First Solvay Conference (P. Langevin and M. de Broglie, Ed.)
pp. 429, 436. Gauthier-Villars, Paris, 1912.
E12. , letter to K. Joel, November 3, 1924.
E13. , letter to P. Ehrenfest, May 31, 1924.
El4. , undated document in the Einstein archives, obviously written in 1924.
E15. , letter to M. Born, April 29, 1924. Reprinted in The Born-Einstein Letters
(M. Born, Ed.), p. 82. Walker, New York, 1971.
HI. W. Heisenberg, Naturw. 17, 490 (1929).
H2. , letter to W. Pauli, June 8, 1924; see [PI], p. 154.
Jl. K. Joel, letter to A. Einstein, October 28, 1924.
Kl. M. Klein, Hist. St. Phys. Sci. 2, 1 (1970).
Nl. W. Nernst, Verh. Deutsch. Phys. Ges. 18, 83 (1916).
PL W. Pauli, letter to N. Bohr, October 2, 1924. Reprinted in W. Pauli, Scientific
Correspondence (A. Hermann, K. v. Meyenn, and V. Weisskoff, Eds.), Vol. 1, p.
163. Springer, New York, 1979.
P2. , letter to H. A. Kramers, July 27, 1925; see [PI], p. 232.
P3. , Collected Scientific Papers, Vol. 1, pp. 83-6. Interscience, New York, 1964.
51. E. Schroedinger, Naturw. 36, 720 (1924).
52. J. C. Slater, Phys. Rev. 25, 395 (1925).
53. , Int. J. Quantum Chem. Is, 1 (1967).
54. A. Sommerfeld, Atombau und Spektrallinien (3rd edn.), p. 311. Vieweg, Braun-
schweig, 1922.
