8
The Edge of History
7. A New Way of Thinking. On April 6, 1922, the Societe Francaise de Phi-
losophic (which Henri Poincare had helped found) convened for a discussion of
the special and the general theories of relativity. Among those in attendance were
the mathematicians Elie Cartan, Jacques Hadamard, and Paul Painleve, the
physicists Jean Becquerel, Albert Einstein, and Paul Langevin, and the philoso-
phers Henri Bergson, Leon Brunschvicg, Edouard LeRoy, and Emile Meyerson.
In the course of the discussions, Bergson expressed his admiration for Einstein's
work: 'I see [in this work] not only a new physics, but also, in certain respects, a
new way of thinking' [Bl].
Special relativity led to new modes of philosophical reflection. It also gave rise
to new limericks, such as the one about the young lady from Wight. However,
first and foremost this theory brought forth a new way of thinking in physics itself,
new because it called for a revision of concepts long entrenched in the physics and
chemistry of the classical period. In physics the great novelties were, first, that the
recording of measurements of space intervals and time durations demanded more
detailed specifications than were held necessary theretofore and, second, that the
lessons of classical mechanics are correct only in the limit v/c <K. 1. In chemistry
the great novelty was that Lavoisier's law of mass conservation and Dalton's rule
of simply proportionate weights were only approximate but nevertheless so good
that no perceptible changes in conventional chemistry were called for. Thus rel-
ativity turned Newtonian mechanics and classical chemistry into approximate sci-
ences, not diminished but better defined in the process.
Today these revisions seem harmless and are easy to teach. To Einstein they
came rather abruptly, but only after years of unsuccessful thinking. His postulates
were obvious to him once he had conceived them. When I talked with him about
those times of transition, he expressed himself in a curiously impersonal way. He
would refer to the birth of special relativity as 'den Schritt,' the step.
It was otherwise in the case of Lorentz and Poincare. Each of them had strug-
gled hard with these same problems, made important steps toward their solution,
and garnered deep insights along the way. But neither of them had quite made
the final transitional steps. In later years all three men, Einstein, Lorentz, and
Poincare, reacted to the special theory of relativity in ways which arouse curiosity.
163
164 RELATIVITY, THE SPECIAL THEORY
Why, on the whole, was Einstein so reticent to acknowledge the influence of the
Michelson-Morley experiment on his thinking? Why could Lorentz never quite
let go of the aether? Why did Poincare never understand special relativity? These
questions lead us to the edge of history.
It is natural to suppose but wrong to conclude that the use of the term the edge
of history implies that its user has a clear picture and sharp definition of what
history is. History deals with happenings in the past. The history of a period is
an account of that period based on a selective sampling of dates and facts from a
pool of information which, it is safe to assume, is incomplete. The selective factor
is necessary as well as unavoidably subjective. Therefore one cannot speak of the
history of a period. An historian can definitely be wrong but often cannot be sure
of being right. That much is clear. Also, the knowledge of selected facts and dates
is necessary but not sufficient if one is not content—and one should not be—with
some insight into what happened but wishes to inquire further how 'it' happened.
In the case of the history of discovery, questions like, Why did A create what he
did, why did B readily accept what A created, why did C resist A's new ideas?
are fascinating. In my many years of immersion in theoretical physics I have
known A's, B's, and C's. Though their concerns may not have been as profound
as relativity, I often found it baffling to answer such questions as those just raised.
Creation, acceptance, and resistance, whether in science or in other areas, are acts
and attitudes the whys of which can be grasped only if one knows, along with
facts, how the minds of A and B and C work. Who knows whether he knows?
However, while the answers to the A-B-C questions are elusive and deliriously
conjectural, the same is not necessarily true for the questions themselves. Return-
ing to Einstein, Lorentz, and Poincare, the questions I raised about them are the
result of patient reading of their papers. The questions themselves are therefore
distilled from an historical record, and I do not think it is at all bold to call them
part of history. Their answers, it seems to me, are beyond history. Somewhere
between the question and the answer lies history's edge, a term I have now defined
with more precision than history itself. In what follows I shall not entirely refrain
from indulging in a bit of extrahistorical speculation regarding the answers.
First, however, a few more facts.
2. Einstein and the Literature. Einstein's 1907 article [El] for the Jahrbuch
der Radioaktivitat und Elektronik was written at the invitation of Johannes Stark,
the founder and editor of that series. In agreeing to review relativity theory, Ein-
stein wrote to Stark, 'I should note that unfortunately I am not in a position to
orient myself about everything that has been published on this subject, because
the library is closed in my free time. Apart from my own papers, I know of a
paper by Lorentz (1904), one by Cohn, one by Mosengeil, and two by Planck.*
I would be much obliged if you could point out further relevant publications to
me, if such are known to you' [E2]**. This letter, as well as an earlier one to
*A11 these papers are referred to in Chapters 6 and 7.
**This letter was published in an article by Hermann [HI].
THE EDGE OF HISTORY 165
Besso [E3], shows that access to the literature was difficult for the man from the
patent office. In his reply to Einstein's letter, Stark mentioned work by Planck,
von Laue, and himself and added, 'Apart from these papers and those mentioned
by you, I do not know of any others either' [SI]. Thus neither Einstein nor Stark
was aware of Poincare's long paper bearing on relativity, completed in July 1905
and published in the 1906 volume of Rendiconti del Circolo matematico di
Palermo [PI]. Minkowski referred to this article on November 5, 1907, in his
lecturef before the Goettinger Mathematische Verein [Ml]. It is therefore certain
that this publication was in circulation in December 1907, the time at which Ein-
stein completed his review, and a fortiori in March 1908, when he added some
corrections and comments to the review [E4]. Nevertheless, especially in view of
the exchange between Einstein and Stark, I see no grounds for thinking that in
1907 Einstein knew of Poincare's paper and chose to ignore it.
I believe, however, that Einstein's complaint about his difficulties in getting
hold of books and journals, while no doubt genuine, is only a secondary factor in
the understanding of his handling of existing literature. The truth of the matter
is that he did not much care. Read for example what he wrote in the introduction
to a paper published in 1906: 'It seems to me to be in the nature of the subject,
that what is to follow might already have been partially clarified by other authors.
However, in view of the fact that the questions under consideration are treated
here from a new point of view, I believed I could dispense with a literature search
which would be very troublesome for me, especially since it is to be hoped that
other authors will fill this gap, as was commendably done by Herr Planck and
Herr Kaufmann on the occasion of my first paper on the principle of relativity'
[E5].* This statement is not arrogant if, and only if, arrogance is a mark of inse-
curity. To me these lines express ebullience, total self-assurance, and a notable
lack of taste.**
The period during which Einstein was unaware of Poincare's technical writing
on relativity now stretches into 1908. I noted in Section 6b that by 1905 Einstein
had already read Poincare's La Science et I'Hypothese, in which it is conjectured
that the undetectability of the earth's motion relative to the aether should hold to
fSee Section 7c.
*"Es scheint mir in der Natur der Sache zu liegen, dasz das Nachfolgende zum Teil bereits von
anderen Autoren klargestellt sein diirfte. Mit Riicksicht darauf jedoch, dasz hier die betreffenden
Fragen von einem neuen Gesichtspunkt aus behandelt sind, glaubte ich, von einer fur mich sehr
umstandlichen Durchmusterung der Literatur absehen zu diirfen, zumal zu hoffen 1st, dasz diese
Liicke von anderen Autoren noch ausgefiillt werden wird, wie dies in dankenswerter Weise bei mei-
ner ersten Arbeit iiber das Relativitatsprinzip durch Hrn. Planck und Hrn. Kaufmann bereits ge-
schehen ist."
** Einstein was evidently able to get to the literature if he set his mind to it. A number of journals
are quoted in his 1907 paper [El], including even the American Journal of Science of 1887 in which
the Michelson-Morley experiment was reported. I would not be surprised if Einstein had copied
that reference from one of Lorentz's papers. Also, in 1906 Einstein mentioned [E6] a paper by
Poincare [P2] which came to his attention because it appeared in a Festschrift for Lorentz.
l66 RELATIVITY, THE SPECIAL THEORY
all orders in v/c and also in which critical comments are made on the naive use
of simultaneity. It cannot be said, however, that the content of Einstein's June
1905 paper depends in any technical sense on these important remarks by Poin-
care. Others in Einstein's position might perhaps have chosen to mention Poincare
at the earliest opportunity. However, it does not seem to me that Einstein had
compelling reasons to do so in 1905. I shall return soon to what Einstein had to
say about Poincare in later years. Here I note that Poincare's name appears only
once in a paper by Einstein on relativity, to wit, in 'Geometric und Erfahrung,'
the text of a lecture he gave in 1921 on general relativity [E7] in which he praises
'der tiefe und scharfsinnige Poincare,' the deep and sharp-witted P., for his ideas
on non-Euclidean geometry—ideas which, incidentally, are found in Chapter 3
of La Science et I'Hypothese.
3. Lorentz and the Aether. To Lorentz simplicity meant simple dynamics.
As an important example of the Lorentz style, consider his reaction to Kaufmann's
result of 1901-6 about the purely electromagnetic origin of the electron's mass*:
'With a view to simplicity, it will be best to admit Kaufmann's conclusion, or
hypothesis, if we prefer so to call it, that the negative electrons have no material
mass at all. This is certainly one of the most important results of modern physics
.. .' [LI]. I believe that Lorentz clung to the idea of a purely electromagnetic
electron mass for the rest of his life.
Lorentz's words about Kaufmann are found in his 1906 Columbia lectures, the
publication of which was held up for three years 'on account of my wish to give
some further development to the subject' [L2]. Despite this considerable delay,
'Einstein's principle of relativity [has not] received an adequate treatment' [L2].
This is indeed true. For example, Lorentz still opines that the contraction of rods
has a dynamic origin. There is no doubt that he had read and understood Ein-
stein's papers by then. However, neither then nor later was he prepared to accept
their conclusions as the definitive answer to the problems of the aether. With his
customary clarity, he stated his own credo in the course of lectures given at the
Teyler Foundation in Haarlem in 1913 [L3]:
'According to Einstein, it has no meaning to speak of motion relative to the
aether. He likewise denies the existence of absolute simultaneity.
'It is certainly remarkable that these relativity concepts, also those concerning
time, have found such a rapid acceptance.
'The acceptance of these concepts belongs mainly to epistemology.... It is cer-
tain, however, that it depends to a large extent on the way one is accustomed to
think whether one is most attracted to one or another interpretation. As far as this
lecturer is concerned, he finds a certain satisfaction in the older interpretations,
according to which the aether possesses at least some substantiality, space and time
can be sharply separated, and simultaneity without further specification can be
spoken of. In regard to this last point, one may perhaps appeal to our ability of
*See Section 7e.
THE EDGE OF HISTORY 167
imagining arbitrarily large velocities. In that way, one comes very close to the
concept of absolute simultaneity.
'Finally, it should be noted that the daring assertion that one can never observe
velocities larger than the velocity of light contains a hypothetical restriction of
what is accessible to us, [a restriction] which cannot be accepted without some
reservation.'
It is clear beyond doubt that Lorentz's imagination was the classical imagina-
tion. Light moves with a velocity c km/s. There is no difficulty in imagining a
velocity equal to c + 1 km/s. The classical mind asserts, the relativistic mind
denies, that a velocity which can be imagined mathematically can necessarily be
reached physically.
As I understand Lorentz, he was a leader in theoretical physics who fully
grasped all the physical and mathematical aspects of the special theory of relativity
but who nevertheless could not quite take leave of a beloved classical past. This
attitude has nothing to do with personality conflicts. Those were alien to him.
Einstein and Poincare always spoke in praise of him, Lorentz always reciprocated.
Nor did he hesitate to make clear where he had been in error: 'The chief cause of
my failure [in discovering special relativity] was my clinging to the idea that only
the variable t can be considered as the true time and that my local time t' must
be regarded as no more than an auxiliary mathematical quantity,' he wrote in a
note added to the second edition of his Columbia lectures [L4]. In a draft* of a
letter to Einstein, written in January 1915 [L5], Lorentz wrote the following
about the FitzGerald-Lorentz contraction: 'I added the remark that one arrives
at this hypothesis if one extends to other forces what one can already say about
the influence of a translation on electrostatic forces. If I had stressed this more,
then the hypothesis would have given much less of an impression of having been
invented ad hoc.' Lorentz never fully made the transition from the old dynamics
to the new kinematics.**
4. Poincare and the Third Hypothesis. In April 1909 Poincare gave a series
of six lectures [P3] in Goettingen. In the last of these, entitled 'La Mecanique
Nouvelle,' the lecturer dealt with questions bearing on relativity. At first glance
the reader of this text may experience surprise at not finding any mention of Ein-
stein, whose theory was four years old by then. On closer scrutiny, he will find
that this absence is justified. Poincare does not describe Einstein's theory.
The new mechanics, Poincare said, is based on three hypotheses. The first of
these is that bodies cannot attain velocities larger than the velocity of light. The
second is (I use modern language) that the laws of physics shall be the same in all
inertial frames. So far so good. Then Poincare introduces a third hypothesis: 'One
'This draft was discovered in 1979 by A. Kox in one of Lorentz's notebooks. I am grateful to Dr
Kox for drawings my attention to this text.
"'According to Born, 'Lorentz . . . probably never became a relativist at all, and only paid lip service
to Einstein at times, to avoid arguments' [B2].
l68 RELATIVITY, THE SPECIAL THEORY
needs to make still a third hypothesis, much more surprising, much more difficult
to accept, one which is of much hindrance to what we are currently used to. A
body in translational motion suffers a deformation in the direction in which it is
displaced. .. . However strange it may appear to us, one must admit that the third
hypothesis is perfectly verified.' It is evident that as late as 1909 Poincare did not
know that the contraction of rods is a consequence of the two Einstein postulates.
Poincare therefore did not understand one of the most basic traits of special
relativity.
Should one give Poincare the benefit of the doubt and assume that his reference
to a third hypothesis was made only for pedagogical reasons? This, I think, would
be too far-fetched. Moreover, if one rereads his earlier papers in the light of what
has just been noted, one finds a distinct similarity in the way he treats the
FitzGerald-Lorentz contraction. I repeat what Poincare said in St Louis in 1904
[P4]. On that occasion he also introduced in essence the first two postulates and
then added, 'Unfortunately, [this reasoning] is not sufficient and complementary
hypotheses are necessary; one must assume that bodies in motion suffer a uniform
contraction in their direction of motion.' One rereads the grand memoir in the
Rendiconti di Palermo [PI] and finds an admirable discussion of the Lorentz
transformation but no mention that these transformations imply the contraction
of rods; the emphasis in that paper is on dynamics. It is likewise the case in a
semipopular account of relativity which Poincare wrote in 1908 [P5].
My own assessment of Poincare's contributions to relativity coincides with what
was said about him during the opening remarks of the meeting in Paris of the
Societe Francaise de Philosophic, referred to earlier: 'The solution anticipated by
Poincare was given by Einstein in his memoir of 1905 on special relativity. He
accomplished the revolution which Poincare had foreseen and stated at a moment
when the development of physics seemed to lead to an impasse' [L6].
5. Whittaker and the History of Relativity. In 1910, Edmund Whittaker pub-
lished a book entitled History of the Theories of Aether and Electricity [ W1 ]. This
work covers the period from Descartes to the close of the nineteenth century. Col-
leagues more knowledgeable on this period than I, confirm my impression that it
is a masterpiece. Forty years later, a revised edition of this book came out. At that
time Whittaker also published a second volume dealing with the period from 1900
to 1926 [W2]. His treatment of the special theory of relativity in the latter volume
shows how well the author's lack of physical insight matches his ignorance of the
literature. I would have refrained from commenting on his treatment of special
relativity were it not for the fact that his book has raised questions in many minds
about the priorities in the discovery of this theory. Whittaker's opinion on this
point is best conveyed by the title of his chapter on this subject: 'The Relativity
Theory of Poincare and Lorentz.'* Born had given Whittaker fair warning [B3].
Einstein's reaction was, 'I do not have to read the thing. ... If he manages to
convince others, that is their own affair' [B4].
*Whittaker's obituary of Einstein written for the Royal Society is no work of art either [W3].
THE EDGE OF HISTORY 169
6. Lorentz and Poincare. Every paper by Poincare dealing with the principle
of relativity acknowledges Lorentz's pioneering role. In his Goettingen lectures,
Poincare called him one of the 'grands demolisseurs' of Newtonian mechanics (I
wonder if Lorentz would have agreed with that) and referred once again to his
'very ingenious invention' of the idea of a local time.
Conversely, Lorentz had high esteem for Poincare. In his major article of 1904
he acknowledged the stimulus of Poincare's criticism (expressed at the Paris Con-
gress of 1900) to the effect that too many independent hypotheses had been intro-
duced in his earlier work [L7]. Later he wrote to Poincare acknowledging receipt
of 'the important memoir on the dynamics of the electron' [L8]. In Volume 38 of
the Acta Mathematica, devoted in its entirety to appreciations of the late Poincare,
Lorentz gave a detailed analysis of the Palermo paper [L9] in which, incidentally,
an imaginary time coordinate (x4 = icf) is introduced for the first time. Regarding
Poincare's contributions to the principles of relativity, Lorentz's view is balanced,
as always. In both editions of the Columbia lectures, Poincare appears only in
connection with the stress terms he invented. In a letter to Einstein, Lorentz rem-
inisced about the origins of the special theory: 'I felt the need for a more general
theory, which I tried to develop later [i.e., in 1904] and which you (and to a lesser
extent Poincare) formulated' [L5].
7. Lorentz and Einstein. As Einstein told me more than once, Lorentz was
to him the most well-rounded and harmonious personality he had met in his entire
life. Einstein's thoughts and feelings about Lorentz were a blend of respect, love,
and awe. 'I admire this man as no other, I would say I love him,' he wrote to
Laub in 1909 [E8]. In a letter to Grossmann, he called Lorentz 'our greatest
colleague' [E9]. To Lorentz himself he wrote, 'You will surely feel that I feel an
unbounded admiration for you' [E10]. In a memorial service held at the Univer-
sity of Leiden shortly after Lorentz's death, Einstein was one of the speakers: 'The
enormous significance of his work consisted therein, that it forms the basis for the
theory of atoms and for the general and special theories of relativity. The special
theory was a more detailed expose of those concepts which are found in Lorentz's
research of 1895'[Ell].
Lorentz's life centered on Arnhem, Leiden, and Haarlem. He was forty-four
years old when he attended his first international physics conference, just across
the Dutch border. At that same age, Einstein had already lived in four countries
and had held four professorships in succession. He, the bird of passage, must at
times have been wistful about the Dutch upper-middle-class stability and serenity
of Lorentz's existence.
Lorentz's esteem for Einstein was extremely high as well. In Chapter 12, I
shall have more to relate about the interactions between these two men at the time
that Lorentz almost got Einstein to accept a permanent position in Holland.
8. Poincare and Einstein. Why did Poincare not mention Einstein in his
Goettingen lectures? Why is there no paper by Poincare in which Einstein and
relativity are linked? It is inconceivable that Poincare would have studied Ein-
stein's papers of 1905 without understanding them. It is impossible that in 1909
170 RELATIVITY, THE SPECIAL THEORY
(the year he spoke in Goettingen) he would never have heard of Einstein's activ-
ities in this area. Shall I write of petulance or professional envy? I shall not, since
my reader's speculations are as good as my own. Could it be that Poincare had
had a mere glance at Einstein's papers and had concluded too hastily that he knew
all that already and that there was nothing new there? Possibly. It would be nei-
ther far-fetched nor a unique occurrence. In his book The Anxiety of Influence,
Harold Bloom writes, 'Strong poets make ... history by misreading one another,
so as to clear imaginative space for themselves,' and speaks of 'strong poets, major
figures with the persistence to wrestle with their strong precursors even to the
death' [B5].* In such respects I see little difference between strong poets and
strong creative personalities in any other domain. Poincare's reaction to Riemann
[Kl] and Einstein's to Hilbert (to be discussed in Chapter 14) may be cases in
point. In any event, the questions are interesting and based on fact, the answers
are beyond certain reach. In my opinion, it is more significant that Poincare until
shortly before his death remained silent about Einstein than that Einstein until
shortly before his death remained silent about Poincare. In closing the case of
Poincare and Einstein, I offer their final statements with only minor comments of
my own.
Alexander Moszkowski begins his biography of Einstein [ M2] by recalling that
on October 13,1910, Poincare gave a lecture before the Berliner Wissenschaftliche
Verein about 'die neue Mechanik' (Poincare was quite comfortable with the Ger-
man language). 'In this lecture it happened for the first time that we heard the
name Albert Einstein.' Poincare spoke of 'the beginning of a current which, as he
confessed, had disturbed the equilibrium of his earlier opinions.' Alas, we are not
told in what way the speaker referred to Einstein.
Einstein and Poincare met (for the first and last time, I believe) at the first
Solvay Conference, held in Brussels in October 1911. About this encounter Ein-
stein reported as follows to a friend: 'Poincare war (gegen die Relativitatstheorie)
einfach allgemein ablehnend, zeigte bei allem Scharfsinn wenig Verstandnis fur
die Situation' [E12].** It is apparent once again that Poincare either never under-
stood or else never accepted the special theory of relativity.
Shortly thereafter, the authorities at the ETH, in the course of their prepara-
tions for offering Einstein a professorship, asked Poincare for an opinion about
him. Poincare replied, 'Monsieur Einstein is one of the most original minds I have
known; in spite of his youth he already occupies a very honorable position among
the leading scholars of his time. We must especially admire in him the ease with
which he adapts himself to new concepts and his ability to infer all the conse-
quences from them. He does not remain attached to the classical principles and,
faced with a physics problem, promptly envisages all possibilities. This is trans-
*I would like to thank Sara Pais for directing me to Bloom's book.
**P. was simply generally antipathetic (in regard to relativity theory) and showed little understand-
ing for the situation despite all his sharp wit.
THE EDGE OF HISTORY 171
lated immediately in his mind into an anticipation of new phenomena, susceptible
some day to experimental verification. I would not say that all his expectations
will resist experimental check when such checks will become possible. Since he is
probing in all directions, one should anticipate, on the contrary, that most of the
roads he is following will lead to dead ends; but, at the same time, one must hope
that one of the directions he has indicated will be a good one; and that suffices'
[P6].
That, as best I know, is the single and final judgment on Einstein that Poincare
left us. Twice, having met Einstein and written this letter, did he comment on
relativity [P7, P8]. Twice did he mention Lorentz but not Einstein, though he
referred to Einstein in connection with the photo effect on the second of these
occasions. That was in an address given on April 11, 1912. He died unexpectedly
three months later.
In 1919, the mathematician Mittag-Leffler wrote to Einstein, asking him to
contribute an article to the Ada Mathematica volume in honor of Poincare [M3].
Four months later, Einstein responded. The letter had reached him after a long
delay and 'it might be too late' now [E14]. Mittag-Leffler replied that Einstein
could still send a paper if he cared to do so [M4]. Two and a half months later,
Einstein replied that obligations and travel prevented him from contributing, add-
ing that his decision 'should be considered as nothing but high respect for the task'
[EH].
In December 1920, a New York Times correspondent interviewed Einstein in
his home on the Haberlandstrasse in Berlin. In reply to a question about the
origins of relativity theory, Einstein said, 'It was found that [Galilean invariance]
would not conform to the rapid motions in electrodynamics. This led the Dutch
professor Lorentz and myself to develop the theory of special relativity . ..' [El5].
An additional mention of Poincare's pioneering ideas might have been gracious.
In an interview with Le Figaro in 1921, he expressed his great admiration for
Poincare, however [El6].
In the early 1950s, I once asked Einstein how Poincare's Palermo paper had
affected his thinking. Einstein replied that he had never read that paper. I owned
a copy—a second-hand exemplar of the Gauthier-Villars reprint—and asked if
he would like to borrow that. Yes, he said, he would. I brought it to him. It was
never returned to me. Some time after Einstein's death, I asked Helen Dukas if
she would please look for it. It had vanished. .. .
Perhaps he did read it. In 1953 Einstein received an invitation to attend the
forthcoming Bern celebration of the fiftieth anniversary of special relativity. Ein-
stein wrote back that his health did not permit him to plan such a trip. In this
letter Einstein mentions for the first time (as far as I know) Poincare's role in
regard to the special theory: 'Hoffentlich wird dafiir gesorgt dasz die Verdienste
von H. A. Lorentz und H. Poincare bei dieser Gelegenheit ebenfalls sachgemass
gewiirdigt werden'* [E17]. The Bern conference took place shortly after Ein-
*I hope that one will also take care on that occasion to honor suitably the merits of L. and P.
172 RELATIVITY, THE SPECIAL THEORY
stein's death. The task of speaking about Lorentz and Poincare fell to Born (who
had attended Poincare's Goettingen lecture). He did not acquit himself well.**
Two months before his death, Einstein gave his fair and final judgment:
'Lorentz had already recognized that the transformations named after him are
essential for the analysis of Maxwell's equations, and Poincare deepened this
insight still further ...' [E18].
9. Coda: The Michelson-Morley Experiment. In concluding this account of
the history of special relativity, I return to its origins. Toward the end of Section
6a, I promised to comment further on Einstein's reticence in acknowledging the
influence of the Michelson-Morley experiment on his thinking. I now do so.
In a letter to an historian, written a year before his death, Einstein expressed
himself for the last time on this subject: 'In my own development, Michelson's
result has not had a considerable influence. I even do not remember if I knew of
it at all when I wrote my first paper on the subject (1905). The explanation is
that I was, for general reasons, firmly convinced that there does not exist absolute
motion and my problem was only how this could be reconciled with our knowledge
of electrodynamics. One can therefore understand why in my personal struggle
Michelson's experiment played no role, or at least no decisive role' [E19].
Why this need not to remember or, at best, to underplay this influence?
Just over twenty years before Einstein wrote this late letter, just under twenty
years after his creation of the special theory, he gave a lecture at Oxford entitled
'On the Method of Theoretical Physics' [E20], in the course of which he said, 'It
is my conviction that pure mathematical construction enables us to discover the
concepts and the laws connecting them, which give us the key to the understanding
of the phenomena of Nature.' It seems to me that here Einstein grossly overesti-
mates the capabilities of the human mind, even of one as great as his own. It is
true that the theoretical physicist who has no sense of mathematical elegance,
beauty, and simplicity is lost in some essential way. At the same time it is dan-
gerous and can be fatal to rely exclusively on formal arguments. It is a danger
from which Einstein himself did not escape in his later years.
The emphasis on mathematics is so different from the way the young Einstein
used to proceed. What wrought this change? Obviously, his realization that Rie-
mannian geometry lay waiting for him as he groped his way to general relativity
must have deeply affected his subsequent thinking. Could it be, however, that the
conviction expressed in Oxford had even earlier roots?
Stepping beyond the edge of history, I offer the thought that, just barely visible,
the origins of Einstein's later attitude toward the discovery of concepts by purely
mathematical thinking may go back to 1905. The kinematic part of his June paper
has the ideal axiomatic structure of a finished theory, a structure which had
**'The reasoning used by Poincare was just the same as that which Einstein introduced in his first
paper of 1905. .. . Does this mean that Poincare knew all this before Einstein? It is possible . ..'
[B6],
THE EDGE OF HISTORY 173
abruptly dawned on him after a discussion with Besso. Is it possible that this
experience was so overwhelming that it seared his mind and partially blotted out
reflections and information that had been with him earlier, as the result of deep-
seated desires to come closer to the divine form of pure creation? Of course that
is possible. Of course neither I nor anyone else will ever know whether it is true.
And of course Einstein could never have been of any help in finding out.
References
Bl.. H. Bergson, Bull. Soc. Fran. Phil. 22, 102 (1922).
B2. M. Born, The Born-Einstein Letters (I. Born, Tran.), p. 198. Walker and Cy,
New York, 1971.
B3. —, letter to A. Einstein, September 26, 1953; [B2], p. 197.
B4. , [B2], p. 199.
B5. H. Bloom, The Anxiety of Influence, p. 5. Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1973.
B6. M. Born, Helv. Phys. Acta Suppl. 4, 244 (1956).
El. A. Einstein, Jahrb. Rod. Elektr. 4, 411 (1907).
E2. ——, letter to J. Stark, September 25, 1907.
E3. , letter to M. Besso, March 17, 1903; EB, p. 13.
E4. , Jahrb. Rad. Elektr. 5, 18 (1908).
E5. , AdP23, 371 (1907).
E6. , AdPZO, 627 (1906).
E7. , PAW, 1921, p. 123. An extended version was published by Springer, Berlin,
1921.
E8. , letter to J. Laub, May 19, 1909.
E9. —, letter to M. Grossmann, December 10, 1911.
E10. , letter to H. A. Lorentz, November 23, 1911.
Ell. , Math.-Naturw. Blatt. 22, 24 (1928).
E12. , letter to H. Zangger, November 15, 1911.
El3. , letter to M. G. Mittag-Leffler, April 12, 1920.
E14. , letter to M. G. Mittag-Leffler, July 21, 1920.
E15. , The New York Times, December 3, 1920.
E16. , letter to A. Sommerfeld, January 28, 1922. Reprinted in Albert Einstein/
Arnold Sommerfeld Briefwechsel (A. Hermann, Ed.), p. 99. Schwabe Verlag, Stutt-
gart, 1968.
E17. —, letter to A. Mercier, November 9, 1953.
E18. , letter to C. Seelig, February 19, 1955; Se, p. 114.
E19. —, letter to F. C. Davenport, February 9, 1954.
E20. , On the Method of Theoretical Physics. Oxford University Press, Oxford,
1933.
HI. A. Herman, Sudhoffs Archiv. 50, 267 (1966).
Kl. F.Klein, Vorlesungen iiber die Entwicklung der Mathematik im 19 Jahrhundert,
Vol. 1, pp. 374-80, Springer, New York, 1979.
LI. H. A. Lorentz, Theory of Electrons (1st edn.), p. 43. Teubner, Leipzig, 1909.
L2. , [LI], preface.
L3. , Das Relativitatsprinzip, p. 23. Teubner, Leipzig, 1920.
174 RELATIVITY, THE SPECIAL THEORY
L4. , [LI], 2nd edn., 1915, p. 321.
L5. , draft of letter to A. Einstein, January 1915, undated.
L6. X. Leon in [Bl], p. 93.
L7. H. A. Lorentz, Proc. Roy. Soc. Amsterdam 6, 809 (1904). Reprinted in H. A.
Lorentz, Collected Papers, Vol. 5, p. 172. Nyhoff, the Hague, 1937.
L8. , letter to H. Poincare, March 8, 1906. Reprinted in A. I. Miller's contribution
to the Proceedings of the Jerusalem Einstein Centennial Symposium, March 1979.
L9. —, Acta Math. 38, 293 (1921).
Ml. H. Minkowski, AdPtf, 927 (1915).
M2. A. Moszkowski, Einstein, p. 15. Fontane, Berlin, 1921-2.
M3. M. G. Mittag-Leffler, letter to A. Einstein, December 16, 1919.
M4. , letter to A. Einstein, May 3, 1920.
PI. H. Poincare, Rend. Circ. Mat. Palermo, 21, 129 (1906). Reprinted in Oeuvres de
Henri Poincare, Vol. 9, p. 494. Gauthier-Villars, Paris, 1954.
P2. , Arch. Neerl. 5, 252 (1900); Oeuvres, Vol. 9, p. 464. Also in Recueil de Tra-
vaux Offerts a H. A. Lorentz. Nyhoff, the Hague, 1900.
P3. , Seeks Vortrage aus der Reinen Mathematik und Mathematischen Physik.
Teubner, Leipzig, 1910.
P4. , Bull. Sci. Math. 28, 302 (1904).
P5. ; Rev. Gen. Sci. 19, 386 (1908); Oeuvres, Vol. 9, p. 551.
P6. , letter to a colleague at the ETH, undated, probably November 1911.
P7. , Scientia 12, 159 (1912). Reprinted in Dernieres Pensees, Chap. 2. Flam-
marion, Paris, 1913.
P8. , /. de Phys. 5, 347 (1912). Reprinted Dernieres Pensees, Chap. 7.
SI. J. Stark, letter to A. Einstein, October 4, 1907, published in [HI].
Wl. E. T. Whittaker, History of the Theories of Aether and Electricity. Longman,
Green, London, 1910.
W2. E. T. Whittaker, History of the Theories of Aether and Electricity, Vol. 2. Nelson
& Sons, New York, 1953.
W3. E. T. Whittaker, Biogr. Mem. Fell. Roy. Soc. 1, 37 (1955).
IV
RELATIVITY,
THE GENERAL THEORY
This page intentionally left blank 