26
Einstein's Vision
26a. Einstein, Newton, and Success
Einstein's lasting conviction that quantum mechanics was not a theory of principle
did not impede him from recognizing that this theory was highly successful. As
early as 1927, he publicly expressed his judgment that wave mechanics is 'in
amazing agreement with the facts of experience' [El]. In 1936 he wrote, 'It seems
clear . . . that the Born statistical interpretation of the quantum theory is the only
possible one' [E2], and in 1949 declared, 'The statistical quantum theory [is] the
most successful theory of our period' [E3]. Then why was he never convinced by
it?
I believe Einstein indirectly answered this question in his 1933 Spencer lec-
ture—perhaps the clearest and most revealing expression of his way of thinking
in later life. The key is to be found in his remarks on Newton and classical
mechanics. In this lecture [E4], Einstein noted that 'Newton felt by no means
comfortable about the concept of absolute space, ... of absolute rest ... [and]
about the introduction of action at a distance.' Then he went on to refer to the
success of Newton's theory in these words: 'The enormous practical success of his
theory may well have prevented him and the physicists of the eighteenth and nine-
teenth centuries from recognizing the fictitious character of the principles of his
system.' It is important to note that by fictitious Einstein meant free inventions of
the human mind. Whereupon he compared Newton's mechanics with his own
work on general relativity: 'The fictitious character of the principles is made quite
obvious by the fact that it is possible to exhibit two essentially different bases
[Newtonian mechanics and general relativistic mechanics] each of which in its
consequences leads to a large measure of agreement with experience.' (Remember
that these words were spoken long before it was realized how markedly the pre-
dictions of Newtonian mechanics differ from those of general relativity when
strong grativational fields come into play.)
In the Spencer lecture, Einstein mentioned the success not only of classical
mechanics but also of the statistical interpretation of quantum theory. 'This con-
ception is logically unexceptionable and has led to important successes.' But, he
added, 'I still believe in the possibility of giving a model of reality which shall
represent events themselves and not merely the probability of their occurence.'
460
EINSTEIN'S VISION 461
From this lecture as well as from discussions with him on the foundations of
quantum physics, I have gained the following impression. Einstein tended to com-
pare the successes of classical mechanics with those of quantum mechanics. In his
view both were on a par, being successful but incomplete. For more than a decade,
Einstein had pondered the single question of how to extend the invariance under
uniform translations to general motions. His resulting theory, general relativity,
had led to only small deviations from Newton's theory. (Instances where these
deviations are large were discussed only much later.) He was likewise prepared
for the survival of the practical successes of quantum mechanics, with perhaps
only small modifications. He was also prepared to undertake his own search for
objective reality, fearless of how long it would take. It is quite plausible that the
very success of his highest achievement, general relativity, was an added spur to
Einstein's apartness. Yet it should not be forgotten that this trait characterized his
entire oeuvre and style.
The crux of Einstein's thinking on the quantum theory was not his negative
position in regard to what others had done, but rather his deep faith in his own
distinct approach to the quantum problems. His beliefs may be summarized as
follows:
(1) Quantum mechanics represents a major advance, and yet it is only a limiting
case of a theory which remains to be discovered:
There is no doubt that quantum mechanics has seized hold of a beautiful ele-
ment of truth and that it will be a touchstone for a future theoretical basis in
that it must be deducible as a limiting case from that basis, just as electrostatics
is deducible from the Maxwell equations of the electromagnetic field or as ther-
modynamics is deducible from statistical mechanics. [E2]
(2) One should not try to find the new theory by beginning with quantum
mechanics and trying to refine or reinterpret it:
I do not believe that quantum mechanics will be the starting point in the search
for this basis, just as one cannot arrive at the foundations of mechanics from
thermodynamics or statistical mechanics. [E2]
(3) Instead—and this was Einstein's main point—one should start all over
again, as it were, and endeavor to obtain the quantum theory as a by-product of
a general relativistic theory or a generalization thereof. Starting all over again had
never daunted him. That is the single most important link between the early and
the late Einstein. His reverence for Lorentz had not held him back from rejecting
the latter's dynamic views on the contraction of rods and on the interpretation of
Fizeau's experiment. His reverence for Newton had not prevented him from
rejecting absolute space. The relativity theories, his own greatest successes, his
theories of principle, had been arrived at by making fresh starts. He was going to
do that again for the quantum theory, and never mind the time it might take. In
1950 he wrote to Born, 'I am convinced of [objective reality] although, up to now,
success is against it' [E5].
462 THE QUANTUM THEORY
It was a solitary position. Einstein knew that. Nor was he oblivious to other's
reactions. 'I have become an obstinate heretic in the eyes of my colleagues,' he
wrote to one friend [E6], and to another, 'I am generally regarded as a sort of
petrified object, rendered blind and deaf by the years. I find this role not too dis-
tasteful, as it corresponds very well with my temperament' [E7]. He knew, and
on occasion would even say, that his road was a lonely one [E8], yet he held fast.
'Momentary success carries more power of conviction for most people than reflec-
tions on principle' [E9].
Einstein was neither saintly nor humorless in defending his position on the
quantum theory. On occasion he could be acerbic. At one time, he said that Bohr
thought very clearly, wrote obscurely, and thought of himself as a prophet [SI].
Another time he referred to Bohr as a mystic [E10]. On the other hand, in a letter
to Bohr, Einstein referred to his own position by quoting an old rhyme: 'Uber die
Reden des Kandidaten Jobses/Allgemeines Schiitteln des Kopses' [Ell].*There
were moments of loneliness. 'I feel sure that you do not understand how I came
by my lonely ways' [El2]. He may not have expressed all his feelings on these
matters. But that was his way. 'The essential of the being of a man of my type
lies precisely in what he thinks and how he thinks, not in what he does or suffers'
[E3].
Einstein's apartness in regard to the foundations of quantum physics predates
the discovery of quantum mechanics. That is the second most important link
between the early and the later Einstein. I shall enlarge on this in Section 26c, but
first some final Comments on the subject of Chapter 2: Einstein's general attitude
toward the quantum and relativity theories.
26b. Relativity Theory and Quantum Theory
It is a very striking characteristic of Einstein's early scientific writing that he left
relativity theory separate from quantum theory, even on occasions where it would
have been natural and straightforward to connect them. This separation is already
evident in his very first paper on special relativity, in which he noted, 'It is remark-
able that the energy and frequency of a light complex vary with the state of motion
of the observer according to the same law' [E13]. Here was an obvious opportu-
nity to refer to the relation E = hv of his paper on light-quanta, finished only a
few months earlier. But Einstein did not do that. Also, in the September 1905
paper on relativity [El4], he referred to radiation but not to light-quanta. In his
1909 address at Salzburg, Einstein discussed his ideas both on relativity theory
and on quantum theory but kept these two areas well separated [El 5]. As we saw
in Section 21c, in his 1917 paper Einstein ascribed to light-quanta an energy E
= hv and a momentum p = hv/c. This paper concludes with the remark,
'Energy and momentum are most intimately related; therefore, a theory can be
*Roughly: There was a general shaking of heads concerning the words of candidate Jobs.
EINSTEIN'S VISION 463
considered justified only if it has been shown that according to [the theory] the
momentum transferred by radiation to matter leads to motions as required by
thermodynamics' [El6]. Why is only thermodynamics mentioned; why not rela-
tivity also? Because, I believe, to him relativity was to such an extent the revealed
truth that in his view the phenomenological and provisional quantum theory was
not yet ripe enough, perhaps not yet worthy enough, to be brought into contact
with relativity arguments.
So it was in the days of the old quantum theory. So it remained after quantum
mechanics came along. In the previous section, I noted that Einstein considered
quantum mechanics to be highly successful. I should now be more precise and add
that this opinion of his applied exclusively to nonrelativistic quantum mechanics.
I know from experience how difficult it was to discuss quantum field theory with
him. He did not believe that nonrelativistic quantum mechanics provided a secure
enough basis for relativistic generalizations [E17, E18]. Relativistic quantum field
theory was repugnant to him [Blj. Walter Thirring has written to me of conver-
sations with Einstein in which 'his objections became even stronger when it con-
cerned quantum field theory, and he did not believe in any of its consequences'
[Tl]. Valentin Bargmann has told me that at one time Einstein asked him for a
private survey of quantum field theory, beginning with second quantization. Barg-
mann did so for about a month. Thereafter Einstein's interest waned.
The preceding remarks on quantum field theory refer principally to its special
relativistic version. In the time capsule of Section 2b, I inserted the comment that
to this day the synthesis of quantum theory and general relativity is beset with
conceptual difficulties. Was that what bothered Einstein? It was not, as is best
seen from the closing phrases of his tribute to Maxwell:
'I incline to the belief that physicists will not be permanently satisfied with
... an indirect description of Reality, even if the [quantum] theory can befitted
successfully to the General Relativity postulates [my italics]. They would then
be brought back to the attempt to realize that programme which may suitably
be called Maxwell's: the description of Physical Reality by fields which satisfy
without singularity a set of partial differential equations. [E19]
'That programme' is uniquely Einstein's. His main point was that one should not
start out by accepting the quantum postulates as primary rules and then proceed
to fit these rules to general relativity. Instead, he believed one should start with a
classical field theory, a unified field theory, and demand of that theory that the
quantum rules should emerge as constraints imposed by that theory itself.
In the next and final section on the quantum theory, I shall outline how Ein-
stein hoped to achieve this. The question of why he harbored such expectations
brings us to another edge of history. A definitive answer cannot be given. As a
personal opinion, it seems to me that making great discoveries can be accompanied
by trauma, and that the purity of Einstein's relativity theories had a blinding effect
on him. He almost said so himself: To the discoverer ... the constructions of his
464 THE QUANTUM THEORY
imagination appear so necessary and so natural that he is apt to treat them not as
the creations of his thoughts but as given realities' [E4]. His insistence on objective
reality is a perfect example of such a mental process.
Finally, I should like to reiterate my own view that Einstein's technical objec-
tions to quantum mechanics are unfounded, but that I do not know whether either
quantum mechanics or general relativity is complete, or whether their desired syn-
thesis can be consummated simply by welding together their respective sets of
postulates.
26c. Uberkausalitat
In 1923 Einstein published an article entitled 'Does field theory offer possibilities
for the solution of the quantum problem?' [E20]. It begins with a reminder of the
successes achieved in electrodynamics and general relativity theory in regard to a
causal description: events are causally determined by differential equations com-
bined with initial conditions on a spacelike surface. However, Einstein continued,
this method cannot be applied to quantum problems without further ado. As he
put it, the discreteness of the Bohr orbits indicates that initial conditions cannot
be chosen freely. Then he asked, Can one nevertheless implement these quantum
constraints in a (causal) theory based on partial differential equations? His
answer: 'Quite certainly: we must only "overdetermine" the field variables by
[appropriate] equations.' Next he stated his program, based on three require-
ments: (1) general covariance, (2) the desired equations should at least be in accor-
dance with the gravitational and the Maxwell theory, and (3) the desired system
of equations which overdetermines the fields should have static, spherically sym-
metric solutions which describe the electron and proton. If this overdetermination
can be achieved, then 'we may hope that these equations co-determine the mechan-
ical behavior of the singular points (electrons) in such a way that the initial con-
ditions of the field and the singular points are also subject to restrictive conditions.'
He went on to discuss a tentative example and concluded, 'To me, the main point
of this communication is the idea of overdetermination.'
By 1923 Einstein had already been brooding about these ideas for a number of
years. In 1920 he had written to Born, 'I do not seem able to give tangible form
to my pet idea [meine Lieblingsidee], which is to understand the structure of the
quanta by redundancy in determination, using differential equations,' [E21].This
is the earliest reference to his strategy that I am aware of. It would seem likely
that ideas of this kind began to stir in him soon after 1917, when he had not only
completed the general theory of relativity but had also discovered the lack of caus-
ality in spontaneous emission [El6]. The early response of others to these attempts
by Einstein was recorded by Born: 'In those days [early 1925], we all thought that
his objective . .. was attainable and also very important' [B2]. Einstein himself
felt that he had no choice. 'The road may be quite wrong, but it must be tried'
[E22].
EINSTEIN'S VISION 465
Overdetermination was and remained Einstein's hope for an answer to the
quantum problem. In addressing Planck, six years later, he made his point quite
emphatically: the understanding of quantum phenomena does not demand a
weakening of classical causality, as is done in quantum mechanics. On the con-
trary, classical causality should be strengthened.
Natural phenomena seem to be determined to such an extent that not only the
temporal sequence but also the initial state is fixed to a large extent by [phys-
ical] law. It seemed to me that I should express this idea by searching for over-
determined systems of differential equations. ... I strongly believe that we will
not end up with a Subkausalitat [subcausality] but that, in the indicated sense,
we will arrive at an Uberkausalitat [supercausality]. [E23].
At long last, I can now explain Einstein's vision. He was looking for a unified
field theory, but to him that concept meant something different from what it meant
and means to everyone else. He demanded that the theory shall be strictly causal,
that it shall unify gravitation and electromagnetism, that the particles of physics
shall emerge as special solutions of the general field equations, and that the quan-
tum postulates shall be a consequence of the general field equations. Einstein had
all these criteria in mind when he wrote, in 1949, 'Our problem is that of finding
the field equations of the total field' [E3]. Einstein's scientific evolution can there-
fore be schematized by the picture given in the preface:
Special relativity Statistical physics
I I
General relativity Quantum theory
^ Unified "^
field theory
In Chapter 171 discussed that portion of Einstein's work on unified field theory
that dealt with the synthesis of gravitation and electromagnetism. Here I add a
few remarks on the quantum aspects.
Einstein's correspondence shows that the unified field theory and the quantum
problems were very often simultaneously on his mind. Here are but a few exam-
ples. In 1925, while he was at work on a theory with a nonsymmetric metric, he
wrote to a friend, 'Now the question is whether this field theory is compatible
with the existence of atoms and quanta.' [E24]. He discussed the same generalized
theory in a letter written in 1942. 'What I am doing now may seem a bit crazy
to you. One must note, however, that the wave-particle duality demands some-
thing unheard of,' [E25]. In 1949 he wrote, 'I am convinced that the . . . statistical
[quantum] theory ... is superficial and that one must be backed by the principle
of general relativity' [E26]. And in 1954, 'I must seem like an ostrich who forever
buries its head in the relativistic sand in order not to face the evil quanta' [E27].
466 THE QUANTUM THEORY
Forever and in vain, Einstein kept looking for hints that would help him realize
his vision of a quantum theory derived from a unified field theory. This urge
explains his reference to the quantum theory at unexpected places. His first paper
with Grommer (see Section 15f) on the problem of motion ends, 'It has been
shown for the first time that a field theory can contain a theory of the mechanical
properties of discontinuities. This may become of significance for . . . the quantum
theory' [E28]. However, in a sequel he withdrew this last remark [E29]. In 1930
he gave a lecture on unified field theory, a report of which contains the statement,
'He emphasized that he is in no way taking notice of the results of quantum cal-
culations because he believes that by dealing with microscopic phenomena these
will come out by themselves' [E30]. A report in 1931 by Einstein on a five-dimen-
sional theory which should unify gravitation and electromagnetism ends, 'This
theory does not yet contain the conclusions of the quantum theory' [E31]. Two
months after the Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen article, Einstein and Rosen completed
another paper, this one dealing with singularity-free solutions of the gravitational-
electromagnetic field equations [E32]. One phrase in this paper, 'one does not see
a priori whether the theory contains the quantum phenomena' illustrates once
again the scope of the program that was on Einstein's mind. The program was to
remain an elusive vision. Gravitation and electromagnetism were not synthesized,
quantum physics was not integrated, satisfactory particle-like solutions were not
found.
I add a few scattered remarks.
After Einstein's brief flirtation with the Dirac equation, (Section 25b), he was
led to the belief that the sought-for equations of the total field would generate
particles with nonzero spin in terms of particle-like solutions that are not spher-
ically symmetrical (V. Bargmann, private communication). Presumably, he hoped
that his idea of overdetermination would lead to discrete spin values.*
He also hoped that the future theory would contain solutions which would not
be absolutely localizable and which would correspond to particles carrying quan-
tized electric charge [E4].
In 1925 Einstein noted that if the combined gravitational-electromagnetic field
equations have particle-like solutions with charge e and mass m, then there should
also be solutions with ( — e,m)\ [E33]. The proof involves the application of time
reversal to the combined equations. (In a related context, the existence of (+ e,m)
solutions was first noted by Pauli [PI].) This result led him to doubt temporarily
whether the unification of gravitation and electromagnetism was possible at all.
(Remember his demand that the unified field theory should generate the known
particles as special solutions.)
Simplicity was the guide in Einstein's quest. 'In my opinion, there is the correct
path and ... it is in our power to find it. Our experience up to date justifies us in
*I note in passing that in 1925 Einstein gave a helping hand to Uhlenbeck and Goudsmit in the
explanation of the origins of the spin-orbit coupling of electrons in atoms [Ul].
EINSTEIN'S VISION 467
feeling sure that in nature is actualized the ideal of mathematical simplicity' [E4].
As early as 1927, Heisenberg stressed, in a letter to Einstein, that the latter's
concept of simplicity and the simplicity inherent in quantum mechanics cannot be
realized at the same time. 'If I have understood correctly your point of view, then
you would gladly sacrifice the simplicity [of quantum mechanics] to the principle
of [classical] causality. Perhaps we could comfort ourselves [with the idea that]
the dear Lord could go beyond [quantum mechanics] and maintain causality. I do
not really find it beautiful, however, to demand more than a physical description
of the connection between experiments' [HI].
As Einstein's life drew to a close, doubts about his vision arose in his mind.
'The theory of relativity and the quantum theory . . . seem little adapted to
fusion into one unified theory,' he remarked in 1940 [E34]. He wrote to Born,
probably in 1949, 'Our respective hobby-horses have irretrievably run off in dif-
ferent directions. . . . Even I cannot adhere to [mine] with absolute confidence'
[E35]. In the early 1950s, he once said to me that he was not sure whether dif-
ferential geometry was to be the framework for further progress, but if it was then
he believed he was on the right track.* To his dear friend Besso he wrote in 1954,
'I consider it quite possible that physics cannot be based on the field concept, i.e.,
on continuous structures. In that case, nothing remains of my entire castle in the
air, gravitation theory included, [and of] the rest of modern physics' [E37]. I doubt
whether any physicist can be found who would not agree that this judgment is
unreasonably harsh. In one of the last of the many introductions Einstein wrote
for books by others, he said:
My efforts to complete the general theory of relativity . . . are in part due to the
conjecture that a sensible general relativistic [classical] field theory might per-
haps provide the key to a more complete quantum theory. This is a modest
hope, but certainly not a conviction. [E38]
But, as Helen Dukas told me, Einstein once said at the dinner table (she did not
recall the year) that he thought physicists would understand him a hundred years
later. Nor can I escape the impression that he was thinking about himself when
he wrote the following lines about Spinoza:
Although he lived three hundred years before our time, the spiritual situation
with which Spinoza had to cope peculiarly resembles our own. The reason for
this is that he was utterly convinced of the causal dependence of all phenomena,
at a time when the success accompanying the efforts to achieve a knowledge of
the causal relationship of natural phenomena was still quite modest. [E39].
*V. Bargmann informs me that Einstein made similar remarks to him in the late 1930s. A related
comment is found in a letter to Infeld: 'I tend more and more to the opinion that one cannot come
further with a continuum theory" [E36].
468 THE QUANTUM THEORY
Einstein kept thinking about quantum theory until the very end. He wrote his
last autobiographical sketch in Princeton, in March 1955, about a month before
his death. Its final sentences deal with the quantum theory.
It appears dubious whether a [classical] field theory can account for the atom-
istic structure of matter and radiation as well as of quantum phenomena. Most
physicists will reply with a convinced 'No,' since they believe that the quantum
problem has been solved in principle by other means. However that may be,
Lessing's comforting word stays with us: the aspiration to truth is more precious
than its assured possession. [E40]
References
Bl. M. Born, letter to A. Einstein, October 10, 1944.
B2. (Ed.), The Born-Einstein Letters, p. 88. Walker, New York, 1971.
El. A. Einstein, Smithsonian Institution Report for 1927, p. 201; Naturw. 15, 273
(1927).
E2. , /. Franklin Inst. 221, 313 (1936).
E3.- in Albert Einstein: Philosopher-Scientist (P. A. Schilpp, Ed.). Tudor, New
York, 1949.
E4. , On the Method of Theoretical Physics. Oxford University Press, New York,
1933. Reprinted in Phil. Sci. 1, 162 (1934).
E5. , letter to M. Born, September 15, 1950.
E6. , letter to M. Besso, August 8, 1949; EB, p. 407.
E7. , letter to M. Born, April 12, 1949.
E8. , letter to M. Born, March 18, 1948.
E9. , letter to M. Besso, July 24, 1949; EB, p. 402.
E10. , letter to E. Schroedinger, August 9, 1939.
Ell. , letter to N. Bohr, April 4, 1949.
E12. —, letter to M. Born, March 18, 1948.
E13. ,AdP17, 891 (1905).
E14. —,AdP 18, 639 (1905).
El 5. , Phys. Zeitschr. 10, 817 (1909).
E16. , Phys. Zeitschr. 18, 121 (1917).
E17. , letter to M. Born, March 22, 1934.
E18. , letter to A. Sommerfeld, December 14, 1946.
E19. in James Clark Maxwell, p. 66. Macmillan, New York, 1931.
£20. , PAW, 1923, p. 359.
E21. , letter to M. Born, March 3, 1920.
E22. , letter to M. Besso, January 5, 1924; EB, p. 197.
E23. , Forschungen und Fortschntte 5, 248 (1929).
E24. , letter to M. Besso, July 28, 1925; EB, p. 209.
E25. —, letter to M. Besso, August 1942; EB, p. 366.
E26. , letter to M. Besso, August 16, 1949; EB, p. 409.
E27. , letter to L. de Broglie, February 8, 1954.
E28. and J. Grommer PAW, 1927, p. 2.
EINSTEIN'S VISION 469
E29. , PAW, 1927, p. 235.
E30. , Science 71, 608 (1930).
E31. , Science 74, 438(1931).
E32. —and N. Rosen, Phys. Rev. 48, 73 (1935).
E33. , Physica 5, 330 (1925).
E34. —, Science 91, 487 (1940).
E35. , letter to M. Born, undated, probably written in 1949.
E36. , letter to L. Infeld, March 6, 1941.
E37. , letter to M. Besso, August 10, 1954; EB, p. 525.
E38. in Louis de Broglie, Physicien et Penseur. Albin Michel, Paris, 1953.
E39. , introduction to R. Kayser, Spinoza, Portrait of a Spiritual Hero, p. xi, Philo-
sophical Library, New York, 1946.
E40. in Helle Zeit, dunkle Zeit (C. Seelig, Ed.). Europa Verlag Zurich, 1956.
HI. W. Heisenberg, letter to A. Einstein, June 10, 1927.
PI. W. Pauli, Phys. Zeitschr. 20, 457 (1919).
SI. R. S. Shankland, Am. J. Phys. 31, 47 (1963).
Tl. W. Thirring, letter to A. Pais, November 29, 1977.
Ul. G. E. Uhlenbeck, Physics Today 29 (6), 43 (1976).
This page intentionally left blank VII
JOURNEY'S END
This page intentionally left blank 