1
Purpose and Plan
It must have been around 1950. I was accompanying Einstein on a walk from
The Institute for Advanced Study to his home, when he suddenly stopped, turned
to me, and asked me if I really believed that the moon exists only if I look at it.
The nature of our conversation was not particularly metaphysical. Rather, we
were discussing the quantum theory, in particular what is doable and knowable
in the sense of physical observation. The twentieth century physicist does not, of
course, claim to have the definitive answer to this question. He does know, how-
ever, that the answer given by his nineteenth century ancestors will no longer do.
They were almost exactly right, to be sure, as far as conditions of everyday life
are concerned, but their answer cannot be extrapolated to things moving nearly
as fast as light, or to things that are as small as atoms, or—in some respects—to
things that are as heavy as stars. We now know better than before that what man
can do under the best of circumstances depends on a careful specification of what
those circumstances are. That, in very broad terms, is the lesson of the theory of
relativity, which Einstein created, and of quantum mechanics, which he eventually
accepted as (in his words) the most successful theory of our period but which, he
believed, was none the less only provisional in character.
We walked on and continued talking about the moon and the meaning of the
expression to exist as it refers to inanimate objects. When we reached 112 Mercer
Street, I wished him a pleasant lunch, then returned to the Institute. As had been
the case on many earlier occasions, I had enjoyed the walk and felt better because
of the discussion even though it had ended inconclusively. I was used to that by
then, and as I walked back I wondered once again about the question, Why does
this man, who contributed so incomparably much to the creation of modern phys-
ics, remain so attached to the nineteenth century view of causality?
To make that question more precise, it is necessary to understand Einstein's
credo in regard not just to quantum physics but to all of physics. That much I
believe I know, and will endeavor to explain in what follows. However, in order
to answer the question, one needs to know not only his beliefs but also how they
came to be adopted. My conversations with Einstein taught me ,'ittle about that.
The issue was not purposely shunned; it simply was never raised. Only many
years after Einstein's death did I see the beginnings of an answer when I realized
5
6 INTRODUCTORY
that, nearly a decade before the discovery of modern quantum mechanics, he had
been the first to understand that the nineteenth century ideal of causality was
about to become a grave issue in quantum physics. However, while I know more
now about the evolution of his thinking than I did when I walked with him, I
would not go so far as to say that I now understand why he chose to believe what
he did believe. When Einstein was fifty years old, he wrote in the introduction to
the biography by his son-in-law Rudolph Kayser, 'What has perhaps been over-
looked is the irrational, the inconsistent, the droll, even the insane, which nature,
inexhaustibly operative, implants in an individual, seemingly for her own amuse-
ment. But these things are singled out only in the crucible of one's own mind.'
Perhaps this statement is too optimistic about the reach of self-knowledge. Cer-
tainly it is a warning, and a fair one, to any biographer not to overdo answering
every question he may legitimately raise.
I should briefly explain how it happened that I went on that walk with Einstein
and why we came to talk about the moon. I was born in 1918 in Amsterdam. In
1941 I received my PhD with Leon Rosenfeld in Utrecht. Some time thereafter I
went into hiding in Amsterdam. Eventually I was caught and sent to the Gestapo
prison there. Those who were not executed were released shortly before VE Day.
Immediately after the war I applied for a postdoctoral fellowship at the Niels Bohr
Institute in Copenhagen and at The Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton
where I hoped to work with Pauli. I was accepted at both places and first went
to Copenhagen for one year. Soon thereafter, I worked with Bohr for a period of
several months. The following lines from my account of that experience are rele-
vant to the present subject: 'I must admit that in the early stages of the collabo-
ration I did not follow Bohr's line of thinking a good deal of the time and was in
fact often quite bewildered. I failed to see the relevance of such remarks as that
Schroedinger was completely shocked in 1927 when he was told of the probability
interpretation of quantum mechanics or a reference to some objection by Einstein
in 1928, which apparently had no bearing whatever on the subject at hand. But
it did not take very long before the fog started to lift. I began to grasp not only the
thread of Bohr's arguments but also their purpose. Just as in many sports a player
goes through warming-up exercises before entering the arena, so Bohr would
relive the struggles which it took before the content of quantum mechanics was
understood and accepted. I can say that in Bohr's mind this struggle started all
over every single day. This, I am convinced, was Bohr's inexhaustible source of
identity. Einstein appeared forever as his leading spiritual partner—even after the
latter's death he would argue with him as if Einstein were still alive' [PI].
In September 1946 I went to Princeton. The first thing I learned was that, in
the meantime, Pauli had gone to Zurich. Bohr also came to Princeton that same
month. Both of us attended the Princeton Bicentennial Meetings. I missed my first
opportunity to catch a glimpse of Einstein as he walked next to President Truman
in the academic parade. However, shortly thereafter, Bohr introduced me to Ein-
stein, who greeted a rather awed young man in a very friendly way. The conver-
sation on that occasion soon turned to the quantum theory. I listened as the two
PURPOSE AND PLAN 7
of them argued. I recall no details but remember distinctly my first impressions:
they liked and respected each other. With a fair amount of passion, they were
talking past each other. And, as had been the case with my first discussions with
Bohr, I did not understand what Einstein was talking about.
Not long thereafter, I encountered Einstein in front of the Institute and told
him that I had not followed his argument with Bohr and asked if I could come to
his office some time for further enlightenment. He invited me to walk home with
him. So began a series of discussions that continued until shortly before his death.*
I would visit with him in his office or accompany him (often together with Kurt
Godel) on his lunchtime walk home. Less often I would visit him there. In all, I
saw him about once every few weeks. We always spoke in German, the language
best suited to grasp both the nuances of what he had in mind and the flavor of his
personality. Only once did he visit my apartment. The occasion was a meeting of
the Institute faculty for the purpose of drafting a statement of our position in the
1954 Oppenheimer affair.
Einstein's company was comfortable and comforting to those who knew him.
Of course, he well knew that he was a legendary figure in the eyes of the world.
He accepted this as a fact of life. There was nothing in his personality to promote
his mythical stature; nor did he relish it. Privately he would express annoyance if
he felt that his position was being misused. I recall the case of Professor X, who
had been quoted by the newspapers as having found solutions to Einstein's gen-
eralized equations of gravitation. Einstein said to me, 'Der Mann ist ein Narr,'
the man is a fool, and added that, in his opinion, X could calculate but could not
think. X had visited Einstein to discuss this work, and Einstein, always courteous,
had said to him that his, X's, results would be important if true. Einstein was
chagrined to have been quoted in the papers without this last provision. He said
that he would keep silent on the matter but would not receive X again. According
to Einstein, the whole thing started because X, in his enthusiasm, had repeated
Einstein's opinion to some colleagues who saw the value of it as publicity for their
university.
To those physicists who could follow his scientific thought and who knew him
personally, the legendary aspect was never in the foreground— yet it was never
wholly absent. I remember an occasion in 1947 when I was giving a talk at the
Institute about the newly discovered ir and /u mesons. Einstein walked in just after
I had begun. I remember being speechless for the brief moment necessary to over-
come a sense of the unreal. I recall a similar moment during a symposium** held
* My stay at the Institute had lost much of its attraction because Pauli was no longer there. As I was
contemplating returning to Europe, Robert Oppenheimer informed me that he had been approached
for the directorship of the Institute. He asked me to join him in building up physics there. I accepted.
A year later, I was appointed to a five-year membership and in 1950 to a professorship at the Insti-
tute, where I remained until 1963.
**The speakers were J. R. Oppenheimer, I. I. Rabi, E. P. Wigner, H. P. Robertson, S. M. Clem-
ence, and H. Weyl.
8 INTRODUCTORY
in Princeton on March 19,1949, on the occasion of Einstein's seventieth birthday.
Most of us were in our seats when Einstein entered the hall. Again there was this
brief hush before we stood to greet him.
Nor do I believe that such reactions were typical only of those who were much
younger than he. There were a few occasions when Pauli and I were both with
him. Pauli, not known for an excess of awe, was just slightly different in Einstein's
company. One could perceive his sense of reverence. Bohr, too, was affected in a
similar way, differences in scientific outlook notwithstanding.
Whenever I met Einstein, our conversations might range far and wide but
invariably the discussion would turn to physics. Such discussions would touch only
occasionally on matters of past history. We talked mainly about the present and
the future. When relativity was the issue, he would often talk of his efforts to
unify gravitation and electromagnetism and of his hopes for the next steps. His
faith rarely wavered in the path he had chosen. Only once did he express a res-
ervation to me when he said, in essence, 'I am not sure that differential geometry
is the framework for further progress, but, if it is, then I believe I am on the right
track.' (This remark must have been made some time during his last few years.)
The main topic of discussion, however, was quantum physics. Einstein never
ceased to ponder the meaning of the quantum theory. Time and time again, the
argument would turn to quantum mechanics and its interpretation. He was
explicit in his opinion that the most commonly held views on this subject could not
be the last word, but he also had more subtle ways of expressing his dissent. For
example, he would never refer to a wave function as die Wellenfunktion but would
always use mathematical terminology: die Psifunktion. I was never able to arouse
much interest in him about the new particles which appeared on the scene in the
late 1940s and especially in the early 1950s. It was apparent that he felt that the
time was not ripe to worry about such things and that these particles would even-
tually appear as solutions to the equations of a unified theory. In some sense, he
may well prove to be right.
The most interesting thing I learned from these conversations was how Einstein
thought and, to some extent, who he was. Since I never became his co-worker, the
discussions were not confined to any particular problem. Yet we talked physics,
often touching on topics of a technical nature. We did not talk much about statis-
tical physics, an area to which he had contributed so much but which no longer
was the center of his interests. If the special and the general theory of relativity
came up only occasionally, that was because at that time the main issues appeared
to have been settled. Recall that the renewed surge of interest in general relativity
began just after his death. However, I do remember him talking about Lorentz,
the one father figure in his life; once we also talked about Poincare. If we argued
so often about the quantum theory, that was more his choice than mine. It had
not taken long before I grasped the essence of the Einstein-Bohr dialogue: com-
plementarity versus objective reality. It became clear to me from listening to them
both that the advent of quantum mechanics in 1925 represented a far greater
PURPOSE AND PLAN 9
break with the past than had been the case with the coming of special relativity
in 1905 or of general relativity in 1915. That had not been obvious to me earlier,
as I belong to the generation which was exposed to 'ready-made' quantum
mechanics. I came to understand how wrong I was in accepting a rather wide-
spread belief that Einstein simply did not care anymore about the quantum theory.
On the contrary, he wanted nothing more than to find a unified field theory which
not only would join together gravitational and electromagnetic forces but also
would provide the basis for a new interpretation of quantum phenomena. About
relativity he spoke with detachment, about the quantum theory with passion. The
quantum was his demon. I learned only much later that Einstein had once said to
his friend Otto Stern, 'I have thought a hundred times as much about the quantum
problems as I have about general relativity theory' [Jl]. From my own experiences
I can only add that this statement does not surprise me.
We talked of things other than physics: politics, the bomb, the Jewish destiny,
and also of less weighty matters. One day I told Einstein a Jewish joke. Since he
relished that, I began to save good ones I heard for a next occasion. As I told these
stories, his face would change. Suddenly he would look much younger, almost like
a naughty schoolboy. When the punch line came, he would let go with contented
laughter, a memory I particularly cherish.
An unconcern with the past is a privilege of youth. In all the years I knew
Einstein, I never read any of his papers, on the simple grounds that I already
knew what to a physicist was memorable in them and did not need to know what
had been superseded. Now it is obvious to me that I might have been able to ask
him some very interesting questions had I been less blessed with ignorance. I
might then have learned some interesting facts, but at a price. My discussions with
Einstein never were historical interviews. They concerned live physics. I am glad
it never was otherwise.
I did read Einstein's papers as the years went by, and my interest in him as an
historical figure grew. Thus it came about that I learned to follow his science and
his life from the end to the beginnings. I gradually became aware of the most
difficult task in studying past science: to forget temporarily what came afterward.
The study of his papers, discussions with others who knew him, access to the
Einstein Archives, personal reminiscences—these are the ingredients which led to
this book. Without disrespect or lack of gratitude, I have found the study of the
scientific papers to be incomparably more important than anything else.
In the preface, I promised a tour through this book. The tour starts here. For
ease I introduce the notation, to be used only in this and in the next chapter, of
referring to, for example, Chapter 3 as (3) and to Chapter 5, Section (c), as (5c).
To repeat, symbols such as [Jl] indicate references to be found at the end of the
chapter.
I shall begin by indicating how the personal biography is woven into the nar-
10 INTRODUCTORY
rative. The early period, from Einstein's birth in 1879 to the beginning of his
academic career as Privatdozent in Bern in February 1908, is discussed in (3),
which contains a sketch of his childhood, his school years (contrary to popular
belief he earned high marks in elementary as well as high school), his brief reli-
gious phase, his student days, his initial difficulties in finding a job, and most of
the period he spent at the patent office in Bern, a period that witnesses the death
of his father, his marriage to Mileva Marie, and the birth of his first son. In (lOa)
we follow him from the time he began as a Privatdozent in Bern to the end, in
March 1911, of his associate professorship at the University of Zurich. In that
period his second son was born. The next phase (11 a) is his time as full professor
in Prague (March 1911 to August 1912). In (12a) we follow him back to Zurich
as a professor at the Federal Institute of Technology (ETH) (August 1912 to
April 1914). The circumstances surrounding his move from Zurich to Berlin, his
separation from Mileva and the two boys, and his reaction to the events of the
First World War, are described in (14a). The story of the Berlin days is continued
in (16) which ends with Einstein's permanent departure from Europe. This
period includes years of illness, which did not noticeably affect his productivity;
his divorce from Mileva and marriage to his cousin Elsa; and the death in his
home in Berlin, of his mother (16a). Following this, (16b) and (16c) are devoted
to the abrupt emergence in 1919 of Einstein (whose genius had already been fully
recognized for some time by his scientific peers) as a charismatic world figure and
to my views on the causes of this striking phenomenon. Next, (16d), devoted to
Einstein's hectic years in Berlin in the 1920s, his early involvements with the
Jewish destiny, his continued interest in pacifism, and his connection with the
League of Nations, ends with his final departure from Germany in December
1932. The Belgian interlude and the early years in Princeton are described in
(25b), the final years of his life in (26) to (28). The book ends with a detailed
Einstein chronology (32).
Before starting on a similar tour of the scientific part, I interject a few remarks
on Einstein and politics and on Einstein as a philosopher and humanist.
Whenever I think of Einstein and politics, I recall my encounter with him in
the late evening of Sunday, April 11, 1954. That morning, a column by the Alsop
brothers had appeared in the New York Herald Tribune, entitled 'Next
McCarthy target: the leading physicists,' which began by stating that the junior
senator from Wisconsin was getting ready to play his ace in the hole. I knew that
the Oppenheimer case was about to break. That evening I was working in my
office at the Institute when the phone rang and a Washington operator asked to
speak to Dr Oppenheimer. I replied that Oppenheimer was out of town. (In fact,
he was in Washington.) The operator asked for Dr Einstein. I told her that Ein-
stein was not at the office and that his home number was unlisted. The operator
told me next that her party wished to speak to me. The director of the Washington
PURPOSE AND PLAN 11
Bureau of the Associated Press came on the line and told me that the Oppenhei-
mer case would be all over the papers on Tuesday morning. He was eager for a
statement by Einstein as soon as possible. I realized that pandemonium on Mercer
Street the next morning might be avoided by a brief statement that evening and
so said that I would talk it over with Einstein and would call back in any event.
I drove to Mercer Street and rang the bell; Helen Dukas, Einstein's secretary, let
me in. I apologized for appearing at such a late hour and said it would be good if
I could talk briefly with the professor, who meanwhile had appeared at the top of
the stairs dressed in his bathrobe and asked, 'Was ist los?' What is going on? He
came down and so did his stepdaughter Margot. After I told him the reason for
my call, Einstein burst out laughing. I was a bit taken aback and asked him what
was so funny. He said that the problem was simple. All Oppenheimer needed to
do, he said, was go to Washington, tell the officials that they were fools, and then
go home. On further discussion, we decided that a brief statement was called for.
We drew it up, and Einstein read it over the phone to the AP director in Wash-
ington. The next day Helen Dukas was preparing lunch when she saw cars in
front of the house and cameras being unloaded. In her apron (she told me) she
ran out of the house to warn Einstein, who was on his way home. When he arrived
at the front door, he declined to talk to reporters.
Was Einstein's initial response correct? Of course it was, even though his sug-
gestion would not and could not be followed. I remember once attending a seminar
by Bertrand de Jouvenel in which he singled out the main characteristic of a
political problem: it has no answer, only a compromise. Nothing was more alien
to Einstein than to settle any issue by compromise, in his life or in his science. He
often spoke out on political problems, always steering to their answer. Such state-
ments have often been called naive.* In my view, Einstein was not only not naive
but highly aware of the nature of man's sorrows and his follies. His utterances on
political matters did not always address the immediately practicable, and I do not
think that on the whole they were very influential. However, he knowingly and
gladly paid the price of sanity.
As another comment on political matters, I should like to relate a story I was
told in 1979 by Israel's President Navon. After the death of the then Israeli pres-
ident, Weizman, in November 1952, Ben Gurion and his cabinet decided to offer
the presidency to Einstein. Abba Eban was instructed to transmit the offer from
Washington (27). Shortly thereafter, in a private conversation, Ben Gurion asked
Navon (who at that time was his personal secretary), 'What are we going to do
if he accepts?'
Einstein often lent his name to pacifist statements, doing so for the first time in
1914 (14a). In 1916 he gave an interview to the Berlin paper Die Vossische Zei-
tung about the work on Mach by his pacifist friend Friedrich Adler, then in jail
"Oppenheimer's description, 'There was always with him a wonderful purity at once childlike and
profoundly stubborn' [Ol] shows the writer's talent for almost understanding everything.
12 INTRODUCTORY
for having shot and killed Karl Sttirgkh, the prime minister of Austria [El]. After
the death of Leo Arons, a physicist Einstein admired for his political courage but
whom he did not know personally, he wrote an obituary in Sozialistische Mon-
atshefte [E2]. After the assassination in 1922 of his acquaintance Walther Rath-
enau, foreign minister of the Weimar republic and a physicist by education, Ein-
stein wrote of him in Neue Rundschau: 'It is no art to be an idealist if one lives
in cloud-cuckoo land. He, however, was an idealist even though he lived on earth
and knew its smell better than almost anyone else' [E3]. In 1923 Einstein became
a cofounder of the Association of Friends of the New Russia. Together with Lor-
entz, Marie Curie, Henry Bergson, and others, he worked for a time as a member
of the League of Nations' Committee for Intellectual Cooperation (16d). Among
those he proposed or endorsed for the Nobel peace prize (31) were Masaryk; Her-
bert Runham Brown, honorary secretary of War Resisters International; Carl von
Ossietzky, at the time in a German concentration camp; and the organization
Youth Aliyah. He spoke out about the plight of the Jews and helped. Numerous
are the affidavits he signed in order to bring Jews from Europe to the United
States.
Pacifism and supranationalism were Einstein's two principal political ideals. In
the 1920s he supported universal disarmament and a United Europe (16d). After
the Second World War, he especially championed the concept of world govern-
ment, and the peaceful—and only peaceful—uses of atomic energy (27). That
pacifism and disarmament were out of place in the years 1933 to 1945 was both
deeply regrettable and obvious to him (25b). In 1939 he sent his sensible letter to
President Roosevelt on the military implications of nuclear fission. In 1943 he
signed a contract with the U.S. Navy Bureau of Ordnance as occasional consultant
(his fee was $25 per day).* Perhaps his most memorable contribution of that
period is his saying, 'I am in the Navy, but I was not required to get a Navy
haircut.' [Bl]. He never forgave the Germans (27).**
Einstein's political orientation, which for simplicity may be called leftist,
derived from his sense of justice, not from an approval of method or a sharing of
philosophy. 'In Lenin I honor a man who devoted all his strength and sacrificed
his person to the realization of social justice. I do not consider his method to be
proper,' he wrote in 1929 [E4] and, shortly thereafter, 'Outside Russia, Lenin and
Engels are of course not valued as scientific thinkers and no one might be inter-
ested to refute them as such. The same might also be the case in Russia, but there
one cannot dare to say so' [E5]. Much documentation related to Einstein's inter-
ests in and involvements with political matters is found in the book Einstein on
Peace [Nl]).
Einstein was a lover of wisdom. But was he a philosopher? The answer to that
"The account of Einstein's consultancy given in [Gl] is inaccurate.
**Einstein's cousin Lina Einstein died in Auschwitz. His cousin Bertha Dreyfus died in Theresien-
stadt.
PURPOSE AND PLAN 13
question is no less a matter of taste than of fact. I would say that at his best he
was not, but I would not argue strenuously against the opposite view. It is as
certain that Einstein's interest in philosophy was genuine as it is that he did not
consider himself a philosopher.
He studied philosophical writings throughout his life, beginning in his high
school days, when he first read Kant (3). In 1943 Einstein, Godel, Bertrand Rus-
sell, and Pauli gathered at Einstein's home to discuss philosophy of science about
half a dozen times [Rl]. 'Science without epistemology is—in so far as it is think-
able at all—primitive and muddled,' he wrote in his later years, warning at the
same time of the dangers to the scientist of adhering too strongly to any one epis-
temological system. 'He [the scientist] must appear to the systematic epistemologist
as a type of unscrupulous opportunist: he appears as realist in so far as he seeks
to describe a world independent of the acts of perception; an idealist in so far as
he looks upon the concepts and theories as the free inventions of the human spirit
(not logically derivable from what is empirically given); as positivist in so far as
he considers his concepts and theories justified only to the extent to which they
furnish a logical representation of relations among sensory experiences. He may
even appear as a Platonist or Pythagorean in so far as he considers the viewpoint
of logical simplicity as an indispensable and effective tool of his research' [E6].
Elements of all these 'isms' are clearly discernible in Einstein's thinking. In the
last thirty years of his life, he ceased to be an 'unscrupulous opportunist', however,
when, much to his detriment, he became a philosopher by freezing himself into
realism or, as he preferred to call it, objective reality. That part of his evolution
will be described in detail in (25). There can be as little doubt that philosophy
stretched his personality as that his philosophical knowledge played no direct role
in his major creative efforts. Further remarks by Einstein on philosophical issues
will be deferred until (16e), except for his comments on Newton.
The men whom Einstein at one time or another acknowledged as his precursors
were Newton, Maxwell, Mach, Planck, and Lorentz. As he told me more than
once, without Lorentz he would never have been able to make the discovery of
special relativity. Of his veneration for Planck, I shall write in (18a); of the influ-
ence of Mach* in (15e); and of his views of Maxwell in (16e). I now turn to
Newton but first digress briefly.
Einstein's deep emotional urge not to let anything interfere with his thinking
dates back to his childhood and lends an unusual quality of detachment to his
personal life. It was not that he was aloof or a loner, incapable of personal attach-
ments. He was also capable of deep anger, as his attitude toward Germany during
*I should note that I do not quite share Isaiah Berlin's opinion [B2] that Mach was one of Einstein's
philosophical mentors and that Einstein first accepted, then rejected Mach's phenomenalism. Ein-
stein's great admiration for Mach came entirely from the reading of the latter's book on mechanics,
in which the relativity of all motion is a guiding principle. On the other hand, Einstein considered
Mach to be 'un deplorable philosophe' [E7], if only because to Mach the reality of atoms remained
forever anathema.
14 INTRODUCTORY
and after the Nazi period attests. When he spoke or wrote of justice and liberty
for others, called the Jews his brothers, or grieved for the heroes of the Warsaw
ghetto, he did so as a man of feeling at least as much as a man of thought. That,
having thus spoken and thus felt, he would want to return to the purity and safety
of the world of ideas is not an entirely uncommon desire. Truly remarkable, how-
ever, was his gift to effect the return to that world without emotional effort. He
had no need to push the everyday world away from him. He just stepped out of
it whenever he wished. It is therefore not surprising either that (as he wrote
shortly before his death) he twice failed rather disgracefully in marriage or that
in his life there is an absence of figures with whom he identified—with the excep-
tion, perhaps, of Newton.
It seems to me that, when in midlife Einstein wrote of 'The wonderful events
which the great Newton experienced in his young days. .. Nature to him was an
open book. ... In one person he combined the experimenter, the theorist, the
mechanic, and, not least, the artist in exposition.. .. He stands before us strong,
certain, and alone: his joy in creation and his minute precision are evident in every
word and every figure .. .' [E8], he described his own ideals, the desire for ful-
fillment not just as a theorist but also as an experimental physicist. (In the second
respect, he, of course, never matched Newton.) Earlier he had written that New-
ton 'deserves our deep veneration' for his achievements, and that Newton's own
awareness of the weaknesses of his own theories 'has always excited my reverent
admiration' [E9] (these weaknesses included the action of forces at a distance,
which, Newton noted, was not to be taken as an ultimate explanation).
'Fortunate Newton, happy childhood of Science!' [E8]. When Einstein wrote
these opening words in the introduction to a new printing of Newton's Opticks,
he had especially in mind that Newton's famous dictum 'hypotheses non fingo,'
I frame no hypotheses, expressed a scientific style of the past. Elsewhere Einstein
was quite explicit on this issue:
We now know that science cannot grow out of empiricism alone, that in the
constructions of science we need to use free invention which only a posteriori
can be confronted with experience as to its usefulness. This fact could elude
earlier generations, to whom theoretical creation seemed to grow inductively out
of empiricism without the creative influence of a free construction of concepts.
The more primitive the status of science is the more readily can the scientist
live under the illusion that he is a pure empiricist. In the nineteenth century,
many still believed that Newton's fundamental rule 'hypotheses non fingo'
should underlie all healthy natural science. [E10]
Einstein again expressed his view that the scientific method had moved on in
words only he could have written:
Newton, forgive me; you found the only way which in your age was just about
possible for a man with the highest powers of thought and creativity. The con-
cepts which you created are guiding our thinking in physics even today,
PURPOSE AND PLAN 15
although we now know that they will have to be replaced by others farther
removed from the sphere of immediate experience, if we aim at a profounder
understanding of relationships. [Ell]
However, in one respect Einstein forever continued to side with Newton and
to quote his authority. That was in the matter of causality. On the occasion of the
bicentenary of Newton's death, Einstein wrote to the secretary of the Royal Soci-
ety, 'All who share humbly in pondering over the secrets of physical events are
with you in spirit, and join in the admiration and love that bind us to Newton',
then went on to comment on the evolution of physics since Newton's day and
concluded as follows:
It is only in the quantum theory that Newton's differential method becomes
inadequate, and indeed strict causality fails us. But the last word has not yet
been said. May the spirit of Newton's method give us the power to restore
unison between physical reality and the profoundest characteristic of Newton's
teaching—strict causality. [E12]
What is strict Newtonian causality? As an example, if I give you the precise
position and velocity of a particle at a given instant, and if you know all the forces
acting on it, then you can predict from Newton's laws the precise position and
velocity of that particle at a later time. Quantum theory implies, however, that I
am unable to give you that information about position and velocity with ideal
precision, even if I have the most perfect instrumentation at my disposal. That is
the problem I discussed with Einstein in our conversation about the existence of
the moon, a body so heavy that the limitations on the precision of information on
position and velocity I can give you are so insignificant that, to all astronomical
intents and purposes, you can neglect the indeterminacy in the information you
obtained from me and continue to talk of the lunar orbit.
It is quite otherwise for things like atoms. In the hydrogen atom, the electron
does not move in an orbit in the same sense as the moon moves around the earth,
for, if it did, the hydrogen atom would be as flat as a little pancake whereas
actually it is a little sphere. As a matter of principle, there is no way back to
Newtonian causality. Of course, this recognition never diminished Newton's stat-
ure. Einstein's hope for a return to that old causality is an impossible dream. Of
course, this opinion, held by modern physicists, has not prevented them from rec-
ognizing Einstein as by far the most important scientific figure of this century.
His special relativity includes the completion of the work of Maxwell and Lorentz.
His general relativity includes the completion of Newton's theory of gravitation
and incorporates Mach's vision of the relativity of all motion. In all these respects,
Einstein's oeuvre represents the crowning of the work of his precursors, adding to
and revising the foundations of their theories. In this sense he is a transitional
figure, perfecting the past and changing the stream of future events. At the same
time he is a pioneer, as first Planck, then he, then Bohr founded a new physics
without precursors—the quantum theory.
l6 INTRODUCTORY
Einstein deserves to be given the same compliment he gave Newton: he, too,
was an artist in exposition. His talent for the German language was second only
to his gift for science. I refer not so much to his proclivity for composing charming
little rhymes as to the quality of his prose. He was a master of nuances, which are
hard to maintain in translation. The student of Einstein should read him in Ger-
man. It is fitting that several of his important papers, such as his scientific credo
in the Journal of the Franklin Institute of 1936, and his autobiographical sketch
in the Schilpp book [E6], should appear side by side in the original German and
in English translation. He wrote all his scientific papers in German, whether or
not they eventually appeared in that language. Not only his mastery of language
but also his perceptiveness of people is evident in his writings in memory of col-
leagues and friends: of Schwarzschild and Smoluchowski, of Marie Curie and
Emmy Noether, of Michelson and Thomas Edison, of Lorentz, Nernst, Langevin,
and Planck, of Walther Rathenau, and, most movingly, of Paul Ehrenfest. These
portraits serve as the best foil for the opinion that Einstein was a naive man.
In languages other than German, he was less at ease.* On his first visit to Paris,
in 1922, he lectured in French[Kl]. He spoke in German, however, when address-
ing audiences on his first visits to England and the United States, but became
fluent in English in later years.
Music was his love. He cared neither for twentieth century composers nor for
many of the nineteenth century ones. He loved Schubert but was not attracted to
the heavily dramatic parts of Beethoven. He was not particularly fond of Brahms
and disliked Wagner. His favorite composers were earlier ones—Mozart, Bach,
Vivaldi, Corelli, Scarlatti. I never heard him play the violin, but most of those
who did attest to his musicality and the ease with which he sight-read scores.
About his predilections in the visual arts, I quote from a letter by Margot Einstein
to Meyer Schapiro:
In visual art, he preferred, of course, the old masters. They seemed to him more
'convincing' (he used this word!) than the masters of our time. But sometimes
he surprised me by looking at the early period of Picasso (1905, 1906). . . .
Words like cubism, abstract painting . . . did not mean anything to him.. . .
Giotto moved him deeply ... also Fra Angelico .. . Piero della Francesca.. ..
He loved the small Italian towns. . . . He loved cities like Florence, Siena
(Sienese paintings), Pisa, Bologna, Padua and admired the architecture. ... If
it comes to Rembrandt, yes, he admired him and felt him deeply. [El3]**
*During the 1920s, Einstein once said to a young friend, 'I like neither new clothes nor new kinds
of food. I would rather not learn new languages' [SI].
**I have no clear picture of Einstein's habits and preferences in regard to literature. I do not know
how complete or representative is the following randomly ordered list of authors he liked: Heine,
Anatole France, Balzac, Dostoyevski (The Brothers Karamazov), Musil, Dickens, Lagerlof, Tolstoi
(folk stories), Kazantzakis, Brecht (Galilei), Broch (The Death of Virgil), Gandhi (autobiography),
Gorki, Hersey (A Bell for Adano), van Loon (Life and Times of Rembrandt), Reik (Listening with
the Third Ear).
PURPOSE AND PLAN l~]
As a conclusion to this introductory sketch of Einstein the man, I should like to
elaborate the statement made in the Preface that Einstein was the freest man I
have known. By that I mean that, more than anyone else I have encountered, he
was the master of his own destiny. If he had a God it was the God of Spinoza.
Einstein was not a revolutionary, as the overthrow of authority was never his
prime motivation. He was not a rebel, since any authority but the one of reason
seemed too ridiculous to him to waste effort fighting against (one can hardly call
his opposition to Nazism a rebellious attitude). He had the freedom to ask scien-
tific questions, the genius to so often ask the right ones. He had no choice but to
accept the answer. His deep sense of destiny led him farther than anyone before
him. It was his faith in himself which made him persevere. Fame may on occasion
have flattered him, but it never deflected him. He was fearless of time and, to an
uncommon degree, fearless of death. I cannot find tragedy in his later attitude to
the quantum theory or in his lack of success in finding a unified field theory,
especially since some of the questions he asked remain a challenge to this day
(2b)—and since I never read tragedy in his face. An occasional touch of sadness
in him never engulfed his sense of humor.
I now turn to a tour of Einstein's science.
Einstein never cared much for teaching courses. No one was ever awarded a
PhD degree working with him, but he was always fond of discussing physics prob-
lems, whether with colleagues his age or with people much younger. All his major
papers are his own, yet in the course of his life he often collaborated with others.
A survey of these collaborative efforts, involving more than thirty colleagues or
assistants, is found in (29). From his student days until well into his forties, he
would seek opportunities to do experiments. As a student he hoped to measure the
drift of the aether through which (as he then believed) the earth was moving (6d).
While at the patent office, he tinkered with a device to measure small voltage
differences (3, 29). In Berlin he conducted experiments on rotation induced by
magnetization (14b), measured the diameter of membrane capillaries (29), and
was involved with patents for refrigerating devices and for a hearing aid (29). But,
of course, theoretical physics was his main devotion.
There is no better way to begin this brief survey of his theoretical work than
with a first look at what he did in 1905. In that year Einstein produced six papers:
1. The light-quantum and the photoelectric effect, completed March 17 (19c),
(19e). This paper, which led to his Nobel prize in physics, was produced before
he wrote his PhD thesis.
2. A new determination of molecular dimensions, completed April 30. This was
his doctoral thesis, which was to become his paper most often quoted in modern
literature (5c).
l8 INTRODUCTORY
3. Brownian motion, received* May 11. This was a direct outgrowth of his thesis
work (5d).
4. The first paper on special relativity, received* June 30.
5. The second paper on special relativity, containing the E = me2 relation,
received* September 27.
6. A second paper on Brownian motion, received* December 19.
There is little if anything in his earlier published work that hints at this
extraordinary creative outburst. By his own account, the first two papers he ever
wrote, dating from 1901 and 1902 and dealing with the hypothesis of a universal
law of force between molecules, were worthless (4a). Then followed three papers
of mixed quality (4c, 4d) on the foundations of statistical mechanics. The last of
these, written in 1904, contains a first reference to the quantum theory. None of
these first five papers left much of a mark on physics, but I believe they were very
important warming-up exercises in Einstein's own development. Then came a
year of silence, followed by the outpouring of papers in 1905.1 do not know what
his trains of thought were during 1904. His personal life changed in two respects:
his position at the patent office was converted from temporary to permanent status.
And his first son was born. Whether these events helped to promote the emergence
of Einstein's genius I cannot tell, though I believe that the arrival of the son may
have been a profound experience. Nor do I know a general and complete char-
acterization of what genius is, except that it is more than an extreme form of talent
and that the criteria for genius are not objective. I note with relief that the case
for Einstein as a genius will cause even less of an argument than the case for
Picasso and much less of an argument than the case for Woody Allen, and I do
hereby declare that—in my opinion—Einstein was a genius.
Einstein's work before 1905 as well as papers 2, 3, and 6 of that year resulted
from his interest in two central early twentieth-century problems, the subjects of
Part II of this book.
The first problem: molecular reality. How can one prove (or disprove) that
atoms and molecules are real things? If they are real, then how can one determine
their size and count their number? In (5a), there is an introductory sketch of the
nineteenth century status of this question. During that period the chemist, member
of the youngest branch of science, argued the question in one context, the physicist
in another, and each paid little attention to what the other was saying. By about
1900 many, though not all, leading chemists and physicists believed that molecules
were real. A few among the believers already knew that the atom did not deserve
its name, which means 'uncuttable.' Roughly a decade later, the issue of molecular
reality was settled beyond dispute, since in the intervening years the many meth-
ods for counting these hypothetical particles all gave the same result, to within
small errors. The very diversity of these methods and the very sameness of the
* By the editors of Annalen der Physik.
PURPOSE AND PLAN 19
answers gave the molecular picture the compelling strength of a unifying princi-
ple. Three of these methods are found in Einstein's work of 1905. In March he
counted molecules in his light-quantum paper (19c). In April he made a count
with the help of the flow properties of a solution of sugar molecules in water (5c).
In May he gave a third count in the course of explaining the long-known phe-
nomenon of Brownian motion of small clumps of matter suspended in solution
(5d). The confluence of all these answers is the result of important late nineteenth-
century developments in experimental physics. Einstein's March method could be
worked out only because of a breakthrough in far-infrared spectroscopy (19a).
The April and May methods were a consequence of the discovery by Dr Pfeffer
of a method for making rigid membranes (5c). Einstein's later work (1911) on the
blueness of the sky and on critical opalescence yielded still other counting methods
(5e).
The second problem: the molecular basis of statistical physics. If atoms and
molecules are real things, then how does one express such macroscopic concepts
as pressure, temperature, and entropy in terms of the motion of these submicros-
copic particles? The great masters of the nineteenth century—Maxwell, Boltz-
mann, Kelvin, van der Waals, and others—did not, of course, sit and wait for the
molecular hypothesis to be proved before broaching problem number two. The
most difficult of their tasks was the derivation of the second law of thermodynam-
ics. What is the molecular basis for the property that the entropy of an isolated
system strives toward a maximum as the system moves toward equilibrium? A
survey of the contributions to this problem by Einstein's predecessors as well as
by Einstein himself is presented in (4). In those early days, Einstein was not the
only one to underestimate the mathematical care that this very complex problem
rightfully deserves. When Einstein did this work, his knowledge of the funda-
mental contributions by Boltzmann was fragmentary, his ignorance of Gibbs'
papers complete. This does not make any easier the task of ascertaining the merits
of his contributions.
To Einstein, the second problem was of deeper interest than the first. As he
said later, Brownian motion was important as a method for counting particles, but
far more important because it enables us to demonstrate the reality of those
motions we call heat, simply by looking into a microscope. On the whole, Ein-
stein's work on the second law has proved to be of less lasting value than his
investigations on the verification of the molecular hypothesis. Indeed, in 1911 he
wrote that he would probably not have published his papers of 1903 and 1904
had he been aware of Gibbs' work.
Nevertheless, Einstein's preoccupation with the fundamental questions of sta-
tistical mechanics was extremely vital since it led to his most important contri-
butions to the quantum theory. It is no accident that the term Boltzmann's prin-
ciple, coined by Einstein, appears for the first time in his March 1905 paper on
the light-quantum. In fact the light-quantum postulate itself grew out of a statis-
tical argument concerning the equilibrium properties of radiation (19c). It should
2O INTRODUCTORY
also be remembered that the main applications of his first work (1904) on energy
fluctuations (4c) are in the quantum domain. His analysis of these fluctuations in
blackbody radiation led him to become the first to state, in 1909, long before the
discovery of quantum mechanics, that the theory of the future ought to be based
on a dual description in terms of particles and waves (21 a). Another link between
statistical mechanics and the quantum theory was forged by his study of the
Brownian motion of molecules in a bath of electromagnetic radiation. This inves-
tigation led him to the momentum properties of light-quanta (21c). His new der-
ivation, in 1916, of Planck's blackbody radiation law also has a statistical basis
(21b). In the course of this last work, he observed a lack of Newtonian causality
in the process called spontaneous emission. His discomfort about causality origi-
nated from that discovery (21d).
Einstein's active involvement with statistical physics began in 1902 and lasted
until 1925, when he made his last major contribution to physics: his treatment of
the quantum statistics of molecules (23). Again and for the last time, he applied
fluctuation phenomena with such mastery that they led him to the very threshold
of wave mechanics (24b). The links between the contributions of Einstein, de
Broglie, and Schroedinger, discussed in (24), make clear that wave mechanics has
its roots in statistical mechanics—unlike matrix mechanics, where the connections
between the work of Bohr, Heisenberg, and Dirac followed in the first instance
from studies of the dynamics of atoms (18c).
Long periods of gestation are a marked characteristic in Einstein's scientific
development. His preoccupation with quantum problems, which began shortly
after Planck's discovery of the blackbody radiation law late in 1900, bore its first
fruit in March 1905. Questions that lie at the root of the special theory of relativity
dawned on him as early as 1895 (6d); the theory saw the light in June 1905. He
began to think of general relativity in 1907 (9); that theory reached its first level
of completion in November 1915 (14c). His interest in unified field theory dates
back at least to 1918 (17a). He made the first of his own proposals for a theory
of this kind in 1925 (17d). As far as the relativity theories are concerned, these
gestation periods had a climactic ending. There was no more than about five weeks
between his understanding of the correct interpretation of the measurement of
time and the completion of his first special relativity paper (7a). Similarly, after
years of trial and error, he did all the work on his ultimate formulation of general
relativity in approximately two months (14c).
I focus next on special relativity. One version of its history could be very brief:
in June, 1905, Einstein published a paper on the electrodynamics of moving bod-
ies. It consists of ten sections. After the first five sections, the theory lies before us
in finished form. The rest, to this day, consists of the application of the principles
stated in those first five sections.
My actual account of that history is somewhat more elaborate. It begins with
brief remarks on the nineteenth century concept of the aether (6a), that quaint,
hypothetical medium which was introduced for the purpose of explaining the
PURPOSE AND PLAN 21
transmission of light waves and which was abolished by Einstein. The question
has often been asked whether or not Einstein disposed of the aether because he
was familiar with the Michelson-Morley experiment, which, with great accuracy,
had demonstrated the absence of an anticipated drift of the aether as the earth
moved through it without obstruction (6a). The answer is that Einstein undoubt-
edly knew of the Michelson-Morley result (6d) but that probably it played only
an indirect role in the evolution of his thinking (7a). From 1907 on, Einstein often
emphasized the fundamental importance of the work by Michelson and Morley,
but continued to be remarkably reticent about any direct influence of that exper-
iment on his own development. An understanding of that attitude lies beyond the
edge of history. In (8) I shall dare to speculate on this subject.
Two major figures, Lorentz and Poincare, take their place next to Einstein in
the history of special relativity. Lorentz, founder of the theory of electrons,
codiscoverer of the Lorentz contraction (as Poincare named it), interpreter of the
Zeeman effect, acknowledged by Einstein as his precursor, wrote down the Lor-
entz transformations (so named by Poincare) in 1904. In 1905, Einstein, at that
time aware only of Lorentz's writings up to 1895, rediscovered these transfor-
mations. In 1898, Poincare, one of the greatest mathematicians of his day and a
consummate mathematical physicist, had written that we have no direct intuition
of the simultaneity of events occurring in two different places, a remark almost
certainly known to Einstein before 1905 (6b). In 1905 Einstein and Poincare
stated independently and almost simultaneously (within a matter of weeks) the
group properties of the Lorentz transformations and the addition theorem of veloc-
ities. Yet, both Lorentz and Poincare missed discovering special relativity; they
were too deeply steeped in considerations of dynamics. Only Einstein saw the cru-
cial new point: the dynamic aether must be abandoned in favor of a new kine-
matics based on two new postulates (7). Only he saw that the Lorentz transfor-
mations, and hence the Lorentz-Fitzgerald contraction, can be derived from
kinematic arguments. Lorentz acknowledged this and developed a firm grasp of
special relativity, but even after 1905 never quite gave up either the aether or his
reservations concerning the velocity of light as an ultimate velocity (8). In all his
life (he died in 1912), Poincare never understood the basis of special relativity (8).
Special relativity brought clarity to old physics and created new physics, in par-
ticular Einstein's derivation (also in 1905) of the relation E = me2 (7b). It was
some years before the first main experimental confirmation of the new theory, the
energy-mass-velocity relation for fast electrons, was achieved (7e). After 1905 Ein-
stein paid only occasional attention to other implications (7d), mainly because
from 1907 he was after bigger game: general relativity.
The history of the discovery of general relativity is more complicated. It is a
tale of a tortuous path. No amount of simplification will enable me to match the
minihistory of special relativity given earlier. In the quantum theory, Planck
started before Einstein. In special relativity, Lorentz inspired him. In general rel-
ativity, he starts the long road alone. His progress is no longer marked by that
22 INTRODUCTORY
light touch and deceptive ease so typical of all his work published in 1905. The
first steps are made in 1907, as he discovers a simple version of the equivalence
principle and understands that matter will bend light and that the spectral lines
reaching us from the sun should show a tiny shift toward the red relative to the
same spectral lines produced on earth (9). During the next three and a half years,
his attention focuses on that crisis phenomenon, the quantum theory, rather than
on the less urgent problems of relativity (10). His serious concentration on general
relativity begins after his arrival in Prague in 1911, where he teaches himself a
great deal with the help of a model theory. He gives a calculation of the bending
of light by the sun. His result is imperfect, since at that time he still believes that
space is flat (11). In the summer of 1912, at the time of his return to Ziirich, he
makes a fundamental discovery: space is not flat; the geometry of the world is not
Euclidean. It is Riemannian. Ably helped by an old friend, the mathematician
Marcel Grossmann, he establishes the first links between geometry and gravity.
With his habitual optimism he believes he has solved the fifty-year-old problem
(13) of finding a field theory of gravitation. Not until late in 1915 does he fully
realize how flawed his theory actually is. At that very same time, Hilbert starts
his important work on gravitation (14d). After a few months of extremely intense
work, Einstein presents the final revised version of his theory on November 25,
1915 (14c).
One week earlier he had obtained two extraordinary results. Fulfilling an
aspiration he had had since 1907, he found the correct explanation of the long-
known precession of the perihelion of the planet Mercury. That was the high
point in his scientific life He was so excited that for three days he could not work.
In addition he found that his earlier result on the bending of light was too small
by a factor of 2. Einstein was canonized in 1919 when this second prediction also
proved to be correct (16b).
After 1915 Einstein continued to examine problems in general relativity. He
was the first to give a theory of gravitational waves (15d). He was also the founder
of general relativistic cosmology, the modern theory of the universe at large (15e).
Hubble's discovery that the universe is expanding was made in Einstein's lifetime.
Radio galaxies, quasars, neutron stars, and, perhaps, black holes were found after
his death. These post-Einsteinian observational developments in astronomy
largely account for the great resurgence of interest in general relativity in more
recent times. A sketchy account of the developments in general relativity after 1915
up to the present appears in (15).
I return to earlier days. After 1915 Einstein's activities in the domain of rela-
tivity became progressively less concerned with the applications of general relativ-
ity than with the search for generalization of that theory. During the early years
following the discovery of general relativity, the aim of that search appeared to be
highly plausible: according to general relativity the very existence of the gravita-
tional field is inalienably woven into the geometry of the physical world. There
was nothing equally compelling about the existence of the electromagnetic field,
PURPOSE AND PLAN 23
at that time the only field other than that of gravity known to exist (17a). Rie-
mannian geometry does not geometrize electromagnetism. Should not one there-
fore try to invent a more general geometry in which electromagnetism would be
just as fundamental as gravitation? If the special theory of relativity had unified
electricity and magnetism and if the general theory had geometrized gravitation,
should not one try next to unify and geometrize electromagnetism and gravity?
After he experimentally unified electricity and magnetism, had not Michael Far-
aday tried to observe whether gravity could induce electric currents by letting
pieces of metal drop from the top of the lecture room in the Royal Institution to
a cushion on the floor? Had he not written, 'If the hope should prove well-
founded, how great and mighty and sublime in its hitherto unchangeable character
is the force I am trying to deal with, and how large may be the new domain of
knowledge that may be opened to the mind of man'? And when his experiment
showed no effect, had he not written, 'They do not shake my strong feeling of the
existence of a relation between gravity and electricity, though they give no proof
that such a relation exists'? [Wl] Thoughts and visions such as these led Einstein
to his program for a unified field theory. Its purpose was neither to incorporate
the unexplained nor to resolve any paradox. It was purely a quest for harmony.
On his road to general relativity, Einstein had found the nineteenth century
geometry of Riemann waiting for him. In 1915 the more general geometries which
he and others would soon be looking for did not yet exist. They had to be invented.
It should be stressed that the unification program was not the only spur to the
search for new geometries. In 1916, mathematicians, acknowledging the stimulus
of general relativity, began the very same pursuit for their own reasons. Thus
Einstein's work was the direct cause of the development of a new branch of math-
ematics, the theory of connections (17c).
During the 1920s and 1930s, it became evident that there exist forces other than
those due to gravitation and electromagnetism. Einstein chose to ignore those new
forces although they were not and are not any less fundamental than the two
which have been known about longer. He continued the old search for a unifica-
tion of gravitation and electromagnetism, following one path, failing, trying a new
one. He would study worlds having more than the familiar four dimensions of
space and time (17b) or new world geometries in four dimensions (17d). It was
to no avail.
In recent years, the quest for the unification of all forces has become a central
theme in physics (17e). The methods are new. There has been distinct progress
(2b). But Einstein's dream, the joining of gravitation to other forces, has so far not
been realized.
In concluding this tour, I return to Einstein's contributions to the quantum
theory. I must add that, late in 1906, Einstein became the founder of the quantum
theory of the solid state by giving the essentially correct explanation of the anom-
alous behavior of hard solids, such as diamond, for example, at low temperatures
(20). It is also necessary to enlarge on the remark made previously concerning the
24 INTRODUCTORY
statistical origins of the light-quantum hypothesis. Einstein's paper of March
1905 contains not one but two postulates. First, the light-quantum was conceived
of as a parcel of energy as far as the properties of pure radiation (no coupling to
matter) are concerned. Second, Einstein made the assumption—he called it the
heuristic principle—that also in its coupling to matter (that is, in emission and
absorption), light is created or annihilated in similar discrete parcels of energy
(19c). That, I believe, was Einstein's one revolutionary contribution to physics
(2). It upset all existing ideas about the interaction between light and matter. I
shall describe in detail the various causes for the widespread disbelief in the heu-
ristic principle (19f), a resistance which did not weaken after other contributions
of Einstein were recognized as outstanding or even after the predictions for the
photoelectric effect, made on the grounds of the heuristic principle, turned out to
be highly successful (19e).
The light-quantum, a parcel of energy, slowly evolved into the photon, a parcel
of energy and momentum (21), a fundamental particle with zero mass and unit
spin. Never was a proposal for a new fundamental particle resisted more strongly
than this one for the photon (18b). No one resisted the photon longer than Bohr
(22). All resistance came to an end when experiments on the scattering of light by
electrons (the Compton effect) proved that Einstein was right (21f, 22).
Quantum mechanics was born within a few months of the settling of the photon
issue. In (25) I describe in detail Einstein's response to this new development. His
initial belief that quantum mechanics contained logical inconsistencies (25a) did
not last long. Thereafter, he became convinced that quantum mechanics is an
incomplete description of nature (25c). Nevertheless, he acknowledged that the
nonrelativistic version of quantum mechanics did constitute a major advance. His
proposal of a Nobel prize for Schroedinger and Heisenberg is but one expression
of that opinion (31).
However, Einstein never had a good word for the relativity version of quantum
mechanics known as quantum field theory. Its successes did not impress him.
Once, in 1912, he said of the quantum theory that the more successful it is, the
sillier it looks (20). When speaking of successful physical theories, he would, in
his later years, quote the example of the old gravitation theory (26). Had Newton
not been successful for more than two centuries? And had his theory not turned
out to be incomplete?
Einstein himself never gave up the search for a theory that would incorporate
quantum phenomena but would nevertheless satisfy his craving for causality. His
vision of a future interplay of relativity and quantum theory in a unified field
theory is the subject of the last scientific chapter of this book (26), in which I
return to the picture drawn in the preface.
Finally, I may be permitted to summarize my own views. Newtonian causality
is gone for good. The synthesis of relativity and the quantum theory is incomplete
(2). In the absence of this synthesis, any assessment of Einstein's vision must be
part of open history.
PURPOSE AND PLAN 25
The tour ends here. General comments on relativity and quantum theory come
next, followed by a sketch of Einstein's early years. Then the physics begins.
References
Bl. S. Brunauer,/. Wash. Acad. Sci. 69, 108, (1979).
B2. I. Berlin. Personal Impressions, pp. 145, 150. Viking, New York, 1980.
El. A. Einstein, Die Vossische Zeitung, May 23, 1916.
E2. , Sozialistische Monatshefte, 1919, p. 1055.
E3. , Neue Rundschau 33, 815 (1922).
E4. , statement prepared for the Ligafur Menschenrechte, January 6, 1929.
E5. , letter to K. R. Leistner, September 8, 1932.
E6. —— in Albert Einstein: Philosopher-Scientist (P. A. Schilpp, Ed.), p. 684. Tudor,
New York, 1949.
E7. , Bull. Soc. Fran. Phil. 22, 97 (1923).
E8. — in I. Newton, Opticks, p. vii. McGraw-Hill, New York, 1931.
E9. , Naturw. 15, 273 (1927). English trans, in Smithsonian Report for 1927, p.
201.
E10. in Emanuel Libman Anniversary Volumes, Vol. 1, p. 363. International, New
York, 1932.
Ell. , [E6], p. 31.
E12. , Nature 119, 467, (1927); Science 65, 347 (1927).
E13. Margot Einstein, letter to M. Schapiro, December 1978.
Gl. G. Gamow, My World Line, p. 148. Viking, New York, 1970.
Jl. R. Jost, letter to A. Pais, August 17, 1977.
Kl. A. Kastler, Technion-lnformations, No. 11, December 1978.
Nl. O. Nathan and H. Norden, Einstein on Peace, Schocken, New York, 1968.
Ol. J. R. Oppenheimer in Einstein, a Centennial Volume (A. P. French, Ed.), p. 44.
Harvard University Press, 1979.
PI. A. Pais in Niels Bohr (S. Rozental, Ed.), p. 215. Interscience, New York, 1967.
Rl. B. Russell, [Nl], p. xv.
SI. E. Salaman, Encounter, April 1979, p. 19.
Wl. L. P. Williams, Michael Faraday, pp. 468-9. Basic Books, New York, 1965.
