20
Einstein and Specific Heats
The more success the quantum theory has, the sillier it looks.
A. Einstein in 1912
20a. Specific Heats in the Nineteenth Century
By the end of the first decade of the twentieth century, three major quantum the-
oretical discoveries had been made. They concern the blackbody radiation law, the
light-quantum postulate, and the quantum theory of the specific heat of solids. All
three arose from statistical considerations. There are, however, striking differences
in the time intervals between these theoretical advances and their respective exper-
imental justification. Planck formulated his radiation law in an uncommonly short
time after learning about experiments in the far infrared that complemented ear-
lier results at higher frequencies. It was quite a different story with the light-
quantum. Einstein's hypothesis was many years ahead of its decisive experimental
tests. As we shall see next, the story is quite different again in the case of specific
heats. Einstein's first paper on the subject [El], submitted in November 1906,
contains the qualitatively correct explanation of an anomaly that had been
observed as early as 1840: the low value of the specific heat of diamond at room
temperature. Einstein showed that this can be understood as a quantum effect.
His paper contains one graph, the specific heat of diamond as a function of tem-
perature, reproduced here below, which represents the first published graph in
the history of the quantum theory of the solid state. It also represents one of only
three instances I know of in which Einstein published a graph to compare theory
with experiment (another example will be mentioned in Section 20b).
In order to recognize an anomaly, one needs a theory or a rule or at least a
prejudice. As I just mentioned, peculiarities in specific heats were diagnosed more
than half a century before Einstein explained them. It was also known well before
1906 that specific heats of gases exhibited even more curious properties. In what
way was diamond considered so exceptional? And what about other substances?
For a perspective on Einstein's contributions, it is necessary to sketch the answer
to these questions. I therefore begin with a short account of specific heats in the
nineteenth century.
389
The first published graph dealing with the quantum theory of the solid state: Einstein's
expression for the specific heat of solids [given in Eq. 20.4] plotted versus hv/kT. The
little circles are Weber's experimental data for diamond. Einstein's best fit to Weber's
measurements corresponds to hv/k = 1300K.
The story begins in 1819, when two young Frenchmen, Pierre Louis Dulong
and Alexis Therese Petit, made an unexpected discovery during the researches in
thermometry on which they had been jointly engaged for a number of years. For
a dozen metals and for sulfur (all at room temperature), they found that c, the
specific heat per gram-atom* (referred to as the specific heat hereafter), had prac-
tically the same value, approximately 6 cal/mole-deg [PI]. They did, of course,
not regard this as a mere coincidence: 'One is allowed to infer [from these data]
the following law: the atoms of all simple bodies [elements] have exactly the same
heat capacity.' They did not restrict this statement to elements in solid form, but
initially believed that improved experiments might show their law to hold for gases
also. By 1830 it was clear, however, that the rule could at best apply only to solids.
Much remained to be learned about atomic weights in those early days of mod-
ern chemistry. In fact, in several instances Dulong and Petit correctly halved val-
ues of atomic weights obtained earlier by other means in order to bring their data
into line with their law [Fl]. For many years, their rule continued to be an
important tool for atomic weight determinations.
*To be precise, these and other measurements on solids to be mentioned hereafter refer to cp at
atmospheric pressure. Later on, a comparison will be made with theoretical values for c,. This
requires a tiny correction to go from cp to cv. This correction will be ignored [LI].390 THE QUANTUM THEORY
EINSTEIN AND SPECIFIC HEATS 391
It became clear rather soon, however, that even for solid elements the Dulong-
Petit rule is not as general as its propounders had thought. Amedeo Avogadro was
one of the first to remark on deviations in the case of carbon, but his measurements
were not very precise [Al].* Matters got more serious in 1840, when two Swiss
physicists, Auguste de la Rive and Francois Marcet, reported on studies of carbon.
In particular, they had obtained 'not without difficulty and expense' an amount
of diamond powder sufficient to experiment with, for which they found c ~ 1.4
[Rl]. At almost the same time, diamond was also being studied by Henri Victor
Regnault, who more than any other physicist contributed to the experimental
investigations of specific heats in the nineteenth century. His value: c =* 1.8 [R2].
Regnault's conclusion about carbon was unequivocal: it is 'a complete exception
among the simple bodies: it does not satisfy the general law which [relates] specific
heats and atomic weights.' During the next twenty years, he continued his studies
of specific heats and found many more deviations from the general law, though
none as large as for diamond.
We now move to the 1870s, when Heinrich Friedrich Weber,** then in Berlin,
made the next advance. He began by re-analyzing the data of de la Rive and
Marcet and those of Regnault and came to the correct conclusion that the different
values for the specific heat of diamond found by these authors were not due to
systematic errors. However, the de la Rive-Marcet value referred to a tempera-
ture average from 3° to 14°C whereas Regnault's value was an average from 8°
to 98°C. Weber noted that both experiments could be correct if the specific heat
of carbon were to vary with temperature [Wl]! Tiny variations in specific heats
with temperature had long been known for some substances (for example, water)
[Nl]. In contrast, Weber raised the issue of a very strong temperature depen-
dence—a new and bold idea. His measurements for twelve different temperatures
between 0° and 200° C confirmed his conjecture: for diamond c varied by a factor
of 3 over this range. He wanted to continue his observations, but it was March
and, alas, there was no more snow for his ice calorimeter. He announced that he
would go on with his measurements 'as soon as meteorological circumstances per-
mit.' The next time we hear from Weber is in 1875, when he presented his beau-
tiful specific heat measurements for boron, silicon, graphite, and diamond, from
-100° to 1000°C [W2]. For the case of diamond, c varied by a factor of 15
between these limits.
By 1872, Weber had already made a conjecture which he confirmed in 1875:
at high T one gets close to the Dulong-Petit value. In Weber's words, 'The three
*In 1833 Avogadro obtained c =* 3 for carbon at room temperature. This value is too high. Since
it was accidentally just half the Dulong-Petit value, Avogadro incorrectly conjectured 'that one must
reduce the atom [i.e., the atomic weight] of sulfur and metals in general by [a factor of] one half
[Al].
**Weber was Einstein's teacher, whom we encountered in Chapter 3. Einstein's notebooks of
Weber's lectures are preserved. They do not indicate that as a student Einstein knew of Weber's
results.
392 THE QUANTUM THEORY
curious exceptions [C, B, Si] to the Dulong-Petit law which were until now a
cause for despair have been eliminated: the Dulong-Petit law for the specific heats
of solid elements has become an unexceptional rigorous law' [W2]. This is, of
course, not quite true, but it was distinct progress. The experimental points on
page 390 are Weber's points of 1875.*
In 1872, not only Weber, but also a second physicist, made the conjecture that
the Dulong-Petit value c ~ 6 would be reached by carbon at high temperatures:
James Dewar. His road to the carbon problem was altogether different: for rea-
sons having to do with solar temperatures, Dewar became interested in the boiling
point of carbon. This led him to high-temperature experiments, from which he
concluded [Dl] that the mean specific heat of carbon between 0° and 2000°C
equals about 5 and that 'the true specific heat [per gram] at 2000°C must be at
least 0.5, so that at this temperature carbon would agree with the law of Dulong
and Petit.'**
Dewar's most important contribution to our subject deals with very low tem-
peratures. He had liquefied hydrogen in 1898. In 1905 he reported on the first
specific heat measurements in the newly opened temperature region. It will come
as no surprise that diamond was among the first substances he chose to study. For
this case, he found the very low average value c ~ 0.05 in the interval from 20
to 85 K. 'An almost endless field of research in the determination of specific heats
is now opened,' Dewar remarked in this paper [D2]. His work is included in a
detailed compilation by Alfred Wigand [W3] of the literature on the specific heats
of solid elements that appeared in the same issue of the Annalen der Physik as
Einstein's first paper on the quantum theory of specific heats. We are therefore
up to date in regard to the experimental developments preceding Einstein's work.
The theoretical interpretation of the Dulong-Petit rule is due to Boltzmann. In
1866 he grappled unsuccessfully with this problem [B2]. It took another ten years
before he recognized that this rule can be understood with the help of the equi-
partition theorem of classical statistical mechanics. The simplest version of that
theorem had been known since 1860: the average kinetic energy equals £772 for
each degree of freedom.! In 1871 Boltzmann showed that the average kinetic
energy equals the average potential energy for a system of particles each one of
which oscillates under the influence of external harmonic forces [B4]. In 1876 he
applied these results to a three-dimensional lattice [B5]. This gave him an average
energy 3RT ^ 6 cal/mol. Hence cv, the specific heat at constant volume, equals
* By the end of the nineteenth century, it was clear that the decrease in c with temperature occurs
far more generally than just for C, B, and Si [Bl].
** There followed a controversy about priorities between Weber and Dewar, but only a very mild
one by nineteenth century standards. In any event, there is no question that the issues were settled
only by Weber's detailed measurements in 1875.
fThis result (phrased somewhat differently) is due to John James Waterston and Maxwell [Ml].
For the curious story of Waterston's contribution, see [B3].
EINSTEIN AND SPECIFIC HEATS 393
6 cal/mol • deg. Thus, after half a century, the Dulong-Petit value had found a
theoretical justification! As Boltzmann himself put it, his result was in good agree-
ment with experiment 'for all simple solids with the exception of carbon, boron*
and silicon.' Boltzmann went on to speculate that these anomalies might be a con-
sequence of a loss of degrees of freedom due to a 'sticking together' at low tem-
peratures of atoms at neighboring lattice points. This suggestion was elaborated
by others [R3] and is mentioned by Wigand in his 1906 review as the best expla-
nation of this effect. I mention this incorrect speculation only in order to stress one
important point: before Einstein's paper of 1906, it was not realized that the dia-
mond anomaly was to be understood in terms of the failure (or, rather, the inap-
plicability) of the classical equipartition theorem. Einstein was the first one to state
this fact clearly.
By sharp contrast, it was well appreciated that the equipartition theorem was
in trouble when applied to the specific heat of gases. This was a matter of grave
concern to the nineteenth century masters. Even though this is a topic that does
not directly bear on Einstein's work in 1906, I believe it will be useful to complete
the nineteenth century picture with a brief explanation of why gases caused so
much more aggravation.
The reasons were clearly stated by Maxwell in a lecture given in 1875:
The spectroscope tells us that some molecules can execute a great many differ-
ent kinds of vibrations. They must therefore be systems of a very considerable
degree of complexity, having far more than six variables [the number charac-
teristic for a rigid body] . . . Every additional variable increases the specific heat.
... Every additional degree of complexity which we attribute to the molecule
can only increase the difficulty of reconciling the observed with the calculated
value of the specific heat. I have now put before you what I consider the greatest
difficulty yet encountered by the molecular theory. [M2]
Maxwell's conundrum was the mystery of the missing vibrations. The follow-
ing oversimplified picture suffices to make clear what troubled him. Consider a
molecule made up of n structureless atoms. There are 3« degrees of freedom,
three for translations, at most three for rotations, and the rest for vibrations. The
kinetic energy associated with each degree of freedom contributes k.T/2 to cv. In
addition, there is a positive contribution from the potential energy. Maxwell was
saying that this would almost always lead to specific heats which are too large. As
a consequence of Maxwell's lecture, attention focused on monatomic gases, and,
in 1876, the equipartition theorem scored an important success: it found that cj
cv « 5/3 for mercury vapor, in accordance with cv = 3R/2 and the ideal gas rule
cp — cv = R [Kl]. It had been known since the days of Regnault** that several
"The good professor wrote bromine but meant boron.
**A detailed review of the specific heats of gases from the days of Lavoisier until 1896 is found in
Wullner's textbook [W4].
394 THE QUANTUM THEORY
diatomic molecules (including hydrogen) have a cv close to 5R/2. It was not yet
recognized by Maxwell that this is the value prescribed by the equipartition theo-
rem for a rigid dumbbell molecule; that observation was first made by Boltzmann
[B5]. The equipartition theorem was therefore very helpful, yet, on the whole, the
specific heat of gases remained a murky subject.
Things were getting worse. Already before 1900, instances were being found in
which cv depended (weakly) on temperature [W4], in flagrant contradiction with
classical concepts. No wonder these results troubled Boltzmann. His idea about
the anomalies for the specific heats of solids could not work for gases. Molecules
in dilute gases hardly stick together! In 1895 he suggested a way out: the equi-
partition theorem is correct for gases but does not apply to the combined gas-
aether system because there is no thermal equilibrium: 'The entire ether has not
had time to come into thermal equilibrium with the gas molecules and has in no
way attained the state which it would have if it were enclosed for an infinitely
long time in the same vessel with the molecules of the gas' [B6].
Kelvin took a different position; he felt that the classical equipartition theorem
was wrong. He stuck to this belief despite the fact that his attempts to find flaws
in the theoretical derivation of the theorem had of course remained unsuccessful.
'It is ... not quite possible to rest contented with the mathematical verdict not
proved and the experimental verdict not true in respect to the Boltzmann-Max-
well doctrine,' he said in a lecture given in 1900 before the Royal Institution [K2].
He summarized his position by saying that 'the simplest way to get rid of the
difficulties is to abandon the doctrine' [K3].
Lastly, there was the position of Rayleigh: the proof of the equipartition theo-
rem is correct and there is thermal equilibrium between the gas molecules and the
aether. Therefore there is a crisis. 'What would appear to be wanted is some
escape from the destructive simplicity of the general conclusion [derived from
equipartition]' [R4].
Such was the state of affairs when Einstein took on the specific heat problem.
20b. Einstein
Until 1906, Planck's quantum had played a role only in the rather isolated prob-
lem of blackbody radiation. Einstein's work on specific heats [El] is above all
important because it made clear for the first time that quantum concepts have a
far more general applicability. His 1906 paper is also unusual because here we
meet an Einstein who is quite prepared to use a model he knows to be approxi-
mate in order to bring home a point of principle. Otherwise this paper is much
like his other innovative articles: succinctly directed to the heart of the matter.
Earlier in 1906 Einstein had come to accept Planck's relation (Eq. 19.11)
between p and the equilibrium energy U as a new physical assumption (see Sec-
tion 19d). We saw in Section 19a that Planck had obtained the expression
EINSTEIN AND SPECIFIC HEATS 395
for all n, where the value of the constant A is irrelevant. Mathematically, this is
the forerunner of the 5-function! Today we write a(E,v) = ^ 5(E — nhv).
From Eqs. 20.2 and 20.3 we recover Eq. 20.1. This new formulation is impor-
tant because for the first time the statistical and the dynamic aspects of the problem
are clearly separated. 'Degrees of freedom must be weighed and not counted,' as
Sommerfeld put it later [SI].
In commenting on his new derivation of Eq. 20.1, Einstein remarked, 'I believe
we should not content ourselves with this result' [El]. If we must modify the the-
ory of periodically vibrating structures in order to account for the properties of
radiation, are we then not obliged to do the same for other problems in the molec-
ular theory of heat, he asked. 'In my opinion, the answer cannot be in doubt. If
Planck's theory of radiation goes to the heart of the matter, then we must also
expect to find contradictions between the present [i.e., classical] kinetic theory and
experiment in other areas of the theory of heat—contradictions that can be
resolved by following this new path. In my opinion, this expectation is actually
realized.'
Then Einstein turned to the specific heat of solids, introducing the following
model of a three-dimensional crystal lattice. The atoms on the lattice points oscil-
late independently, isotropically, harmonically, and with a single frequency v
*I do not always use the notations of the original paper.(20.1)
by introducing a prescription that modified Boltzmann's way of counting states.
Einstein's specific heat paper begins with a new prescription for arriving at the
same result. He wrote U in the form*
The exponential factor denotes the statistical probability for the energy E. The
weight factor us contains the dynamic information about the density of states
between E and E + dE. For the case in hand (linear oscillators), <o is trivial in
the classical theory: u(E,v) = 1. This yields the equipartition result U = kT.
Einstein proposed a new form for w. Let t = hv. Then o> shall be different from
zero only when ne < E < nt + a, n = 0, 1, 2, ... 'where a is infinitely small
compared with «,' and such that(20.2)
(20.3)
396 THE QUANTUM THEORY
around their equilibrium positions (volume changes due to heating and contri-
butions to the specific heat due to the motions of electrons within the atoms are
neglected, Einstein notes). He emphasized that one should of course not expect
rigorous answers because of all these approximations.
The First Generalization. Einstein applied Eq. 20.2 to his three-dimensional
oscillators. In thermal equilibrium, the total energy of a gram-atom of oscillators
equals 3>NU(v,T), where U is given by Eq. 20.1 and N is Avogadro's number.
Hence,
(20.4)
which is Einstein's specific heat formula.
The Second Generalization. For reasons of no particular interest to us now,
Einstein initially believed that his oscillating lattice points were electrically
charged ions. A few months later, he published a correction to his paper, in which
he observed that this was an unnecessary assumption [E2] (In Planck's case, the
linear oscillators had of course to be charged!). Einstein's correction freed the
quantum rules (in passing, one might say) from any specific dependence on elec-
tromagnetism.
Einstein's specific heat formula yields, first of all, the Dulong-Petit rule in the
high-temperature limit. It is also the first recorded example of a specific heat for-
mula with the property
(20.5)
As we shall see in the next section, Eq. 20.5 played an important role in the
ultimate formulation of Nernst's heat theorem.
Einstein's specific heat formula has only one parameter. The only freedom is
the choice of the frequency* v, or, equivalently, the 'Einstein temperature' TE, the
value of T for which £ = 1. As was mentioned before, Einstein compared his
formula with Weber's points for diamond. Einstein's fit can be expressed in tem-
perature units by 7^E ^ 1300 K, for which 'the points lie indeed almost on the
curve.' This high value of TE makes clear why a light and hard substance like
diamond exhibits quantum effects at room temperature (by contrast, TE ~ 70 K
for lead).
By his own account, Einstein took Weber's data from the Landolt-Bornstein
tables. He must have used the 1905 edition [L2], which would have been readily
available in the patent office. These tables do not yet contain the earlier-mentioned
results by Dewar in 1905. Apparently Einstein was not aware of these data in
1906 (although they were noted in that year by German physicists [W3]). Perhaps
that was fortunate. In any case, Dewar's value of cv ~ 0.05 for diamond refers
*In a later paper, Einstein attempted to relate this frequency to the compressibility of the material
[E3].
EINSTEIN AND SPECIFIC HEATS 397
to an average over the range £ ~ 0.02-0.07. This value is much too large to be
accommodated (simultaneously with Weber's points) by Einstein's Eq. 20.4: the
exponential drop of cv as T —*• 0, predicted by that equation, is far too steep.
Einstein did become aware of this discrepancy in 1911, when the much
improved measurements by Nernst showed that Eq. 20.4 fails at low T [N2].
Nernst correctly ascribed the disagreement to the incorrectness of the assumption
that the lattice vibrations are monochromatic. Einstein himself explored some
modifications of this assumption [ E4]. The correct temperature dependence at low
temperatures was first obtained by Peter Debye; for nonmetallic substances, cv
—* 0 as T"3 [D3]. Einstein had ended his active research on the specific heats of
solids by the time the work of Debye and the more exact treatment of lattice
vibrations by Max Born and Theodore von Karman appeared [B7]. These further
developments need therefore not be discussed here.
However, in 1913 Einstein returned once again to specific heats, this time to
consider the case of gases. This came about as the result of important experimental
advances on this subject which had begun in 1912 with a key discovery by Arnold
Eucken. It had long been known by then that c, ~ 5 for molecular hydrogen at
room temperature. Eucken showed that this value decreased with decreasing T
and that cv « 3 at T «s 60 K [E5]. As is well known today, this effect is due to
the freezing of the two rotational degrees of freedom of this molecule at these low
temperatures. In 1913 Einstein correctly surmised that the effect was related to
the behavior of these rotations and attempted to give a quantitative theory. In a
paper on this subject, we find another instance of curve fitting by Einstein [E6].
However, this time he was wrong. His answer depended in an essential way on
the incorrect assumption that rotational degrees of freedom have a zero point
energy.*
In 1925 Einstein was to turn his attention one last time to gases at very low
temperatures, as we shall see in Section 23b.
20c. Nernst: Solvay I**
'As the temperature tends to absolute zero, the entropy of a system tends to a
universal constant that is independent of chemical or physical composition or of
other parameters on which the entropy may depend. The constant can be taken
to be zero.' This modern general formulation of the third law of thermodynamics
implies (barring a few exceptional situations) that specific heats tend to zero as T
—* 0 (see [H2]). The earliest and most primitive version of the 'heat theorem' was
presented in 1905, before Einstein wrote his first paper on specific heats. The final
*In 1920 Einstein announced a forthcoming paper on the moment of inertia of molecular hydrogen
[E7]. That paper was never published, however,
**The preparation of this section was much facilitated by my access to an article by Klein [K4] and
a book by Hermann [HI].
398 THE QUANTUM THEORY
form of the third law was arrived at and accepted only after decades of controversy
and confusion.* For the present account, it is important to note the influence of
Einstein's work on this evolution.
On December 23, 1905, Hermann Walther Nernst read a paper at the Goet-
tingen Academy entitled 'On the Computation of Chemical Equilibria from Ther-
mal Measurements.' In this work he proposed a new hypothesis for the thermal
behavior of liquids and solids at absolute zero [N3]. For our purposes, the 1905
hypothesis is of particular interest as it applies to a chemically homogeneous sub-
stance. For this case, the hypothesis states in essence that the entropy difference
between two modifications of such a substance (for example, graphite and dia-
mond in the case of carbon) tends to zero as T —* 0. Therefore it does not exclude
a nonzero specific heat at zero temperatures. In fact, in 1906 Nernst assumed that
all specific heats tend to 1.5 cal/deg at T = 0 [N3, N4]. However, he noted that
he had no proof of this statement because of the absence of sufficient low-temper-
ature data. He stressed that it was a 'most urgent task' to acquire these [N3].
Nernst's formidable energies matched his strong determination. He and his col-
laborators embarked on a major program for measuring specific heats at low tem-
peratures. This program covered the same temperature domain already studied
by Dewar, but the precision was much greater and more substances were exam-
ined. One of these was diamond, obviously.
By 1910 Nernst was ready to announce his first results [N5]. From his curves,
'one gains the clear impression that the specific heats become zero or at least take
on very small values at very low temperatures. This is in qualitative agreement
with the theory developed by Herr Einstein. ..'
Thus, the order of events was as follows. Late in 1905 Nernst stated a primitive
version of the third law. In 1906 Einstein gave the first example of a theory that
implies that cv —» 0 as T —> 0 for solids. In 1910 Nernst noted the compatibility
of Einstein's result with 'the heat theorem developed by me.' However, it was
actually Planck who, later in 1910, took a step that 'not only in form but also in
content goes a bit beyond [the formulation given by] Nernst himself.' In Planck's
formulation, the specific heat of solids and liquids does go to zero as T —*• 0 [P2].
It should be stressed that neither Nernst nor Planck gave a proof of the third law.
The status of this law was apparently somewhat confused, as is clear from Ein-
stein's remark in 1914 that 'all attempts to derive Nernst's theorem theoretically
in a thermodynamic way with the help of the experimental fact that the specific
heat vanishes at T = 0 must be considered to have failed.' Einstein went on to
remark—rightly so—that the quantum theory is indispensable for an understand-
ing of this theorem [E8]. In an earlier letter to Ehrenfest, he had been sharply
critical of the speculations by Nernst and Planck [E9].
Nernst's reference to Einstein in his paper of 1910 was the first occasion on
*Simon has given an excellent historical survey of this development [S2j.
EINSTEIN AND SPECIFIC HEATS 399
which he acknowledged the quantum theory in his publications. His newly
aroused interest in the quantum theory was, however, thoroughly pragmatic. In
an address (on the occasion of the birthday of the emperor), he said:
At this time, the quantum theory is essentially a computational rule, one may
well say a rule with most curious, indeed grotesque, properties. However, . . .
it has borne such rich fruits in the hands of Planck and Einstein that there is
now a scientific obligation to take a stand in its regard and to subject it to
experimental test.
He went on to compare Planck with Dalton and Newton [N6]. Also in 1911,
Nernst tried his hand at a needed modification of Einstein's Eq. 20.4 [N7].
Nernst was a man of parts, a gifted scientist, a man with a sense for practical
applications, a stimulating influence on his students, and an able organizer. Many
people disliked him. But he commanded respect 'so long as his egocentric weakness
did not enter the picture' [E10]. He now saw the need for a conference on the
highest level to deal with the quantum problems. His combined talents as well as
his business relations enabled him to realize this plan. He found the industrialist
Ernest Solvay willing to underwrite the conference. He planned the scientific pro-
gram in consultation with Planck and Lorentz. On October 29, 1911, the first
Solvay Conference convened. Einstein was given the honor of being the final
speaker. The title of his talk: 'The Current Status of the Specific Heat Problem.'
He gave a beautiful review of this subject—and used the occasion to express his
opinion on the quantum theory of electromagnetic radiation as well. His contri-
butions to the latter topic are no doubt more profound than his work on specific
heats. Yet his work on the quantum theory of solids had a far greater immediate
impact and considerably enlarged the audience of those willing to take quantum
physics seriously.
Throughout the period discussed in the foregoing, the third law was applied
only to solids and liquids. Only in 1914 did Nernst dare to extend his theorem to
hold for gases as well. Eucken's results on the specific heat of molecular hydrogen
were a main motivation for taking this bold step [N8]. Unlike the case for solids,
Nernst could not point to a convincing theoretical model of a gas with the property
cv —> 0 as T -* 0. So it was to remain until 1925, when the first model of this
kind was found. Its discoverer: Einstein (Section 23b).
Einstein realized, of course, that his work on the specific heats of solids was a
step in the right direction. Perhaps that pleased him. It certainly puzzled him. In
1912 he wrote the following to a friend about his work on the specific heat of gases
at low temperatures:
In recent days, I formulated a theory on this subject. Theory is too presump-
tuous a word—it is only a groping without correct foundation. The more suc-
cess the quantum theory has, the sillier it looks. How nonphysicists would scoff
if they were able to follow the odd course of developments! [Ell]
400 THE QUANTUM THEORY
References
Al. A. Avogadro, Ann. Chim. Phys. 55, 80 (1833), especially pp. 96-8.
Bl. U. Behn, AdP 48, 708 (1893).
B2. L. Boltzmann, Wiener Ber. 53, 195 (1866). Reprinted in Wissenschaftliche Abhan-
dlugen von L. Boltzmann (F. Hasenohrl, Ed.), Vol. 1, p. 20, Reprinted by Chelsea,
New York, 1968. These collected works are referred to below as WA.
B3. S. G. Brush, The Kind of Motion We Call Heat, Vol. 1, Chap 3; Vol. 2, Chap. 10.
North Holland, Amsterdam, 1976.
B4. L. Boltzmann, Wiener Ber. 63, 679, (1871); WA, Vol. 1, p. 259.
B5. , Wiener Ber. 74, 553, (1876); WA, Vol 2, p. 103.
B6. , Nature 51, 413, (1895); WA, Vol. 3, p. 535.
B7. M. Born and T. von Karman, Phys. Zeitschr. 13, 297, (1912); 14, 15 (1913).
Dl. J. Dewar, Phil. Mag. 44, 461 (1872).
D2. , Proc. Roy. Soc. London 76, 325 (1905).
D3. P. Debye, AdP 39, 789 (1912).
El. A. Einstein, AdP 22, 180 (1907).
E2. , AdP 22, 800 (1907).
E3. —, AdP 34, 170(1911).
E4. , Ad 35, 679, (1911).
E5. A. Eucken, PAW, 1912, p. 141.
E6. A. Einstein and O. Stern, AdP 40, 551 (1913).
E7. , PAW, 1920, p. 65.
E8. , Verh. Deutsch. Phys. Ges. 16, 820 (1914).
E9. —, letter to P. Ehrenfest, April 25, 1912.
E10. , Set. Monthly 54, 195 (1942).
Ell. , letter to H. Zangger, May 20, 1912.
Fl. R. Fox, Brit. J. Hist. Sci. 4, 1 (1968).
HI. A. Hermann, Fruhgeschichte der Quantentheorie, 1899-1913. Mosbach, Baden,
1969.
H2. K. Huang, Statistical Mechanics, p. 26. Wiley, New York, 1963.
Kl. A. Kundt and E. Warburg, AdP 157, 353 (1876).
K2. Kelvin, Baltimore Lectures, Sec. 27. Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore,
1904.
K3. , [K2], p. xvii.
K4. M. Klein, Science 148, 173 (1965).
LI. G. N. Lewis, /. Am. Chem. Soc. 29, 1165, 1516 (1907).
L2. H. Landolt and R. Bornstein, Physikalisch Chemische Tabellen (3rd ed.), p. 384.
Springer, Berlin, 1905.
Ml. J. C. Maxwell, The Scientific Papers of J. C. Maxwell (W. P. Niven , Ed.), Vol.
1, p. 377. Dover, New York.
M2. [Ml], Vol. 2, p. 418.
Nl. F. E. Neumann, AdP 23, 32 (1831).
N2. W. Nernst, PAW, 1911, p. 306.
N3. —, Gott. Nachr., 1906, p. 1.
N4. , PAW, 1906, p. 933.
N5. , PAW, 1910, p. 262.
EINSTEIN AND SPECIFIC HEATS 401
N6. , PAW, 1911, p. 65.
N7. and F. Lindemann, PAW,\9l\,p. 494.
N8. , Z. Elektrochem. 20, 397 (1914).
PI. A. T. Petit and P. L. Dulong, Ann. Chim. Phys. 10, 395 (1819).
P2. M. Planck, Vorlesungen ilber Thermodynamik (3rd Edn.), introduction and Sec.
292. Von Veil, Leipzig, 1911.
Rl. A. de la Rive and F. Marcet, Ann. Chim. Phys. 75, 113 (1840).
R2. H. V. Regnault, Ann. Chim. Phys. 1, 129 (1841), especially pp. 202-5.
R3. F. Richarz, AdP 48, 708 (1893).
R4. J. W. S. Rayleigh, Phil. Mag. 49, 98 (1900).
51. A. Sommerfeld, Gesammelte Schriften, Vol. 3, p. 10. Vieweg, Braunschweig, 1968.
52. F. Simon, Yearbook Phys. Soc. London, 1956, p. 1.
Wl. H. F. Weber, AdP 147, 311 (1872).
W2. , AdP 154, 367, 533 (1875).
W3. A. Wigand, AdP 22, 99 (1907).
W4. A. Wiillner, Lehrbuch der Experimentalphysik, Vol. 2, p. 507. Teubner, Leipzig,
1896.
