3
Portrait of the Physicist
as a Young Man
Apart ... 4. Away from others in action or function; separately,
independently, individually.
Oxford English Dictionary
It is not known whether Hermann Einstein became a partner in the featherbed
enterprise of Israel and Levi before or after August 8, 1876. Certain it is that by
then he, his mother, and all his brothers and sisters, had been living for some time
in Ulm, in the kingdom of Wurttemberg. On that eighth of August, Hermann
married Pauline Koch in the synagogue in Cannstatt. The young couple settled
in Ulm, first on the Miinsterplatz, then, at the turn of 1878-9, on the Bahnhof-
strasse. On a sunny Friday in the following March their first child was born, a
citizen of the new German empire, which Wurttemberg had joined in 1871. On
the following day Hermann went to register the birth of his son. In translation the
birth certificate reads, 'No. 224. Ulm, March 15,1879. Today, the merchant Her-
mann Einstein, residing in Ulm, Bahnhofstrasse 135, of the Israelitic faith, per-
sonally known, appeared before the undersigned registrar, and stated that a child
of the male sex, who has received the name Albert, was born in Ulm, in his res-
idence, to his wife Pauline Einstein, nee Koch, of the Israelitic faith, on March
14 of the year 1879, at 11:30 a.m. Read, confirmed, and signed: Hermann Ein-
stein. The Registrar, Hartman.' In 1944 the house on the Bahnhofstrasse was
destroyed during an air attack. The birth certificate can still be found in the Ulm
archives.
Albert was the first of Hermann and Pauline's two children. On November 18,
1881, their daughter, Maria, was born. There may never have been a human
being to whom Einstein felt closer than his sister Maja (as she was always called).
The choice of nonancestral names for both children illustrates the assimilationist
disposition in the Einstein family, a trend widespread among German Jews in the
nineteenth century. Albert was named (if one may call it that) after his grand-
father Abraham,* but it is not known how the name Maria was chosen. 'A liberal
* Helen Dukas, private communication.
35
36 INTRODUCTORY
spirit, nondogmatic in regard to religion, prevailed in the family. Both parents had
themselves been raised that way. Religious matters and precepts were not dis-
cussed' [Ml]. Albert's father was proud of the fact that Jewish rites were not
practised in his home [Rl].
Maja's biographical essay about her brother, completed in 1924, is the main
source of family recollections about Albert's earliest years. It informs us of the
mother's fright at the time of Albert's birth because of the unusually large and
angular back of the baby's head (that uncommon shape of the skull was to be
permanent); of a grandmother's first reaction upon seeing the newest member of
the family: 'Viel zu dick! Viel zu dick!' (much too heavy!); and of early apprehen-
sions that the child might be backward because of the unusually long time before
it could speak [M2]. These fears were unfounded. According to one of Einstein's
own earliest childhood memories, 'when he was between two and three, he formed
the ambition to speak in whole sentences. He would try each sentence out on
himself by saying it softly. Then, when it seemed all right, he would say it out
loud' [SI]. He was very quiet as a young child, preferring to play by himself. But
there was early passion, too. On occasion, he would throw a tantrum. 'At such
moments his face would turn pale, the tip of his nose would become white, and
he would lose control of himself [M2]. On several such occasions, dear little
Albert threw things at his sister. These tantrums ceased when he was about seven.
The relationship between the parents was an harmonious and very loving one,
with the mother having the stronger personality. She was a talented pianist who
brought music into the home so the children's musical education started early.
Maja learned to play the piano. Albert took violin instruction from about the time
he was six until he was thirteen. The violin was to become his beloved instrument,
although playing remained a burdensome duty to him through most of these early
years, in which he took lessons from Herr Schmied [R2]. He taught himself to
play the piano a bit and grew especially fond of improvising on that instrument.
Hermann Einstein, an unruffled, kind-hearted, and rather passive man, loved
by all acquaintances [R3], was fond of literature and in the evenings would read
Schiller and Heine aloud to his family [R4]. (Throughout Albert's life, Heine
remained one of his most beloved authors.) In his high school years, Hermann
had shown evidence of mathematical talent, but his hopes for university study
were not realized because the family could not afford it.
Hermann's venture into the featherbed business was not very successful. Shortly
after Albert's birth, Hermann's enterprising and energetic younger brother Jakob,
an engineer, proposed that together they start a small gas and water installation
business in Munich. Hermann agreed to take care of the business end and also to
invest a substantial part of his and Pauline's funds in the enterprise. In 1880
Hermann and his family moved to Munich, where they registered on June 21.
The modest undertaking opened on October 11 and had a promising beginning,
but Jakob had greater ambitions. A few years later, he proposed starting an elec-
trotechnical factory to produce dynamos, arc lamps, and electrical measuring
equipment for municipal electric power stations and lighting systems. He also
PORTRAIT OF THE PHYSICIST AS A YOUNG MAN 37
suggested that the brothers jointly buy a house in Sendling, a suburb of Munich.
These plans were realized in 1885 with financial support from the family, espe-
cially Pauline's father. The firm was officially registered on May 6, 1885.
Albert and Maja loved their new home on the Adelreiterstrasse with its large
garden shaded by big trees. It appears that business also went well in the begin-
ning. In a book entitled Versorgung von Stddten mil elektrischem Strom, we find
four pages devoted to the 'Elektrotechnische Fabrik J. Einstein und Co. in
Miinchen' from which we learn that the brothers had supplied power stations in
Miinchen-Schwabing as well as in Varese and Susa in Italy [Ul].
Thus Einstein spent his earliest years in a warm and stable milieu that was
also stimulating. In his late sixties he singled out one particular experience from
that period: 'I experienced a miracle ... as a child of four or five when my father
showed me a compass' [El]. It excited the boy so much that 'he trembled and
grew cold' [R5]. 'There had to be something behind objects that lay deeply hidden
.. .the development of [our] world of thought is in a certain sense a flight away
from the miraculous' [El]. Such private experiences contributed far more to Ein-
stein's growth than formal schooling.
At the age of five, he received his first instruction at home. This episode came
to an abrupt end when Einstein had a tantrum and threw a chair at the woman
who taught him. At about age six he entered public school, the Volksschule. He
was a reliable, persistent, and slow-working pupil who solved his mathematical
problems with self-assurance though not without computational errors. He did
very well. In August 1886, Pauline wrote to her mother: 'Yesterday Albert
received his grades, he was again number one, his report card was brilliant' [Ela].
But Albert remained a quiet child who did not care to play with his schoolmates.
His private games demanded patience and tenacity. Building a house of cards was
one of his favorites.
In October 1888 Albert moved from the Volksschule to the Luitpold Gymna-
sium, which was to be his school till he was fifteen. In all these years he earned
either the highest or the next-highest mark in mathematics and in Latin [HI]. But
on the whole, he disliked those school years; authoritarian teachers, servile stu-
dents, rote learning—none of these agreed with him. Further, 'he had a natural
antipathy for ... gymnastics and sports. .. . He easily became dizzy and tired'
[R6]. He felt isolated and made few friends at school.
There was no lack of extracurricular stimuli, however. Uncle Jakob would pose
mathematical problems and after he had solved them 'the boy experienced a deep
feeling of happiness' [M3]. From the time Albert was ten until he turned fifteen,
Max Talmud, a regular visitor to the family home, contributed importantly to his
education. Talmud, a medical student with little money, came for dinner at the
Einstein's every Thursday night. He gave Einstein popular books on science to
read and, later, the writings of Kant. The two would spend hours discussing sci-
ence and philosophy.* 'In all these years I never saw him reading any light lit-
* After Talmud moved to the United States, he changed his name to Talmey. A book he wrote con-
tains recollections of his early acquaintance with Einstein [Tl].
38 INTRODUCTORY
erature. Nor did I ever see him in the company of schoolmates or other boys of
his age,' Talmud recalled later [T2]. In those years, 'his only diversion was music,
he already played Mozart and Beethoven sonatas, accompanied by his mother'
[M4]. Einstein also continued to study mathematics on his own. At the age of
twelve he experienced a second miracle: he was given a small book on Euclidean
geometry [H2], which he later referred to as the holy geometry book. 'The clarity
and certainty of its contents made an indescribable impression on me' [El]. From
age twelve to age sixteen, he studied differential and integral calculus by himself.
Bavarian law required that all children of school age receive religious education.
At the Volksschule, only instruction in Catholicism was provided. Einstein was
taught the elements of Judaism at home by a distant relative [M5]. When he went
to the Luitpold Gymnasium, this instruction continued at school. As a result of
this inculcation, Einstein went through an intense religious phase when he was
about eleven years old. His feelings were of such ardor that he followed religious
precepts in detail. For example, he ate no pork [M6]. Later, in his Berlin days,
he told a close friend that during this period he had composed several songs in
honor of God, which he sang enthusiastically to himself on his way to school [S2].
This interlude came to an abrupt end a year later as a result of his exposure to
science. He did not become bar mitzvah. He never mastered Hebrew. When he
was fifty, Einstein wrote to Oberlehrer Heinrich Friedmann, his religion teacher
at the Gymnasium, 'I often read the Bible, but its original text has remained
inaccessible to me' [E2].
There is another story of the Munich days that Einstein himself would occa-
sionally tell with some glee. At the Gymnasium a teacher once said to him that
he, the teacher, would be much happier if the boy were not in his class. Einstein
replied that he had done nothing wrong. The teacher answered, 'Yes, that is true.
But you sit there in the back row and smile, and that violates the feeling of respect
which a teacher needs from his class' [SI, S2].
The preceding collection of stories about Einstein the young boy demonstrates
the remarkable extent to which his most characteristic personal traits were native
rather than acquired. The infant who at first was slow to speak, then becomes
number one at school (the widespread belief that he was a poor pupil is
unfounded) turned into the man whose every scientific triumph was preceded by
a long period of quiet gestation. The boy who sat in the classroom and smiled
became the old man who—as described in Chapter 1—laughed because he
thought the authorities handling the Oppenheimer case were fools. In his later
years, his pacifist convictions would lead him to speak out forcefully against arbi-
trary authority. However, in his personal and scientific conduct, he was not a
rebel, one who resists authority, nor—except once*—a revolutionary, one who
'Einstein's one truly revolutionary contribution is his light-quantum paper of 1905. It is significant
that he never believed that the physical meaning of the light-quantum hypothesis had been fully
understood. These are matters to which I shall return in later chapters.
PORTRAIT OF THE PHYSICIST AS A YOUNG MAN 39
aims to overthrow authority. Rather, he was so free that any form of authority
but the one of reason seemed irresistibly funny to him. On another issue, his brief
religious ardor left no trace, just as in his later years he would often wax highly
enthusiastic about a scientific idea, then drop it as of no consequence. About his
religious phase, Einstein himself later wrote, 'It is clear to me that [this] lost reli-
gious paradise of youth was a first attempt to liberate myself from the "only-
personal"' [E3], an urge that stayed with him all his life. In his sixties, he once
commented that he had sold himself body and soul to science, being in flight from
the T and the 'we' to the 'it' [E4]. Yet he did not seek distance between himself
and other people. The detachment lay within and enabled him to walk through
life immersed in thought. What is so uncommon about this man is that at the
same time he was neither out of touch with the world nor aloof.
Another and most important characteristic of Einstein is already evident in the
child quietly at play by itself: his 'apartness.' We also see this in the greater
importance of private experience than of formal schooling and will see it again in
his student days, when self-study takes precedence over class attendance, and in
his days at the patent office in Bern when he does his most creative work almost
without personal contact with the physics community. It is also manifested in his
relations to other human beings and to authority. Apartness was to serve him well
in his single-handed and single-minded pursuits, most notably on his road from
the special to the general theory of relativity. This quality is also strongly in evi-
dence during the second half of his life, when he maintained a profoundly skeptical
attitude toward quantum mechanics. Finally, apartness became a practical neces-
sity to him, in order to protect his cherished privacy from a world hungry for
legend and charisma.
Let us return to the Munich days. Hermann's business, successful initially,
began to stagnate. Signer Garrone, the Italian representative, suggested moving
the factory to Italy, where prospects appeared much better. Jakob was all for it;
his enthusiasm carried Hermann along. In June 1894, the factory in Sendling was
liquidated, the house sold, and the family moved to Milan. All except Albert, who
was to stay behind to finish school. The new factory, 'Einstein and Garrone,' was
established in Pavia. Some time in 1895, Hermann and his family moved from
Milan to Pavia, where they settled at Via Foscolo 11 [S3].
Alone in Munich, Albert was depressed and nervous [M4]. He missed his fam-
ily and disliked school. Since he was now sixteen years old, the prospect of military
service began to weigh on him.* Without consulting his parents, he decided to join
them in Italy. With the help of a certificate from his family doctor attesting to
*By law, a boy could leave Germany only before the age of seventeen without having to return for
military service. Einstein's revulsion against military service started when, as a very young boy, he
and his parents watched a military parade. The movements of men without any apparent will of
their own frightened the boy. His parents had to promise him that he would never become a soldier
[R4].
40 INTRODUCTORY
nervous disorders, he obtained a release from the Gymnasium and in the early
spring of 1895 traveled to Pavia. He promised his parents, who were upset by his
sudden arrival, that he would prepare himself by self-study for the admission
examination at the ETH in Zurich and also informed them that he planned to
give up his German citizenship [Fl]. A new, freer life and independent work
transformed the quiet boy into a communicative young man. The Italian land-
scape and the arts made a lasting impression on him [M7].
In October 1895 Einstein went to Zurich to take the ETH examination. He
failed, although he did well in mathematics and the sciences.* Following a sug-
gestion to obtain the Matura, the high school diploma that would entitle him to
enroll at the ETH, he next went to the cantonal school in Aarau, in the German-
speaking part of Switzerland, where he boarded with the Winteler family. For
Jost Winteler, one of his teachers and a scholar in his own right, Einstein devel-
oped great respect, for Frau Winteler a deep affection. He got along well with
their seven children and was treated as part of the family.
For the first time in his life he enjoyed school. Shortly before his death he wrote,
'This school has left an indelible impression on me because of its liberal spirit and
the unaffected thoughtfulness of the teachers, who in no way relied on external
authority' [E5]. The frontispiece photograph, taken in Aarau, shows Einstein as
a confident-looking, if not cocky, young man without a trace of the timidity of the
earlier years. A classmate later remembered his energetic and assured stride, the
touch of mockery in his face, and his 'undaunted ways of expressing his personal
opinion, whether it offended or not' [S4]. He may always have been sure of him-
self. Now it showed.
A brief essay by Einstein, entitled 'Mes Projets d'Avenir,' has survived from his
Aarau schooldays (reproduced on pp. 42-43). Written in less-than-perfect French
in about 1895, it conveys his sense of purpose. In translation, it reads
My plans for the future
A happy man is too content with the present to think much about the future.
Young people, on the other hand, like to occupy themselves with bold plans.
Furthermore, it is natural for a serious young man to gain as precise an idea as
possible about his desired aims.
If I were to have the good fortune to pass my examinations, I would go to
[the ETH in] Zurich. I would stay there for four years in order to study math-
ematics and physics. I imagine myself becoming a teacher in those branches of
the natural sciences, choosing the theoretical part of them.
Here are the reasons which led me to this plan. Above all, it is [my] dispo-
sition for abstract and mathematical thought, [my] lack of imagination and
practical ability. My desires have also inspired in me the same resolve. That is
quite natural; one always likes to do the things for which one has ability. Then
there is also a certain independence in the scientific profession which I like a
great deal. [E5]
*He was examined in political and literary history, German, French, biology, mathematics, descrip-
tive geometry, chemistry, physics, and drawing and also had to write an essay.
PORTRAIT OF THE PHYSICIST AS A YOUNG MAN 41
In 1896 Einstein's status changed from that of German high school pupil in
Aarau to that of stateless student at the ETH. Upon payment of three mark, he
received a document, issued in Ulm on January 28, 1896, which stated that he
was no longer a German (more precisely, a Wiirttemberger) citizen. In the fall he
successfully passed the Matura with the following grades (maximum = 6): Ger-
man 5, Italian 5, history 6, geography 4, algebra 6, geometry 6, descriptive geom-
etry 6, physics 6, chemistry 5, natural history 5, drawing (art) 4, drawing (tech-
nical) 4. On October 29 he registered as a resident of Zurich and became a student
at the ETH. Upon satisfactory completion of the four-year curriculum, he would
qualify as a Fachlehrer, a specialized teacher, in mathematics and physics at a
high school. Throughout his student years, from 1896 to 1900, Einstein lived on
an allowance of one hundred Swiss francs per month, of which he saved twenty
each month to pay for his Swiss naturalization papers.*
At this time, however, his family was in financial trouble. Hermann and
Jakob's factory in Pavia failed and had to be liquidated in 1896. Most of the
family funds poured into the enterprise were lost. Jakob found employment with
a large firm. Hermann decided once more to start an independent factory, in
Milan this time. Albert warned his father in vain against this new venture and
also visited an uncle in Germany to urge him to refrain from further financial
support. His advice was not followed. The Einsteins moved back to Milan and
began anew. Two years later Hermann again had to give up. At that time, Albert
wrote to Maja, 'The misfortune of my poor parents, who for so many years have
not had a happy moment, weighs most heavily on me. It also hurts me deeply that
I as a grown-up must be a passive witness . .. without being able to do even the
smallest thing about it. I am nothing but a burden to my relatives. ... It would
surely be better if I did not live at all. Only the thought .. . that year after year
I do not allow myself a pleasure, a diversion, keeps me going and must protect me
often from despair' [M8]. This melancholy mood passed when his father found
new work, again related to the installation of electrical power stations.
Einstein's student days did have their pleasant moments. He would allow him-
self an occasional evening at a concert or a theatre or at a KafFeehaus to talk with
friends. He spent happy hours with the distinguished historian Alfred Stern and
his family, and with the family of Marcel Grossmann, a fellow student and friend.
His acquaintance in Zurich with Michele Angelo Besso grew into a life-long
friendship. Then and later he could savor the blessings of friendship and the
beauty of music and literature. But, already as a young man, nothing could dis-
tract him from his destiny, which with poetic precision he put in focus at the age
of eighteen: 'Strenuous labor and the contemplation of God's nature are the angels
which, reconciling, fortifying, and yet mercilessly severe, will guide me through
the tumult of life' [E6].
*In the Tagesblatt der Stadt Zurich of 1895, one finds the following typical advertisements: small
furnished room SF 20/month; two daily hot meals in a boarding house SF 1.40/day without wine;
a better room with board SF 70/month. (I thank Res Jost for finding this out for me.) Thus Ein-
stein's allowance was modest but not meager.
42 INTRODUCTORY
Einstein's essay written in Aarau, for which he received the grade 3 to 4 (out of 6).
Courtesy Staatsarchiv Kanton Aargau.
PORTRAIT OF THE PHYSICIST AS A YOUNG MAN 43
44 INTRODUCTORY
'Most of the time I worked in the physical laboratory, fascinated by the direct
contact with observation,' Einstein later wrote about his years at the ETH [E7].
However, his experimental projects were not received with enthusiasm by his pro-
fessor, Heinrich Friedrich Weber. In particular, Einstein was not allowed to con-
duct an experiment on the earth's movement against the aether [R8].* At one
point Weber is supposed to have said to Einstein: 'You are a smart boy, Einstein,
a very smart boy. But you have one great fault: you do not let yourself be told
anything' [S5]. Einstein's fascination with experiment must have been dampened.
It is recorded in the Protokollbuch of the mathematics-physics section of the ETH
that he received a strong warning (Verweis) because he neglected his laboratory
work.
Einstein, in turn, was not impressed with Weber's physics courses. He 'did not
care much for [Weber's] introduction to theoretical physics because he was dis-
appointed not to learn anything new about Maxwell theory.... As a typical rep-
resentative of classical physics, [Weber] simply ignored everything which came
after Helmholtz [S6]. He followed some other courses with intense interest, how-
ever.** On several later occasions, he singled out Adolf Hurwitz and Hermann
Minkowski as excellent mathematics teachers [R9, E6].f But on the whole Ein-
stein did not excel in regular course attendance. He relied far more on self-study.
As a student he read the works of Kirchhoff, Hertz, and Helmholtz; learned Max-
well theory from the first edition of Einfuhrung in die Maxwellsche Theorie der
Elektrizitat by August Foppl, which had come out in 1894 [Fl]; read Mach's
book on mechanics, 'a book which, with its critical attitudes toward basic concepts
and basic laws, made a deep and lasting impression on me' [S8]; and studied
papers by Lorentz and by Boltzmann.l Among other subjects which drew his
attention was the work of Darwin [R9].
'In all there were only two examinations; for the rest one could do what one
wanted ... a freedom which I thoroughly enjoyed ... up to a few months before
the examination' [E9]. These few-month periods were made easy for Einstein
because Marcel Grossmann made available his lecture notes, beautifully written,
meticulously organized. § Nevertheless, these times of working under orders
imposed by others were an ordeal to him. It took him a year after his final exam-
ination to fully regain his taste for physics [E9]. His final grades were 5 each for
theoretical physics, experimental physics, and astronomy; 5.5 for the theory of
*See Section 6d.
**For a complete list of Einstein's four-year curriculum, see [S7].
fit is of interest for Einstein's later work on general relativity that he also attended some of Geiser's
lectures on differential geometry [Kl, RIO). I discuss Geiser's influence in Section 12b.
$1 have not found any evidence for the correspondence between Boltzmann and Einstein referred to
in [M9] and [S9].
§These lecture notes are now in the historical collection of the library in Zurich.
PORTRAIT OF THE PHYSICIST AS A YOUNG MAN 45
functions; 4.5 for an essay on heat conductivity (out of a maximum of 6). And so,
in August 1900, Einstein became qualified as a Fachlehrer, together with three
other students, who each immediately obtained positions as assistants at the ETH
[S5]. A fifth student, Mileva Marie, did not pass.* Einstein himself was jobless.
It was a disappointment for him. He never quite forgave Weber for holding out
an assistantship and then letting the matter drop.** In September he wrote to
Hurwitz, asking if he could be considered for a vacant assistantship [Ell]. A few
days later, he wrote again, 'I note with great joy that there is a prospect of obtain-
ing the position' [El2]. Nothing came of this, however. And so as the year ended,
he was still without work.
However, there were some satisfactions. In December 1900 he finished his first
scientific paper, dealing with intermolecular forces, and submitted it from Zurich
to the Annalen der Physik [E13]. On February 21, 1901, he was granted the
Swiss citizenship for which he had saved so long.f For the rest of his life, he
remained a citizen of Switzerland, 'the most beautiful corner on earth I know'
[S10].
Early in 1901 Einstein again tried to find a university position. 'I have been
with my parents [in Milan] for three weeks to seek from here a position as an
assistant at a university. I would have found one long ago if Weber had not played
a dishonest game with me' [E14]4 In March 1901 he sent a reprint of his first
paper to Friedrich Wilhelm Ostwald in Leipzig, along with a letter in which he
inquired 'whether you perhaps might have use for a mathematical physicist who
is familiar with absolute measurements' [El5]. In April he wrote to Heike
Kamerlingh Onnes asking for a position in Leiden [E16]. Perhaps he never
received replies. Certainly his applications were unsuccessful. He was discour-
aged, as we know from a letter from his father to Ostwald§: 'My son is deeply
unhappy with his current state of unemployment. Day by day the feeling grows
in him that his career is off the track . . . the awareness weighs on him that he is
a burden to us, people of small means' [El7]. Hermann asked Ostwald to at least
send a few words of encouragement about his son's paper. Nine years later, Ein-
stein and Ostwald would both be in Geneva to receive honorary doctorates. The
year after that Ostwald would be the first to propose Einstein for the Nobel
prize. H
* Mileva made a second try in July 1901 and failed again.
**After Weber's death in 1912, Einstein wrote to a friend, in a way quite uncommon for him,
'Weber's death is good for the ETH' [E10].
fHe had formally applied for citizenship on October 19, 1899. On January 10, 1900, his father
made the required declaration that he had no objections to this application [F2]. On March 13, 1901,
he was declared unfit for the army (Untauglich A) because of flat feet and varicose veins.
:(:'... wenn Weber nicht ein falsches Spiel gegen mich spielte.'
§The letters from the Einsteins to Ostwald have been reproduced in [K2].
f See Chapter 30.
46 INTRODUCTORY
Finally Einstein found a temporary job. Starting May 19, 1901, he became a
substitute teacher for two months at a high school in Winterthur. He wrote to
Winteler that he had never expected to derive such pleasure from teaching. 'After
having taught for five or six hours in the morning, I am still quite fresh and work
in the afternoon either in the library on my further education or at home on inter-
esting problems. ... I have given up the ambition to get to a university since I saw
that also under the present circumstances I maintain the strength and desire to
make scientific efforts' [El8].* To Grossmann he wrote, also from Winterthur,
that he was at work on kinetic gas theory and that he was pondering the movement
of matter relative to the aether [El9].
After Winterthur, another temporary position came his way. He was appointed
for one year, to begin in September 1901, at a private school in Schaffhausen [F3].
Once again there was enough time for physics. Here is Einstein writing in Decem-
ber 1901: 'Since September 15, 1901, I am a teacher at a private school in
Schaffhausen. During the first two months of my activities at that school, I wrote
my doctoral dissertation on a topic in the kinetic theory of gases. A month ago I
handed in this thesis at the University of Zurich'** [E20]. This work was not
accepted as a thesis, however, f This setback was the last one in Einstein's career.
It came at about the time that he left Schaffhausen for Bern, where he was to
spend the most creative years of his life.
The first initiative for the move to Bern had already been taken some time in
1900, when Marcel Grossmann had spoken to his family about Einstein's employ-
ment difficulties. This led Marcel's father to recommend Einstein to Friedrich
Haller, the director of the federal patent office in Bern. Einstein was deeply grate-
ful for this recommendation4 There the matter rested until December 11, 1901,
when a vacancy at the patent office was advertised in the Schweizerisches Bundes-
blatt. Einstein at once sent a letter of application [E20]. At some point he was
interviewed by Haller. Perhaps he received some assurances of a position at that
time. In any event, he resigned his job at Schaffhausen and settled in Bern in
February 1902, before he had any appointment there. At first his means of sup-
port were a small allowance from his family and fees from tutoring in mathematics
and physics. One of his students described him as follows: 'about five feet ten,
broad-shouldered, slightly stooped, a pale brown skin, a sensuous mouth, black
moustache, nose slightly aquiline, radiant brown eyes, a pleasant voice, speaking
*In this same letter, Einstein also reported that he had met one of the leading German physicists. I
have been unable to find out who that was.
**At that time, the ETH did not yet grant the PhD degree.
fl have been unable to find a response from Zurich concerning Einstein's proposed thesis. This
kinetic theory paper was later published [E21]. Earlier in the year, Einstein had contemplated sub-
mitting an extended version of his first paper, on intermolecular forces, as a PhD thesis [E14].
JHe expressed his gratitude in a letter to Marcel Grossmann dated April 14, 1901, [E14] (not 1902,
as is stated in [Sll]).
PORTRAIT OF THE PHYSICIST AS A YOUNG MAN 47
French correctly but with a light accent' [F4]. It was at this time that he met
Maurice Solovine, 'der gute Solo,' who came to be tutored and became a friend
for life. Einstein, Solovine, and another friend, Konrad Habicht, met regularly to
discuss philosophy, physics, and literature, from Plato to Dickens. They solemnly
constituted themselves as founders and sole members of the 'Akademie Olympia,'
dined together, typically on sausage, cheese, fruit, and tea, and generally had a
wonderful time.*
Meanwhile, Einstein's appointment by the Swiss federal council came through.
As of June 16, 1902, he was technical expert third class at the patent office at an
annual salary of SF 3500—on a trial basis.
Before settling in Bern, Einstein already had plans to marry a fellow student
from the ETH with whom he had often discussed science in Zurich. She was
Mileva Marie (or Marity), born in 1875 in Titel (South Hungary), of Greek
Catholic background. Einstein's parents were strongly opposed to the marriage;
'perhaps they had wished to pursue other plans' [M10]. In 1902 there was tem-
porary friction between Einstein and his mother, who neither then nor later liked
Mileva [E23]. It was altogether a hard year for Pauline. Her husband's series of
misfortunes had undermined his robust health. A brief and fatal heart disease
felled him. Einstein came from Bern to Milan to be with his father, who on his
death-bed finally consented to his son's marriage. When the end was near, Her-
mann asked everyone to leave so that he could die alone. It was a moment his son
never recalled without feelings of guilt**. Hermann Einstein died on October 10,
1902, and was buried in Milan.
Albert and Mileva married on January 6, 1903. There was a small party that
evening. Afterward, when the couple arrived at their lodgings, Einstein had to
wake up the landlord. He had forgotten his keys [M10]. Much later, Einstein
recalled the inner resistance with which he had entered the marriage [E24]. On
May 14, 1904, their son Hans Albert was born, through whom the family line
continues to this day.
Einstein did well at the patent office. He took his work seriously and often
found it interesting. There was always enough time and energy left for his own
physics. In 1903 and 1904 he published papers on the foundations of statistical
mechanics. On September 16, 1904, his provisional appointment was made per-
manent. Further promotion, wrote Haller, 'should wait until he has fully mas-
tered machine technology; he studied physics' [F5].
No one before or since has widened the horizons of physics in so short a time
as Einstein did in 1905. His work of that year will of course be discussed at length
*In his late sixties, Einstein remembered the days 'when we ran our happy "Academy," which after
all was less childish than those respectable ones which I got to know later from close in' [E22]. The
best description of the Akademie is the one by Solovine, who records that the members also read
Spinoza, Hume, Mach, Poincare, Sophocles, Racine, and Cervantes [S12].
**Helen Dukas, private communication.
48 INTRODUCTORY
in later chapters.* Here I note only that in March he completed a paper which
was to earn him the Nobel prize and that in April he finished an article which
finally gained him the PhD degree from the University of Zurich [E25].
On April 1, 1906, Einstein was promoted to technical expert second class with
a salary raise to SF 4500. He now knew enough technology and, writes Haller,
'belongs among the most esteemed experts at the office' [F6]. At the end of 1906,
he finished a fundamental paper on specific heats. He also found time to write
book reviews for the Annalen der Physik [K3]. At the end of 1907 Einstein made
the first important strides toward the general theory of relativity (see Chapter 9).
Here the sketch of the young man's life ends. Einstein's days in Bern are not
yet over, but a new phase is about to begin: his academic career (see further Sec-
tion lOa).
At the end of his life, Einstein wrote that the greatest thing Marcel Grossman
did for him was to recommend him to the patent office with the help of the elder
Grossman [E26]. That no doubt is true. Einstein's funds may have been limited,
his marriage may not have been perfect. But, for the man who preferred to think
in apartness, the Bern days were the closest he would ever come to paradise on
earth.
An Addendum on Einstein Biographies
In preparing this chapter, I have striven to rely as much as possible on original
documents. The Einstein Archives in Princeton and Helen Dukas's guidance
were, of course, of prime importance. I also derived great benefit from the Wis-
senschaftschistorische Sammlung of the ETH Library in Zurich, where Dr. B.
Glaus gave me much help. In addition, I have made grateful use of the following
biographies.
1. Albert Einstein, Beitrag far sein Lebensbild by Maja Einstein; in manuscript
form. Completed in Florence on February 15, 1924. The original manuscript
is in the hands of the Besso family; a copy is present in the Princeton Archives.
Cited in the references to this chapter as M.
2. Albert Einstein, a Biographical Portrait by Anton Reiser, the pen name for
Rudolf Kayser; A. and C. Boni, New York, 1930. Cited below as R. In 1931,
Einstein wrote about this book: 'The book by Reiser is, in my opinion, the best
biography which has been written about me. It comes from the pen of a man
who knows me well personally' [E8]. (Kayser, a connoisseur of the German
language, was for many years the chief editor of the influential Neue Rund-
schau, a Berlin monthly; he was also the author of numerous books and a
teacher. In 1924 he married Einstein's stepdaughter Use.)
*For the doctoral thesis and Brownian motion, see Chapter 5. For special relativity, see Chapters 6
through 8. For the light-quantum hypothesis, see Chapter 19.
PORTRAIT OF THE PHYSICIST AS A YOUNG MAN 49
3. A. Einstein, Autobiographisches, in Albert Einstein: Philosopher-Scientist (P.
Schilpp, Ed.); Tudor, New York, 1949. Cited below as E. The closest Einstein
ever came to writing an autobiography. Indispensable.
4. C. Seelig, Albert Einstein; Europa Verlag, Zurich, 1960. Quoted below as Se.
The material is based in part on an extensive correspondence between the
author and A. Einstein, Margot Einstein, and Helen Dukas. This biography
is a much-expanded version of an earlier book by C. Seelig, Albert Einstein;
Europa Verlag, Zurich, 1954. (The English translation of this last book is not
recommended.)
5. B. Hoffmann in collaboration with H. Dukas, Albert Einstein, Creator and
Rebel; Viking, New York, 1972.
6. Albert Einstein in Bern by M. Fliickiger; Paul Haupt Verlag, Bern, 1974.
Cited below as F. Contains a number of reproductions of rare documents per-
taining to Einstein's younger days. The text contains numerous inaccuracies.
7. Philipp Frank, Albert Einstein, sein Leben und seine Zeit; Vieweg, Braun-
schweig, 1979. This German version is superior to the English edition, Ein-
stein, His Life and Time, Knopf, New York, 1947, since large parts of the
German edition do not appear in the English one. The German edition also
contains an introduction by Einstein in which he mentions that he encouraged
Frank to write this book.
8. H. E. Specker, Ed. Einstein und Ulm; Kohlhammer, Stuttgart, 1979. Contains
details about Einstein's ancestry, including a family tree.
9. C. Kirsten and H. J. Treder, Ed., Albert Einstein in Berlin 1913-1933; Aka-
demie Verlag, Berlin, 1979. An annotated collection of documents from the
archives of the Prussian Academy of Sciences. Splendid.
References
El. E, p. 8.
Ela. Pauline Einstein, letter to Jette Koch, August 1, 1886.
E2. A. Einstein, letter to H. Friedmann, March 18, 1929.
E3. E, p. 4.
E4. A. Einstein, letter to Hermann Broch, September 2, 1945.
E5. , Mes Projets d'Avenir; the original is in the Staatsarchiv Kanton Aargau.
E6. , letter to Rosa Winteler, June 3, 1897.
E7. E, p. 14.
E8. A. Einstein, letter to E. F. Magnin, February 25, 1931.
E9. E, p. 16.
E10. A. Einstein, letter to H. Zangger, summer 1912.
Ell. —, letter to A. Hurwitz, September 23, 1900.
E12. , letter to A. Hurwitz, September 26, 1900.
E13. , AdP4, 513, (1901).
E14. , letter to M. Crossman, April 14, 1901.
E15. , letter to W. Ostwald, March 19, 1901.
50 INTRODUCTORY
E16. , letter to H. Kamerlingh Onnes, April 17, 1901.
El 7. H. Einstein, letter to W. Ostwald, April 13, 1901.
El 8. A. Einstein, letter to J. Winteler, undated, 1901.
E19. , letter to M. Grossman, undated, 1901.
E20. , letter to the Eidgenossisches Amt fiir geistiges Eigentum, December 18,
1901; reproduced in F, p. 55.
E21. —, AdP 9, 417 (1902).
E22. , letter to M. Solovine, November 25, 1948.
E23. Pauline Einstein, letter to R. Winteler, February 20, 1902.
E24. A. Einstein, letter to C. Seelig, May 5, 1952.
E25. , Eine neue Bestimmung der Molekuldimensionen. Buchdruckerei K. J.
Wyss, Bern, 1905.
E26. , in Helle Zeit, Dunkle Zeit, p. 12. C. Seelig Ed. Europa Verlag, Zurich,
1956.
Fl. A. Foppl, Einfuhrung in die Maxwellsche Theorie der Elektrizitdt. Teubner,
Leipzig, 1894.
F2. F, pp. 43-44.
F3. F, p. 34.
F4. F, p. 11.
F5. F, p. 67.
F6. F, p. 65.
HI. Ph. Hausel, Miinchner Merkur, March 14, 1979.
H2. E. Heis and T. J. Eschweiler, Lehrbuch der Geometric zum Gebrauch an hoheren
Lehranstalten. Du-Mont and Schauberg, Cologne, 1867.
Kl. L. Kollros, Helv. Phys. Acta Suppl. 4, 271 (1956).
K2. H. Korber, Forschungen und Fortschritte 38, 74 (1974).
K3. M. J. Klein and A. Needell, his 68, 601 (1977).
Ml. M, p. 12.
M2. M, pp. 9-10.
M3. M, p. 14.
M4. M, p. 15.
M5. M, pp. 11-12.
M6. M, p. 13.
M7. M, p. 16.
M8. M, p. 18.
M9. M, p. 20.
M10. M, p. 23.
Rl. R, p. 28.
R2. R, p. 31.
R3. R, p. 24.
R4. R, p. 26.
R5. R, p. 25.
R6. R, p. 33.
R7. R, p. 54.
R8. R, p. 52.
R9. R, p. 48.
RIO. R, p. 49.
PORTRAIT OF THE PHYSICIST AS A YOUNG MAN 51
51. E. G. Straus, lecture given at Yeshiva University, September 18, 1979.
52. Se, p. 15.
53. E. Sanesi, Physis 18, 174 (1976).
54. Se, pp. 21-22.
55. Se, p. 48.
56. Se, p. 47.
57. Se, pp. 38-40.
S8 Se, p. 54.
S9. Se, p. 43.
510. Se, p. 415.
511. Se, p. 85.
512. M. Solovine, Ed., Albert Einstein, Lettres a Maurice Solovine, introduction. Gau-
thier Villars, Paris, 1956.
Tl. M. Talmey, The Relativity Theory Simplified and the Formative Years of Its
Inventor. Falcon Press, New York, 1932.
T2. [Tl],pp. 164-5.
Ul. F. Uppenborn, Ed., Die Versorgung von Stadten mil elektrischem Strom, p. 63.
Springer, Berlin, 1891.
This page intentionally left blank II
STATISTICAL PHYSICS
This page intentionally left blank 