23
A Loss of Identity:
the Birth of Quantum Statistics
23a. From Boltzmann to Dirac
This episode begins with a letter dated June 1924 [Bl], written by a young Ben-
gali. His name was Satyendra Nath Bose. The five papers he had published by
then were of no particular distinction. The subject of his letter was his sixth paper.
He had sent it to the Philosophical Magazine. A referee had rejected it [B2].
Bose's letter was addressed to Einstein, then forty-five years old and already rec-
ognized as a world figure by his colleagues and by the public at large. In this
chapter I describe what happened in the scientific lives of these two men during
the six months following Einstein's receipt of Bose's letter. For Bose the conse-
quences were momentous. Virtually unknown before, he became a physicist whose
name will always be remembered. For Einstein this period was only an inter-
lude.* He was already deeply engrossed in his search for a unified theory. Such
is the scope of his oeuvre that his discoveries in those six months do not even rank
among his five main contributions, yet they alone would have sufficed for Einstein
to be remembered forever.
Bose's sixth paper deals with a new derivation of Planck's law. Along with his
letter, he had sent Einstein a copy of his manuscript, written in English, and asked
him to arrange for publication in the Zeitschrift fur Physik, if he thought the work
of sufficient merit. Einstein acceded to Bose's request. He personally translated
the paper into German and submitted it, adding as a translator's note: 'In my
opinion, Bose's derivation of the Planck formula constitutes an important advance.
The method used here also yields the quantum theory of the ideal gas, as I shall
discuss elsewhere in more detail.'
The purpose of this chapter is not to discuss the history of quantum statistics
but rather to describe Einstein's contribution to the subject. Nevertheless, I include
a brief outline of Bose's work for numerous reasons. (1) It will give us some insight
into what made Einstein deviate temporarily from his main pursuits. (2) It will
facilitate the account of Einstein's own research on the molecular gas. That work
*In 1925 Einstein said of his work on quantum statistics, 'That's only by the way' [SI].
423
424 THE QUANTUM THEORY
is discussed in Section 23b with the exception of one major point, which is reserved
for the next chapter: Einstein's last encounter with fluctuation questions. (3) It
will be of help in explaining Einstein's ambivalence to Bose's work. In a letter to
Ehrenfest, written in July, Einstein did not withdraw, but did qualify his praise
of Bose's paper: Bose's 'derivation is elegant but the essence remains obscure' [El ].
(4) It will help to make clear how novel the photon concept still was at that time
and will throw an interesting sidelight on the question of photon spin.
Bose recalled many years later that he had not been aware of the extent to
which his paper defied classical logic. (Such a lack of awareness is not uncommon
in times of transition, but it is not the general rule. Einstein's light-quantum paper
of 1905 is a brilliant exception.) 'I had no idea that what I had done was really
novel. ... I was not a statistician to the extent of really knowing that I was doing
something which was really different from what Boltzmann would have done,
from Boltzmann statistics. Instead of thinking of the light-quantum just as a par-
ticle, I talked about these states. Somehow this was the same question which Ein-
stein asked when I met him [in October or November 1925]: how had I arrived
at this method of deriving Planck's formula?' [Ml].
In order to answer Einstein's question and to understand what gave Bose the
idea that he was doing what Boltzmann would have done, I need to make a brief
digression.
As was discussed in Section 4b, both logically and historically classical statistics
developed via the sequence
fine-grained counting —* course-grained counting
This is, of course, the logic of quantum statistics as well, but its historical devel-
opment went the reverse way, from coarse-grained to fine-grained. For the oldest
quantum statistics, the Bose-Einstein (BE) statistics, the historical order of events
was as follows.
1924-5. Introduction of a new coarse-grained counting, first by Bose, then by
Einstein. These new procedures are the main subject of this chapter.
1925-6. Discovery of nonrelativistic quantum mechanics. It is not at once
obvious how the new theory should be supplemented with a fine-grained counting
principle that would lead to BE statistics [HI].
1926. This principle is discovered by Paul Adrien Maurice Dirac. Recall first
Boltzmann's fine-grained counting formula for his discrete model of a classical
ideal gas consisting of N particles with total energy E. Let there be n, particles
with energy e, (see section 4b, especially Eq. 4.4 and Eq. 4.5):
(23.1)
Then the corresponding number w of microstates is given by
(Boltzmann statistics) (23.2)
A LOSS OF IDENTITY: THE BIRTH OF QUANTUM STATISTICS 425
We owe to Dirac the observation that in the BE case, Eq. 23.2 must be replaced
by
w = 1 (BE statistics) (23.3)
only the single microstate that is symmetric in the N particles is allowed. Dirac
went on to show that Eq. 23.3 leads to the blackbody radiation law, Eq. 19.6 [Dl].
Thus he brought to an end the search—which had lasted just over a quarter of a
century—for the foundations of Planck's law.
Equation 23.3 was of course not known at the time Bose and Einstein com-
pleted the first papers ever written on quantum statistics. Theirs was guesswork,
but of an inspired kind. Let us turn first to Bose's contribution.
23b. Bose
The paper by Bose [B3] is the fourth and last of the revolutionary papers of the
old quantum theory (the other three being by, respectively, Planck [PI], Einstein
[E2], and Bohr [B4]). Bose's arguments divest Planck's law of all supererogatory
elements of electromagnetic theory and base its derivation on the bare essentials.
It is the thermal equilibrium law for particles with the following properties: they
are massless, they have two states of polarization, the number of particles is not
conserved, and the particles obey a new statistics. In Bose's paper, two new ideas
enter physics almost stealthily. One, the concept of a particle with two states of
polarization, mildly puzzled Bose. The other is the nonconservation of photons. I
do not know whether Bose even noticed this fact. It is not explicitly mentioned in
his paper.
Bose's letter to Einstein begins as follows: 'Respected Sir, I have ventured to
send you the accompanying article for your perusal. I am anxious to know what
you think of it. You will see that I have ventured to deduce the coefficient 8Tri>2/c^
in Planck's law independent of the classical electrodynamics .. .' [Bl]. Einstein's
letter to Ehrenfest contains the phrase, 'the Indian Bose has given a beautiful
derivation of Planck's law, including the constant [i.e., Sirv2/^]' [El]. Nei-
ther letter mentions the other parts of Planck's formula. Why this emphasis on
8wv2/c}?
In deriving Planck's law, one needs to know the number of states Zs in the
frequency interval between cs and i>s + dv\ It was customary to compute Zs by
counting the number of standing waves in a cavity with volume V. This yields
Bose was so pleased because he had found a new derivation of this expression for
Zs which enabled him to give a new meaning to this quantity in terms of particle
language. His derivation rests on the replacing of the counting of wave frequencies
by the counting of cells in one-particle phase space. He proceeded as follows.
Integrate the one-particle phase space element dxdp over V and over all(23.4)
426 THE QUANTUM THEORY
momenta between p* and p* + dp'. Supply a further factor 2 to count polariza-
tions. This produces the quantity STT V(ps)2dps, which equals A3ZS by virtue of the
relation ps = hv'/c. Hence Zs is the number of cells of size A3 contained in the
particle phase space region being considered. How innocent it looks, yet how new
it was. Recall that the kinematics of the Compton effect had been written down
only about a year and a half earlier. Here was a new application of p — hv/c\
Before I turn to the rest of Bose's derivation, I shall comment briefly on the
subject of photon spin. When Bose introduced his polarization factor of 2, he noted
that 'it seems required' to do so. This slight hesitation is understandable. Who in
1924 had ever heard of a particle with two states of polarization? For some time,
this remained a rather obscure issue. After the discovery of the electron spin,
Ehrenfest asked Einstein 'to tell [him] how the analogous hypothesis is to be stated
for light-corpuscles, in a relativistically correct way' [E3]. As is well known, this
is a delicate problem since there exists, of course, no rest frame definition of spin
in this instance. Moreover, gauge invariance renders ambiguous the separation
into orbital and intrinsic angular momentum (see, e.g., [Jl]). It is not surprising,
therefore, that in 1926 the question of photon spin seemed quite confusing to Ein-
stein. In fact, he went so far as to say that he was 'inclined to doubt whether the
angular momentum law can be maintained in the quantum theory. At any rate,
its significance is much less deep than that of the momentum law' [E4]. I believe
that this is an interesting comment on the state of the art some fifty years ago and
that otherwise not too much should be made of it.
Let us return to Bose. His new interpretation of Zs was in terms of 'number of
cells,' not 'number of particles.' This must have led him to follow Boltzmann's
counting but to replace everywhere 'particles' by 'cells,' a procedure he neither did
nor could justify—but which gave the right answer. It may help to understand
Bose's remark that he did not know that he was 'doing something which was
really different from what Boltzmann would have done, from Boltzmann statis-
tics,' if I recall at this point Boltzmann's coarse-grained counting, which is dis-
cussed at more length in Section 4b.
Boltzmann. Partition N particles with total energy E over the one-particle
phase space cells «,, w2,.. . There are NA particles in <OA. Their mean energy is
£A. We have
The relative probability W of this coarse-grained state is
The equilibrium entropy S is given by(23.5)
(23.6)
(23.7)
and then derived Planck's law for E(v, T)by standard manipulations—and there-
with concluded his paper without further comments.
Bose considered his Ansatz (Eq. 23.13) to be 'evident' [B3]. Nothing is further
from the truth. I venture to guess that to him the cell counting (Eq. 23.13) was
the perfect analog of Boltzmann's particle counting (Eq. 23.6) and that his cell
constraint, hold Zs fixed, was similarly the analog of Boltzmann's particle con-
straint, hold N fixed. Likewise, the two Lagrange parameters in Eq. 23.14 are
his analogs of the parameters in Eq. 23.8. Bose's replacement of fixed N by fixed
Zs already implies that N is not conserved. The final irony is that the constraint
of fixed Z5 is irrelevant: if one drops this constraint, then one must drop Xs in Eq.
23.14. Even so, it is easily checked that one still finds Planck's law! This is in
accordance with the now-familiar fact that Planck's law follows from Bose statis-
tics with E held fixed as the only constraint. In summary, Bose's derivation intro-
duced three new features:He then maximized W as a function of the p\ holding Zs and E fixed so thatis the total number of photons. Next Bose introduced his new coarse-grained
counting:
(23.13)
(23.14)(23.9)
(23.10)
(23.11)
(23.12)andwhich incorporate the constraints (a) hold N fixed and (b) hold E fixed.
Bose. Partition Zs into numbers psr, where p"r is defined as the number of cells
which contain r quanta with frequency if. Let there be Ns photons in all with this
frequency and let E be the total energy. ThenA LOSS OF IDENTITY: THE BIRTH OF QUANTUM STATISTICS 427
where C is a constant and W^ follows from the extremal conditions
(23.8)
428 THE QUANTUM THEORY
1. Photon number nonconservation.
2. Bose's cell partition numbers p\ are defined by asking how many particles are
in a cell. Boltzmann's axiom of distinguishability is gone.
3. The Ansatz (Eq. 23.13) implies statistical independence of cells. Statistical
independence of particles is gone.
The astounding fact is that Bose was correct on all three counts. (In his paper,
he commented on none of them.) I believe there had been no such successful shot
in the dark since Planck introduced the quantum in 1900. Planck, too, had
counted in strange ways, as was subtly recalled by Einstein in his review, written
in 1924, of a new edition of Planck's Wdrmestrahlung: 'Planck's law [was] derived
... by postulating statistical laws in the treatment of the interaction between pon-
derable matter and radiation which appear to be justified on the one hand because
of their simplicity, on the other hand because of their analogy to the corresponding
relations of the classical theory' [E5].
Einstein continued to be intrigued by Bose's paper. In an address given in
Lucerne on October 4, 1924, before the Schweizerische Naturforschende Gesell-
schaft, he stressed 'the particular significance for our theoretical concepts' of Bose's
new derivation of Eq. 23.4 [E6]. By this time, he had already published his own
first paper on quantum statistics.
23c. Einstein
As long as Einstein lived, he never ceased to struggle with quantum physics. As
far as his constructive contributions to this subject are concerned, they came to an
end with a triple of papers, the first published in September 1924, the last two in
early 1925. In the true Einsteinian style, their conclusions are once again reached
by statistical methods, as was the case for all his important earlier contributions
to the quantum theory. The best-known result is his derivation of the Bose-Ein-
stein condensation phenomenon. I shall discuss this topic next and shall leave for
the subsequent section another result contained in these papers, a result that is
perhaps not as widely remembered even though it is more profound.
First, a postscript to Einstein's light-quantum paper of 1905.
Its logic can be schematically represented in the following way.
Wien's law 1
Einstein 1905: I -* Light-quanta
Gas analogy
An issue raised in Section 19c should be dealt with now. We know that BE is the
correct statistics when radiation is treated as a photon gas. Then how could Ein-
stein have correctly conjectured the existence of light-quanta using Boltzmann sta-
tistics? Answer: according to BE statistics, the most probable value (n,) of ni for
photons is given by {«,) = [exp (hvJkT) —1]~'. This implies that (nt) <K 1 in
A LOSS OF IDENTITY: THE BIRTH OF QUANTUM STATISTICS 429
the Wien regime hv{ S> kT. Therefore, up to an irrelevant* factor TV!, Equations
23.2 and 23.3 coincide in the Wien limit. This asymptotic relation in the Wien
region fully justifies, ex post facto, Einstein's extraordinary step forward in 1905!
Bose's reasoning in 1924 went as follows:
Photons 1
Bose 1924: I -» Planck's law
Quantum statistics
and in 1924-5 Einstein came full circle:
Bose statistics 1
Einstein 1924-5: I —>• The quantum gas
Photon analogy
It was inevitable, one might say, that he would do so. 'If it is justified to conceive
of radiation as a quantum gas, then the analogy between the quantum gas and a
molecular gas must be a complete one' [E7].
In his 1924 paper [E8], Einstein adopted Bose's counting formula (Eq. 23.13),
but with two modifications. He needed, of course, the Zs appropriate for nonre-
lativistic particles with mass m:
Second (and unlike Bose!), he needed the constraint that N be held fixed. This is
done by adding a term
(23.16)(23.15)
inside the parentheses of Eq. 23.14.** One of the consequences of the thus mod-
ified Eq. 23.14 is that the Lagrange multiplier (—ln^4) is determined by
(23.17)
(23.18)Hence, Einstein noted, the 'degeneracy parameter' A must satisfy
In his first paper [E8], Einstein discussed the regime in which A does not reach
*The TV! is irrelevant since it affects only C in Eq. 23.7. The constant C is interesting nevertheless.
For example, its value bears on the possibility of defining 51 in such a way that it becomes an extensive
thermodynamic variable. The interesting history of these normalization questions has been discussed
in detail by M. Klein [Kl].
**The term A~* is defined as exp (—p,/kT), where n is the chemical potential. Einstein, of course,
never introduced the superfluous X* into the parenthetical term. In Eqs. 23.16-23.22,1 deviate from
Einstein's notation.
and asked what happens if T drops below T0 (for given v0). His answer:
I maintain that, in this case, a number of molecules steadily growing with
increasing density goes over in the first quantum state (which has zero kinetic
energy) while the remaining molecules distribute themselves according to the
parameter value A = 1. ... A separation is effected; one part condenses, the
rest remains a 'saturated ideal gas.' [E7]
He had come upon the first purely statistically derived example of a phase tran-
sition, which is now called Bose-Einstein condensation. I defer a few comments
on this phenomenon to the next section and turn to other important facets of the
three Einstein papers.
1. Einstein on Statistical Dependence. After the papers by Bose [B3] and the
first one by Einstein [E8] came out, Ehrenfest and others objected (so we read in
Einstein's second paper [E7]) that 'the quanta and molecules, respectively, are not
treated as statistically independent, a fact that is not particularly emphasized in
our papers' (i.e., [B3] and [E8]). Einstein replied, 'This [objection] is entirely
correct' [E7]. He went on to stress that the differences between the Boltzmann
and the BE counting 'express indirectly a certain hypothesis on a mutual influence
of the molecules which for the time being is of a quite mysterious nature.' With
this remark, Einstein came to the very threshold of the quantum mechanics of
identical particle systems. The mysterious influence is, of course, the correlation
induced by the requirement of totally symmetric wave functions.
2. Einstein on Indistinguishability. In order to illustrate further the differ-
ences between the new and the old counting of macrostates, Einstein cast W in awith v = V/N. He then discussed the region A < 1, where the equation of state
(obtained by eliminating A between Eqs. 23.19) shows perturbative deviations
from the classical ideal gas. All this is good physics, though unusually straightfor-
ward for a man like Einstein.
In his second paper [E7], the most important one of the three, Einstein began
with the v — T relation at A = 1:
(23.20)430 THE QUANTUM THEORY
the critical value unity. He proceeded to the continuous limit, in which the sum
in Eq. 23.17 is replaced by an integral over phase space, and found
(23.19)A LOSS OF IDENTITY: THE BIRTH OF QUANTUM STATISTICS 431
form alternative to Eq. 23.13. He counted the number of ways in which Ns indis-
tinguishable particles in the dEs interval can be partitioned over the Z! cells. This
yields
Einstein's Eq. 23.21 rather than Bose's Eq. 23.13 is the one now used in all
textbooks.
3. Einstein on the Third Law of Thermodynamics. As was noted at the end
of Section 20c, in 1914 Nernst introduced the hypothesis that the third law of
thermodynamics applies to gases. It was also mentioned that no sensible model of
a gas with that property was available at that time. In 1925 Einstein made his last
contribution to thermodynamics by pointing out that the BE gas does satisfy the
third law. (A Boltzmann gas does not do so, Einstein remarked.) Indeed, since all
particles go into the zero energy state as T —* 0, we have in this limit N° = N,
all other A^ = 0. Hence W —* 1 and S —*• 0 as T —* 0. It was as important to
him that a molecular BE gas yield Nernst's law as that a BE photon gas yield
Planck's law.
4. Einstein and Nonconservation of Photons. After 1917 Einstein ceased to
write scientific articles on questions related to radiation.* The only mention of
radiation in the 1924-5 papers is that 'the statistical method of Herr Bose and
myself is by no means beyond doubt, but seems only a posteriori justified by its
success for the case of radiation' [Ell].
There can be no doubt that he must have noted the nonconservation of photons.
In his language, this is implemented by putting A = 1 in Eq. 23.16. Yet I have
not found any reference to nonconservation, either in his scientific writings or in
the correspondence I have seen. I cannot state with certainty why he chose to be
silent on this and all further issues regarding photons. However, I do believe that
it is a fair guess that Einstein felt he would have nothing fundamental to say about
photons until such time as he could find his own way of dealing with the lack of
causality he had noted in 1917. Such a time never came.
Other physicists had followed Einstein's work on quantum statistics with inter-
est. Lorentz invited him to speak on this subject at the 1927 Solvay congress. Ein-
stein's reply, written in June 1927, may serve as a most appropriate preliminary
to my subsequent discussion of quantum mechanics.
I recall having committed myself to you to give a report on quantum statistics
at the Solvay congress. After much reflection back and forth, I come to the con-
viction that I am not competent [to give] such a report in a way that really
'Except for a brief refutation of an objection to his work on needle radiation [E9]. I found a notice
by Einstein in 1930 announcing a new paper on radiation fluctuations [E10]. This paper was never
published, however.
(23.21)432 THE QUANTUM THEORY
corresponds to the state of things. The reason is that I have not been able to
participate as intensively in the modern development of the quantum theory as
would be necessary for this purpose. This is in part because I have on the whole
too little receptive talent for fully following the stormy developments, in part
also because I do not approve of the purely statistical way of thinking on which
the new theories are founded. . . . Up until now, I kept hoping to be able to
contribute something of value in Brussels; I have now given up that hope. I beg
you not to be angry with me because of that; I did not take this lightly but tried
with all my strength. . . . Perhaps Herr Fermi in Bologna ... or Langevin . . .
could do a good job. [E12]
23d. Postscript on Bose-Einstein Condensation
(1) In December 1924, Einstein wrote to Ehrenfest, 'From a certain tempera-
ture on, the molecules "condense" without attractive forces, that is, they accu-
mulate at zero velocity. The theory is pretty, but is there also some truth to it?'
[E13].
(2) In 1925, Einstein mentioned hydrogen, helium, and the electron gas as the
best possible candidates in which to observe his condensation phenomenon [E7].
In 1925, these were, of course, sensible proposals. Recall that the Fermi-Dirac
statistics was not discovered* until 1926 [Fl, Dl], following Pauli's enunciation
of the exclusion principle in 1925 [P2]. Even then, it took some time until it was
sorted out when BE and FD statistics apply respectively: referring to Dirac's
paper [Dl], Pauli wrote in December 1926, 'We shall take the point of view also
advocated by Dirac, that the Fermi, and not the Einstein-Bose, statistics applies
to the material gas' [P3]. These matters were cleared up by 1927.
(3) In his 1925 paper, Einstein did not call the condensation phenomenon a
phase transition. According to Uhlenbeck (private communication), nobody real-
ized in 1925 that the existence of a phase transition was a 'deep' problem. In 1926,
Uhlenbeck himself raised an objection to Einstein's treatment of the condensation
problem [Ul]. This critique was to lead to a more precise theoretical formulation
of the conditions under which phase transitions can occur. Uhlenbeck noted that
the quantity N° in Eq. 23.17 -«• oo as A — 1 (for fixed T); hence also N -*
oo. Thus, if A —» 1, it is impossible to implement the constraint that N is a fixed
finite number. Therefore A = 1 can be reached only asymptomatically and there
is no two-phase regime.
Uhlenbeck recently described the communications between Ehrenfest and Ein-
stein on this question [U2]. Uhlenbeck and Einstein were both right, however.
The point is that a sharp phase transition can occur only in the so-called ther-
modynamic limit N —* oo, V —* GO, v fixed. This view emerged in a morning-
long debate that took place during the van der Waals Centenary Conference in
November 1937. The issue was, Does the partition function contain the infor-
mation necessary to describe a sharp phase transition? The transition implies the
*Dirac has given a charming account of the time sequence of these discoveries [D2].
A LOSS OF IDENTITY: THE BIRTH OF QUANTUM STATISTICS 433
existence of analytically distinct parts of isotherms. It was not clear how this could
come about. The debate was inconclusive, and Kramers, the chairman, put the
question to a vote. Uhlenbeck recalls that the ayes and nays were about evenly
divided. However, Kramers' suggestion to go to the thermodynamic limit was
eventually realized to be the correct answer. Shortly afterward, Uhlenbeck with-
drew his objections to Einstein's result, in a joint paper with his gifted student, the
late Boris Kahn (a Nazi victim) [K2].
(4) Until 1938, the BE condensation had 'the reputation of having only a purely
imaginary character' [LI]. Recall that the Hel-Hell phase transition was not
discovered until 1928, by Willem Hendrik Keesom [K3]. In 1938, Fritz Londo
proposed interpreting this helium transition as a BE condensation. Experimen-
tally, the transition point lies at 2.19 K. It is most encouraging that Eq. 23.20
gives T = 3.1 K [L2]. It is generally believed but not proved that the difference
between these two values is due to the neglecting of intermolecular forces in the
theoretical derivations.
References
Bl. S. N. Bose, letter to A. Einstein, June 4, 1924.
B2. W. Blanpied, Am. J. Phys. 40, 1212 (1972).
B3. S. N. Bose, Z. Phys. 26, 178 (1924).
B4. N. Bohr, Phil. Mag. 26, 1 (1913).
Dl. P. A. M. Dirac, Proc. Roy. Soc. 112, 661 (1926).
D2. , History of Twentieth Century Physics, Varenna Summer School, pp. 133-4.
Academic Press, New York, 1977.
El. A. Einstein, letter to P. Ehrenfest, July 12, 1924.
E2. , AdPl7, 132 (1905).
E3. P. Ehrenfest, letter to A. Einstein, April 7, 1926.
E4. A. Einstein, letter to P. Ehrenfest, April 12, 1926.
E5. , Deutsche Literaturzeitung, 1924, p. 1154
E6. , Verh. Schw. Naturf. Ces. 105, 85 (1924)
E7. , PAW, 1925, p. 3.
E8. , PAW, 1924, p. 261
E9. , Z. Phys. 31, 784 (1925).
E10. , PAW, 1930, p. 543.
Ell. , PAW, 1925, p. 18.
El 2. , letter to H. A. Lorentz, June 17, 1927
E13. , letter to P. Ehrenfest, November 29, 1924
Fl. E. Fermi, Z. Phys. 36, 902 (1926).
HI. W. Heisenberg, Z. Phys. 38, 411 (1926).
Jl. J. M. Jauch and F. Rohrlich, The Theory of Photons and Electrons, p. 40. Addi-
son-Wesley, Reading, Mass., 1955.
Kl. M. Klein, Proc. Kon. Ned. Akad. Wetensch. Amsterdam, 62, 41, 51 (1958
K2. B. Kahn and G. E. Uhlenbeck, Physica 4, 399 (1938).
K3. W. H. Keesom, Helium. Elsevier, New York, 1942.
434 THE QUANTUM THEORY
LI. F. London, Nature 141, 643 (1938).
L2. , Phys. Rev. 54, 1947 (1938).
Ml. J. Mehra, Biogr. Mem. Fell. Roy. Soc. 21, 117 (1975).
PI. M. Planck, Verh. Deutsch. Phys. Ges. 2, 237 (1900).
P2. W. Pauli, Z. Phys. 31, 625 (1925).
P3. ; z. Phys. 41, 81 (1927).
SI. E. Salaman, Encounter, April 1979, p. 19.
Ul. G. E. Uhlenbeck, 'Over Statistische Methoden in de Theorie der Quanta,' PhD
thesis, Nyhoff, the Hague, 1927.
U2. , Proceedings Einstein Centennial Symposium 1979 (H. Woolf, Ed.). Addison-
Wesley, Reading, Mass., 1980.
