5
The Reality of Molecules
5a. About the Nineteenth Century, Briefly
7. Chemistry. In 1771 work was completed on the first edition of the Encyclo-
pedia Britannica, 'a Dictionary of Arts and Sciences compiled upon a new plan
... by a Society of Gentlemen in Scotland.' The entry atom, written by William
Smellie, a man renowned for his devotion to scholarship and whisky [Kl], reads
as follows. ''Atom. In philosophy, a particle of matter, so minute as to admit no
division. Atoms are the minima naturae [smallest bodies] and are conceived as the
first principles or component parts of all physical magnitude.' Democritus might
have disagreed, since his atoms were not necessarily minute. Epicurus might have
objected that the atom has structure—though it cannot be divided into smaller
parts by physical means. Both men might have found the definition incomplete
since it did not mention that atoms—as they believed—exist in an infinite variety
of sizes and shapes, any one variety being forever incapable of transforming itself
into any other. They might have wondered why no reference was made to the
irparrr] vXri, the prime matter of which all atoms are made. It is likely, however,
that an imaginary dialogue between the Greek and the late eighteenth century
philosophers might rapidly have led to a common understanding that in the two
thousand years which separated them very little had changed regarding the under-
standing of the basic structure of matter.
The period of rapid change began in 1808, when John Dalton commenced the
publication of his New System of Chemical Philosophy [Dl]. This event marks
the birth of modern chemistry, according to which all modes of matter are
reducible to a finite number of atomic species (eighteen elements were known at
that time). Dalton's early assessment (in 1810) of the youngest of the sciences
sounds very modern: 'I should apprehend there are a considerable number of what
may be properly called elementary principles, which can never be metamor-
phosed, one into another, by any power we can control. We ought, however, to
avail ourselves of every means to reduce the number of bodies or principles of this
appearance as much as possible; and after all we may not know what elements
are absolutely indecomposable, and what are refractory, because we do not know
the proper means for their reduction. We have already observed that all atoms of
the same kind, whether simple or compound, must necessarily be conceived to be
79
80 STATISTICAL PHYSICS
alike in shape, weight, and every other particular' [Bl]. Note that Dalton's com-
pound atom is what we call a molecule. Great confusion reigned through most of
the nineteenth century regarding such terminology, one man's molecule being
another man's atom. The need for a common language developed, but slowly.
Fifty years later, at the first international scientific conference ever held, the 1860
Karlsruhe congress of chemists,* the steering committee still considered it neces-
sary to put at the top of the agenda of points to be discussed the question, 'Shall
a difference be made between the expressions molecule and atom, such that a
molecule be named the smallest particle of bodies which can enter into chemical
reactions and which may be compared to each other in regard to physical prop-
erties—atoms being the smallest particles of those bodies which are contained in
molecules?,' [Ml]. More interesting than the question itself is the fact that, even
in 1860, no consensus was reached.
Especially illuminating for an understanding of science in the nineteenth cen-
tury are the topics discussed by young August Kekule von Stradonitz (who by
then had already discovered that carbon atoms are tetravalent) in the course of his
opening address to the Karlsruhe conference. '[He] spoke on the difference
between the physical molecule and the chemical molecule, and the distinction
between these and the atom. The physical molecule, refers, he said, to the particle
of gas, liquid, or solid in question. The chemical molecule is the smallest particle
of a body which enters or leaves a chemical reaction. These are not indivisible.
Atoms are particles not further divisible' [Ml]. Both physics and chemistry could
have profited if more attention had been paid to the comment by Stanislao Can-
nizzaro, in the discussion following Kekule's paper, that the distinction between
physical and chemical molecules has no experimental basis and is therefore unnec-
essary. Indeed, perhaps the most remarkable fact about the nineteenth century
debates on atoms and molecules is the large extent to which chemists and physicists
spoke at cross purposes when they did not actually ignore each other. This is not
to say that there existed one common view among chemists, another among phys-
icists. Rather, in either camp there were many and often strongly diverging opin-
ions which need not be spelled out in detail here. It should suffice to give a few
illustrative examples and to note in particular the central themes. The principal
point of debate among chemists was whether atoms were real objects or only mne-
monic devices for coding chemical regularities and laws. The main issues for the
physicists centered around the kinetic theory of gases; in particular, around the
meaning of the second law of thermodynamics.
An early illustration of the dichotomies between the chemists and the physicists
is provided by Dalton's opinion about the work of Joseph Louis Gay-Lussac.
Dalton's chemistry was based on his law of multiple proportions: if there exists
"The meeting was held September 3-5, 1860. There were 127 chemists in attendance. Participants
came from Austria, Belgium, France, Germany, Great Britain, Italy, Mexico, Poland, Russia, Spain,
Sweden, and Switzerland.
THE REALITY OF MOLECULES 8l
more than one compound of two elements, then the ratios of the amounts of weight
of one element which bind with the same amounts of the other are simple integers.
As said, the publication of Dalton's major opus began in 1808. In 1809, Gay-
Lussac published his law of combining volumes: the proportions by volume in
which gases combine are simple integers. Gay-Lussac mentioned that his results
were in harmony with Dalton's atomic theory [Gl]. Dalton, on the other hand,
did not believe Gay-Lussac: 'His notion of measures is analogous to mine of atoms;
and if it could be proved that all elastic fluids have the same number of atoms in
the same volume, of numbers that are as 1, 2, 3, 4, etc., the two hypotheses would
be the same, except that mine is universal and his applies only to elastic fluids.
Gay-Lussac could not but see that a similar hypothesis had been entertained by
me and abandoned as untenable' [D2]. (Elastic fluids are now better known as
gases.) Also, Dalton did not accept the hypothesis put forward in 1811 by Amedeo
Avogadro, that for fixed temperature and pressure equal volumes of gases contain
equal numbers of molecules [Al].* Nor was Dalton's position one held only by a
single person for a brief time. By all accounts the high point of the Karlsruhe
congress was the address by Cannizzaro, in which it was still necessary for the
speaker to emphasize the importance of Avogadro's principle for chemical consid-
erations.** That conference did not at once succeed in bringing chemists closer
together. 'It is possible that the older men were offended by the impetuous behav-
ior and imposing manner of the younger scientists' [M2]. However, it was recalled
by Dmitri Ivanovich Mendeleev thirty years later that 'the law of Avogadro
received by means of the congress a wider development, and soon afterwards con-
quered all minds' [M3].
The law of Avogadro is the oldest of those physical-chemical laws that rest on
the explicit assumption that molecules are real things. The tardiness with which
this law came to be accepted by the chemists clearly indicates their widespread
resistance to the idea of molecular reality. For details of the atomic debate among
chemists, I refer the reader to recent excellent monographs [Bl, Nl]. Here I men-
tion only some revealing remarks by Alexander Williamson, himself a convinced
atomist. In his presidential address of 1869 to the London Chemical Society, he
said, 'It sometimes happens that chemists of high authority refer publicly to the
atomic theory as something they would be glad to dispense with, and which they
are ashamed of using. They seem to look upon it as something distinct from the
general facts of chemistry, and something which the science would gain by throw-
ing off entirely. .. . On the one hand, all chemists use the atomic theory, and .. .
on the other hand, a considerable number view it with mistrust, some with positive
dislike. If the theory really is as uncertain and unnecessary as they imagine it to
*The reason for Dalton's opposition was that he did not realize (as Avogadro did) that the smallest
particles of a gaseous element are not necessarily atoms but may be molecules.
**The views of this remarkable man are most easily accessible in the English translation, published
in 1961, of an article he wrote in 1858 [Cl].
82 STATISTICAL PHYSICS
be, let its defects be laid bare and examined. Let them be remedied if possible, or
let the theory be rejected, and some other theory be used in its stead, if its defects
are really as irremediable and as grave as is implied by the sneers of its detractors'
[Wl].
As a final comment on chemistry in the nineteenth century, mention should be
made of another regularity bearing on the atomicity of matter and discovered in
that period. In an anonymous paper written in 1815, William Prout, a practising
physician in London with a great interest in chemistry, claimed to have shown
that the specific gravities of atomic species can be expressed as integral multiples
of a fundamental unit [PI]. In an addendum written the next year, and also pub-
lished anonymously [P2], he noted that this fundamental unit may be identified
with the specific gravity of hydrogen: 'We may almost consider the TT/OWTTJ uXi; of
the ancients to be realized in hydrogen.' Yet Prout did not consider his hypothesis
as a hint for the reality of atoms: 'The light in which I have always been accus-
tomed to consider it [the atomic theory] has been very analogous to that in which
I believe most botanists now consider the Linnean system; namely, as a conven-
tional artifice, exceedingly convenient for many purposes but which does not rep-
resent nature' [B2].
2. Kinetic Theory. The insight that gases are composed of discrete particles
dates back at least to the eighteenth century. Daniel Bernoulli may have been the
first to state that gas pressure is caused by the collisions of particles with the walls
within which they are contained [B3]. The nineteenth century masters of kinetic
theory were atornists—by definition, one might say. In Clausius's paper of 1857,
'On the Kind of Motion We Call Heat' [C2], the distinction between solids, liq-
uids, and gases is related to different types of molecular motion. In 1873, Maxwell
said, 'Though in the course of ages catastrophes have occurred and may yet occur
in the heavens, though ancient systems may be dissolved and new systems evolved
out of their ruins, the molecules [i.e., atoms!] out of which these systems [the earth
and the whole solar system] are built—the foundation stones of the material uni-
verse—remain unbroken and unworn. They continue this day as they were cre-
ated—perfect in number and measure and weight ...' [M4].*
Boltzmann was less emphatic and in fact reticent at times, but he could hardly
have developed his theory of the second law had he not believed in the particulate
structure of matter. His assertion that entropy increases almost always, rather
than always, was indeed very hard to swallow for those who did not believe in
molecular reality. Planck, then an outspoken skeptic, saw this clearly when in
1883 he wrote, 'The consistent implementation of the second law [i.e., to Planck,
increase of entropy as an absolute law] ... is incompatible with the assumption
of finite atoms. One may anticipate that in the course of the further development
of the theory a battle between these two hypotheses will develop which will cost
*Faraday had reservations. In 1844 he wrote, 'The atomic doctrine ... is at best an assumption of
the truth of which we can assert nothing, whatever we may say or think of its probability' [W2].
THE REALITY OF MOLECULES 83
one of them its life' [P3]. This is the battle which Ostwald joined in 1895 when
he addressed a meeting of the Deutsche Gesellschaft fur Naturforscher und Arzte:
'The proposition that all natural phenomena can ultimately be reduced to
mechanical ones cannot even be taken as a useful working hypothesis: it is simply
a mistake. This mistake is most clearly revealed by the following fact. All the
equations of mechanics have the property that they admit of sign inversion in the
temporal quantities. That is to say, theoretically perfectly mechanical processes
can develop equally well forward and backward [in time]. Thus, in a purely
mechanical world there could not be a before and an after as we have in our world:
the tree could become a shoot and a seed again, the butterfly turn back into a
caterpillar, and the old man into a child. No explanation is given by the mechan-
istic doctrine for the fact that this does not happen, nor can it be given because of
the fundamental property of the mechanical equations. The actual irreversibility
of natural phenomena thus proves the existence of processes that cannot be
described by mechanical equations; and with this the verdict on scientific materi-
alism is settled' [Ol]. It was in essence a replay of the argument given by Lo-
schmidt twenty years earlier.
Such were the utterances with which Boltzmann, also present at that meeting,
had to cope. We are fortunate to have an eye-witness report of the ensuing dis-
cussion from a young physicist who attended the conference, Arnold Sommerfeld.
'The paper on "Energetik" was given by Helm* from Dresden; behind him stood
Wilhelm Ostwald, behind both the philosophy of Ernst Mach, who was not pres-
ent. The opponent was Boltzmann, seconded by Felix Klein. Both externally and
internally, the battle between Boltzmann and Ostwald resembled the battle of the
bull with the supple fighter. However, this time the bull was victorious over the
torero in spite of the latter's artful combat. The arguments of Boltzmann carried
the day. We, the young mathematicians of that time, were all on the side of Boltz-
mann; it was entirely obvious to us that one could not possibly deduce the equa-
tions of motion for even a single mass point—let alone for a system with many
degrees of freedom—from the single energy equation ...' [SI]. As regards the
position of Ernst Mach, it was anti-atomistic but of a far more sober variety than
Ostwald's: 'It would not become physical science [said Mach] to see in its self-
created, changeable, economical tools, molecules and atoms, realities behind phe-
nomena ... the atom must remain a tool . . . like the function of mathematics'
[M5].
Long before these learned fin de siecle discourses took place, in fact long before
the laws of thermodynamics were formulated, theoretical attempts had begun to
estimate the dimensions of molecules. As early as 1816 Thomas Young noted that
'the diameter or distance of the particles of water is between the two thousand and
"The physicist Georg Helm was an ardent supporter of Ostwald's 'Energetik,' according to which
molecules and atoms are but mathematical fictions and energy, in its many forms, the prime physical
reality.
84 STATISTICAL PHYSICS
the ten thousand millionth of an inch' [Yl].* In 1866 Loschmidt calculated the
diameter of an air molecule and concluded that 'in the domain of atoms and mol-
ecules the appropriate measure of length is the millionth of the millimeter' [LI].
Four years later Kelvin, who regarded it 'as an established fact of science that a
gas consists of moving molecules,' found that 'the diameter of the gaseous molecule
cannot be less than 2.10~9 of a centimeter' [Tl]. In 1873 Maxwell stated that the
diameter of a hydrogen molecule is about 6.10~8 cm [M6]. In that same year
Johannes Diderik van der Waals reported similar results in his doctoral thesis
[W3]. By 1890 the spread in these values, and those obtained by others [B4], had
narrowed considerably. A review of the results up to the late 1880s placed the
radii of hydrogen and air molecules between 1 and 2.10~8 cm [R2], a remarkably
sensible range. Some of the physicists just mentioned used methods that enabled
them to also determine Avogadro's number N, the number of molecules per mole.
For example, Loschmidt's calculations of 1866 imply that N « 0.5 X 1023 [LI],
and Maxwell found N « 4 X 1023 [M6]. The present best value [D3] is
* Young arrived at this estimate by a rather obscure argument relating the surface tension to the
range of the molecular forces and then equating this range with the molecular diameter. Rayleigh,
along with many others, had trouble understanding Young's reasoning [Rl].
**This relation was derived by Clausius and Maxwell. The constant is equal to I/y2 if one uses
the Maxwell velocity distribution of identical molecules. Loschmidt used Clausius's value of %, which
follows if all the gas molecules are assumed to have the same speed. References to refinements of
Loschmidt's calculations are found in [T2].Toward the end of the nineteenth century, the spread in the various determina-
tions of N was roughly 1022 to 1024, an admirable achievement in view of the
crudeness—stressed by all who worked on the subject—of the models and meth-
ods used.
This is not the place to deal with the sometimes obscure and often wonderful
physics contained in these papers, in which the authors strike out into unexplored
territory. However, an exception should be made for the work of Loschmidt [LI]
since it contains a characteristic element which—as we shall soon see—recurs in
the Einstein papers of 1905 on molecular radii and Avogadro's number: the use
of two simultaneous equations in which two unknowns, N, and the molecular
diameter d, are expressed in terms of physically known quantities.
The first of the equations used by Loschmidt is the relation between d, the mean
free path X, and the number n of molecules per unit volume of a hard-sphere gas:
Xnird2 = a calculable constant.** The second relation concerns the quantity
nird^/6, the fraction of the unit volume occupied by the molecules. Assume that
in the liquid phase these particles are closely packed. Then nird*/6 = p^/l. 17
Aiquid; where the p's are the densities in the respective phases and the geometric
factor 1.17 is Loschmidt's estimate for the ratio of the volume occupied by the
molecules in the liquid phase and their proper volume. Thus we have two equa-
THE REALITY OF MOLECULES 85
tions for n (hence for N) and d. (Loschmidt applied his reasoning to air, for which
A was known experimentally. However, in order to estimate the densities of liquid
oxygen and nitrogen, he had to use indirect theoretical estimates.)
It is not surprising that, on the whole, molecular reality met with less early
resistance in physics than it did in chemistry. As is exemplified by Loschmidt's
1866 calculation, physicists could already do things with molecules at a time when
chemists could, for most purposes, take them to be real or leave them as coding
devices. However, it became increasingly difficult in chemical circles to deny the
reality of molecules after 1874, the year in which Jacobus Henricus van 't Hoff
and Joseph Achille Le Bel independently explained the isomerism of certain
organic substances in terms of stereochemical properties of carbon compounds.
Even then skeptics did not yield at once (van 't Hoff himself was initially quite
cautious on the issue, [N2]). But by the 1880s, the power of a truly molecular
picture was widely recognized.
In order to complete this survey of topics bearing on molecular reality prior to
the time Einstein got involved, it is necessary to add two further remarks.
3. The End of Indivisibility. Until the very last years of the nineteenth cen-
tury, most if not all physicists who believed in the reality of atoms shared Max-
well's view that these particles remain unbroken and unworn. 'They are . .. the
only material things which still remain in the precise condition in which they first
began to exist,' he wrote in his book Theory of Heat [M7], which contains the
finest expression of his atomic credo.* It is true that many of these same physicists
(Maxwell among them) were convinced that something had to rattle inside the
atom in order to explain atomic spectra. Therefore, while there was a need for a
picture of the atom as a body with structure, this did not mean (so it seemed) that
one could take the atom apart. However, in 1899, two years after his discovery of
the electron, Joseph John Thomson announced that the atom had been split:
'Electrification [that is, ionization] essentially involves the splitting of the atom, a
part of the mass of the atom getting free and becoming detached from the original
atom' [T3]. By that time it was becoming increasingly clear that radioactive phe-
nomena (first discovered in 1896) also had to be explained in terms of a divisible
atom. 'Atoms [of radioactive elements], indivisible from the chemical point of view,
are here divisible,' Marie Curie wrote in 1900 [C3]. She added that the expla-
nation of radioactivity in terms of the expulsion of subatomic particles 'seriously
undermines the principles of chemistry.' In 1902 Ernest Rutherford and Frederick
Soddy proposed their transformation theory, according to which radioactive bodies
contain unstable atoms, a fixed fraction of which decay per unit time. Forty years
later, a witness to this event characterized the mood of those early times: 'It must
be difficult if not impossible for the young physicist or chemist to realize how
*To Maxwell, electrolytic dissociation was not at variance with the indivisibility of atoms—but that
is another story.
86 STATISTICAL PHYSICS
extremely bold [the transformation theory] was and how unacceptable to the
atomists of the time' [R3].
Thus, at the turn of the century, the classical atomists, those who believed both
in atoms and in their indivisibility, were under fire from two sides. There was a
rapidly dwindling minority of conservatives, led by the influential Ostwald and
Mach, who did not believe in atoms at all. At the same time a new breed arose,
people such as J. J. Thomson, the Curies, and Rutherford, all convinced of the
reality of atoms and all—though not always without trepidation, as in the case of
Marie Curie—aware of the fact that chemistry was not the last chapter in particle
physics. For them, the ancient speculations about atoms had become reality and
the old dream of transmutation had become inevitable.
4. The End of Invisibility. If there was one issue on which there was agree-
ment between physicists and chemists, atomists or not, it was that atoms, if they
exist at all, are too small to be seen. Perhaps no one expressed this view more
eloquently than van der Waals in the closing lines of his 1873 doctoral thesis,
where he expressed the hope that his work might contribute to bringing closer the
time when 'the motion of the planets and the music of the spheres will be forgotten
for a while in admiration of the delicate and artful web formed by the orbits of
those invisible atoms' [W3].
Direct images of atoms were at last produced in the 1950s with the field ion
microscope [M8]. In a broad sense of the word, particles smaller than atoms were
'seen' much earlier, of course. At the turn of the century, alpha particles were
perceived as scintillations on zinc sulfide screens, electrons as tracks in a cloud
chamber. In an 1828 paper entitled, in part, 'A Brief Account of Microscopical
Observations Made in the Months of June, July and August, 1827, on the Par-
ticles Contained in the Pollen of Plants' [B5], the botanist Robert Brown reported
seeing the random motion of various kinds of particles sufficiently fine to be sus-
pended in water. He examined fragments of pollen particles, 'dust or soot depos-
ited on all bodies in such quantity, especially in London,' particles from pulverized
rock, including a fragment from the Sphinx, and others. Today, we say that
Brown saw the action of the water molecules pushing against the suspended
objects. But that way of phrasing what we see in Brownian motion is as dependent
on theoretical analysis as is the statement that a certain cloud chamber track can
be identified as an electron.
In the case of Brownian motion, this analysis was given by Einstein, who
thereby became the first to make molecules visible. As a last preparatory step
toward Einstein's analysis, I must touch briefly on what was known about dilute
solutions in the late nineteenth century.
5b. The Pots of Pfeffer and the Laws of van 't Hoff
In the mid-1880s, van 't Hoff, then professor of chemistry, mineralogy, and geol-
ogy at the University of Amsterdam, discovered in the course of his studies of
THE REALITY OF MOLECULES 87
chemical equilibrium in solutions 'that there is a fundamental analogy, nay almost
an identity, with gases, more especially in their physical aspect, if only in solutions
we consider the so-called osmotic pressure.. . . We are not here dealing with a
fanciful analogy, but with one which is fundamental' [HI]. The experimental
basis for these discoveries was provided by the measurements on osmosis through
rigid membranes performed a decade earlier by Wilhelm Pfeffer, then an extraor-
dinarius in Bonn [P4].
Let us first recall what van 't Hoff meant by the osmotic pressure. Consider a
vessel filled with fluid, the solvent. A subvolume V of the fluid is enclosed by a
membrane that is fully permeable with respect to the solvent. Another species of
molecules, the solute, is inserted in V. If the membrane is fully impermeable to
the solute, solvent will stream into V until equilibrium is reached. In equilibrium,
the pressure on the membrane is an osmotic pressure. If the membrane has some
degree of elasticity, then this pressure will cause the membrane to dilate. For the
special case where the membrane is rigid and unyielding, the pressure exerted on
it is the osmotic pressure to which van 't Hoff referred and which we shall always
have in mind in what follows. (This pressure can be sizable; for example, a 1%
sugar solution exerts a pressure of % atm.)
It is one of the great merits of Pfeffer, renowned also for his work in botany
and plant physiology, that he was the first to prepare such rigid membranes. He
did this by placing unglazed, porous, porcelain pots filled with an aqueous solution
of K3Fe(CN)6 in a bath filled with copper sulfate. The resulting precipitate of
Gu2Fe(CN)6 in the pores of the porcelain pots constituted the rigid membrane.
Pfeffer performed elaborate measurements with his new tool. His results led him
to suspect that 'evidently there had to exist some connection between osmotic [pres-
sure] on the one hand and the size and number of molecules on the other' [C4].
The connection conjectured by Pfeffer was found by Einstein and reported in his
doctoral thesis, with the help of the laws found by van 't Hoff. In turn, van 't
Hoff's purely phenomenological discovery was based exclusively on the analysis
of data obtained by Pfeffer.
Van 't Hoff's laws apply to ideal solutions, 'solutions which are diluted to such
an extent that they are comparable to ideal gases' [HI].* For such ideal solutions,
his laws can be phrased as follows (it is assumed that no electrolytic dissociation
takes place):
1. In equilibrium, one has
independent of the nature of the solvent. In this analog of the Boyle-Gay-Lus-
sac law, p is the osmotic pressure, V the volume enclosed by the rigid mem-
brane, T the temperature, and R' a constant.
"Van 't Hoff noted that a negligible heat of dilution is a practical criterion for solutions to be ideal.
88 STATISTICAL PHYSICS
2. The extension of Avogadro's law: equal volumes of solutions at the same p and
T contain the same number of solute molecules. This number is equal to the
number of gas molecules at the same (gas) pressure p and the same T. Hence,
for one gram-mole
where R is the gas constant. Thus, after van 't Hoff, the liquid phase offered
a new way of measuring the gas constant and, consequently, new possibilities
for the determination of Avogadro's number.
'The fact that the dissolved molecules of a diluted solution exert on a semi-
permeable membrane—in spite of the presence of the solvent—exactly the same
pressure as if they alone were present, and that in the ideal gas state—this fact is
so startling that attempts have repeatedly been made to find a kinetic interpreta-
tion that was as lucid as possible', Ehrenfest wrote in 1915 [El]. Einstein briefly
discussed the statistical derivation of van 't HofFs laws in 1905 [E2]; more impor-
tant, however, are the applications he made of these laws.
In 1901, van 't Hoff became the first to receive the Nobel prize for chemistry.
The presentation speech delivered on that occasion illustrates vividly that, at the
beginning of the twentieth century, molecular reality had become widely accepted
among chemists as well as physicists: 'He proved that gas pressure and osmotic
pressure are identical, and thereby that the molecules themselves in the gaseous
phase and in solutions are also identical. As a result of this, the concept of the
molecule in chemistry was found to be definite and universally valid to a degree
hitherto undreamed of [N3].
5c. The Doctoral Thesis
In his PhD thesis, Einstein described a new theoretical method for determining
molecular radii and Avogadro's number. From a comparison of his final equations
with data on sugar solutions in water, he found that
The printed version of his thesis [E3] carries the dedication 'to my friend Marcel
Grossman' and gives April 30, 1905, as the completion date. Einstein did not sub-
mit his dissertation to the dean of the philosophical faculty, Section II, at the
University of Zurich until July 20 [E4]. This delay may have had its technical
reasons. More important, probably, was the fact that, between April and July,
Einstein was rather busy with other things: during those months he completed his
first papers on Brownian motion and on the special theory of relativity. The thesis
was rapidly accepted. On July 24* the dean forwarded to the faculty for their
'Einstein later recalled that, after having been told that the manuscript was too short, he added one
sentence, whereupon it was accepted [S2]. I have found no trace of such a communication, nor is it
clear to me when this exchange could have taken place.
THE REALITY OF MOLECULES 89
approval the favorable reports by Kleiner and by Burkhardt, who had been asked
by Kleiner to check the most important parts of the calculations. The faculty
approved (Burkhardt had failed to note a rather important mistake in Einstein's
calculations—but that comes later). Einstein was now Herr Doktor.
It is not sufficiently realized that Einstein's thesis is one of his most fundamental
papers. Histories and biographies invariably refer to 1905 as the miraculous year
because of his articles on relativity, the light-quantum, and Brownian motion. In
my opinion, the thesis is on a par with the Brownian motion article. In fact, in
some—not all—respects, his results on Brownian motion are by-products of his
thesis work. This goes a long way toward explaining why the paper on Brownian
motion was received by the Annalen der Physik on May 11, 1905, only eleven
days after the thesis had been completed.
Three weeks after the thesis was accepted, this same journal received a copy
(without dedication) for publication. It was published [E5] only after Einstein
supplied a brief addendum in January 1906 (I shall refer to this paper as the
1906 paper). As a result of these various delays, the thesis appeared as a paper in
the Annalen der Physik only after the Brownian motion article had come out in
the same journal. This may have helped create the impression in some quarters
(see, for example, [L2]) that the relation between diffusion and viscosity—a very
important equation due to Einstein and Sutherland—was first obtained in Ein-
stein's paper on Brownian motion. Actually, it first appeared in his thesis.
In the appendix to the 1906 paper, Einstein gave a new and (as turned out
later) improved value for TV:
Quite apart from the fundamental nature of some results obtained in the thesis,
there is another reason why this paper is of uncommon interest: it has had more
widespread practical applications than any other paper Einstein ever wrote.
The patterns of scientific reference as traced through the study of citations are,
as with Montaigne's description of the human mind, ondoyant et divers.
The history of Einstein's influence on later works, as expressed by the frequency
of citations of his papers, offers several striking examples. Of the eleven scientific
articles published by any author before 1912 and cited most frequently between
1961 and 1975, four are by Einstein. Among these four, the thesis (or, rather, the
1906 paper) ranks first; then follows a sequel to it (to which I return later in this
section), written in 1911. The Brownian motion paper ranks third, the paper on
critical opalescence fourth. At the top of the list of Einstein's scientific articles cited
most heavily during the years 1970 to 1974 is the 1906 paper. It was quoted four
times as often as Einstein's first survey article of 1916 on general relativity and
eight times as often as his 1905 paper on the light-quantum [C5].The large difference between this value and his value of eight months earlier was
entirely due to the availability of better data on sugar solutions.
90 STATISTICAL PHYSICS
Of course, relative citation frequencies are no measure of relative importance.
Who has not aspired to write a paper so fundamental that very soon it is known
to everyone and cited by no one? It is nevertheless obvious that there must be valid
reasons for the popularity of Einstein's thesis. These are indeed not hard to find:
the thesis, dealing with bulk rheological properties of particle suspensions, con-
tains results which have an extraordinarily wide range of applications. They are
relevant to the construction industry (the motion of sand particles in cement mixes
[R4]), to the dairy industry (the motion of casein micelles in cow's milk [D4]),
and to ecology (the motion of aerosol particles in clouds [Y2]), to mention but a
few scattered examples. Einstein might have enjoyed hearing this, since he was
quite fond of applying physics to practical situations.
Let us consider Einstein's Doktorarbeit in some detail. His first step is hydro-
dynamic. Consider the stationary flow of an incompressible, homogeneous fluid.
If effects of acceleration are neglected, then the motion of the fluid is described by
the Navier-Stokes equations:
where v is the velocity, p the hydrostatic pressure, and 77 the viscosity. Next, insert
a large number of identical, rigid, spherical particles in the fluid. The radius of
the solute particles is taken to be large compared with the radius of the solvent
molecules so that the solvent can still be treated as a continuum. The solution is
supposed to be dilute; the total volume of the particles is much smaller than the
volume of the liquid. Assume further that (1) the overall motion of the system is
still Navier-Stokes, (2) the inertia of the solute particles in translation and their
rotational motion can be neglected, (3) there are no external forces, (4) the motion
of any one of the little spheres is not affected by the presence of any other little
sphere, (5) the particles move under the influence of hydrodynamic stresses at
their surface only, and (6) the boundary condition of the flow velocity v is taken
to be v = 0 on the surface of the spheres. Then, Einstein showed, the flow can
still be described by Eq. 5.6 provided rj is replaced by a new 'effective viscosity'
77*, given by
where <p is the fraction of the unit volume occupied by the (uniformly distributed)
spheres. Let the hard spheres represent molecules (which do not dissociate). Then
where ./V is Avogadro's number, a the molecular radius, m the molecular weight
of the solute, and p the amount of mass of the solute per unit volume. Einstein
had available to him values for rf/rj for dilute solutions of sugar in water, and <p
THE REALITY OF MOLECULES 91
and m were also known. Thus Eqs. 5.7 and 5.8 represent one relation between
the two unknowns N and a.
The next thing that Einstein of course did (in the spirit of Loschmidt*) was
find a second connection between N and a. To this end, he used a reasoning which
is partly thermodynamic, partly dynamic. This argument is sketched in his thesis
and repeated in mbre detail in his first paper on Brownian motion [E2]. It is
extremely ingenious.
Consider first an ideal gas and a time-independent force K acting on its mole-
cules in the negative x direction. The force exerted per unit volume equals KpN/
m. In thermal equilibrium, the balance between this force and the gas pressure p
is given by
where R is the gas constant. Now, Einstein reasoned, according to van 't Hoff's
law, Eq. 5.9 should also hold for dilute solutions as long as the time-independent
force K acts only on the solute molecules.
Let K impart a velocity v (relative to the solvent) to the molecules of the solute.
If the mean free path of the solvent molecules is much less than the diameter of
the solute molecules, then (also in view of the boundary condition v = 0 on the
surface of the solute particles) we have the well-known Stokes relation
Then, from the thermal equilibrium condition (Eq. 5.9) and the dynamic equilib-
rium condition (Eq. 5.11)
*See Section 5a. The only nineteenth century method for finding N and a that Einstein discussed
in his 1915 review article on kinetic theory [E6] was the one by Loschmidt.Observe that the force K has canceled out in Eq. 5.12. The trick was therefore to
use K only as an intermediary quantity to relate the diffusion coefficient to theso that, under the influence of K, KpN/6irrjam solute molecules pass in the neg-
ative x direction per unit area per second. The resulting concentration gradient
leads to a diffusion in the x direction of DN/m. (dp/dx) particles/cm2/sec, where,
by definition, D is the diffusion coefficient. Dynamic equilibrium demands that
the magnitude of the diffusion current equal the magnitude of the current induced
by K:
92 STATISTICAL PHYSICS
viscosity in the Stokes regime. Equation 5.12 is the second relation for the two
unknowns N and a.
By a quite remarkable coincidence, Eq. 5.12 was discovered in Australia at
practically the same time Einstein did his thesis work. In March 1905 William
Sutherland submitted a paper that contained the identical result, arrived at by the
method just described [S2a]. Thus, Eq. 5.12 should properly be called the Suth-
erland-Einstein relation.
Note that the derivation of Eq. 5.12 is essentially independent of any details
regarding the motion of the solute particles. Therein lies the strength of the argu-
ment that, as a theme with variations, recurs a number of times in Einstein's later
work: a 'systematic force,' a drag force of the Stokesian type (that is, proportional
to the velocity) balances with a random, or fluctuating, force. In the present case,
as well as for Brownian motion, the fluctuating force is the one generated by the
thermal molecular motions in the environment, the fluctuations leading to a net
diffusion. Later, in 1909 and again in 1917, Einstein was to use the balance
between a Stokesian force and a fluctuating force generated by electromagnetic
radiation.
As to the contents of Einstein's thesis, all was quiet for the five years following
its publication. Then a Mr. Bacelin, a pupil of Jean Baptiste Perrin's, informed
Einstein of measurements which gave a value for 77* that was too high to be com-
patible with Eq. 5.7. As we shall see in the next section, by this time Perrin had
a very good idea how big TV had to be. Therefore, 77* could now be computed
(knowing a from other sources) and the result could be compared with experi-
ment! Upon hearing this news, Einstein set one of his own pupils to work, who
discovered that there was an elementary but nontrivial mistake in the derivation
of Eq. 5.7. The correct result is [E7]
With the same data that Einstein had used earlier to obtain Eq. 5.5, the new value
for TV is
a far better result, on which I shall comment further in the next section.
In conclusion, it is now known that Einstein's Eq. 5.13 is valid only for values
of ip < 0.02.* Theoretical studies of corrections 0(<p2) to the rhs of Eq. 5.13 were
made as late as 1977. Effects that give rise to <p2 terms are two-particle correlations
[B6] and also a phenomenon not yet discussed in the thesis: the Brownian motion
of the solute particles [B7],
*See the reviews by Rutgers, which contain detailed comparisons of theory with experiment, as well
as a long list of proposals to modify Eq. 5.13 [R5].
THE REALITY OF MOLECULES 93
5d. Eleven Days Later: Brownian Motion*
1. Another Bit of Nineteenth Century History. During the nineteenth century,
it had become clear from experiments performed in various laboratories that
Brownian motions increase with decreasing size and density of the suspended par-
ticles (10~3 mm is a typical particle radius above which these motions are hardly
observable) and with decreasing viscosity and increasing temperature of the host
liquid. Another important outcome of this early research was that it narrowed
down the number of possible explanations of this phenomenon, beginning with
Brown's own conclusion that it had nothing to do with small things that are alive.
Further investigations eliminated such causes as temperature gradients, mechan-
ical disturbances, capillary actions, irradiation of the liquid (as long as the result-
ing temperature increase can be neglected), and the presence of convection currents
within the liquid. As can be expected, not all of these conclusions were at once
generally accepted without controversy.
In the 1860s, the view emerged that the cause of the phenomenon was to be
found in the internal motions of the fluid. From then on, it did not take long before
the more specific suggestion was made that the zigzag motions of the suspended
particles were due to collisions with the molecules of the fluid. At least three phys-
icists proposed this independently: Giovanni Cantoni from Pavia and the two Bel-
gian Jesuits Joseph Delsaulx and Ignace Carbonelle. Of course, this was a matter
of speculation rather than proof. 'Io penso che il moto di danza delle particelle
solide .. . possa attribuirsi alle different! velocita che esser devono .. . sia in coteste
particelli solide, sia nelle molecole del liquido che le urtano da ogni banda,' wrote
Cantoni [C6].** '[Les] mouvements browniens . .. seraient, dans ma maniere de
considerer le phenomene, le resultat des mouvements moleculaires calorifiques du
liquide ambiant,' wrote Delsaulx [D5].f
However, these proposals soon met with strong opposition, led by the Swiss
botanist Carl von Naegeli and by William Ramsey. Their counterargument was
based on the incorrect assumption that every single zig or zag in the path of a
suspended particle should be due to a single collision with an individual molecule.
Even though experiments were not very quantitative at that time, it was not dif-
ficult to realize that this assumption led to absurdities. Nevertheless, the expla-
* Einstein's papers on Brownian motion as well as the 1906 paper have been collected in a handy
little book by Fiirth [Fl, F2]. A useful though not complete set of references to nineteenth century
experimental work and theoretical speculation can be found in a paper by Smoluchowski [S3]; see
also [B8] and [N4].
**I believe that the dancing motion of the solid particles .. . can be attributed to the different veloc-
ities which ought to be ascribed . .. either to the said solid particles, or to the molecules of the liquid
which hit [these solid particles] from all directions.
fin my way of considering the phenomenon, the Brownian motions should be the consequence of
the molecular heat motions of the ambient liquid.
94 STATISTICAL PHYSICS
nation in terms of molecular collisions was not entirely abandoned. Take, for
example, the case of Louis Georges Gouy, who did some of the best nineteenth
century experiments on Brownian motion. He agreed with the remark by Naegeli
and Ramsey, but conjectured that the molecules in liquids travel in organized
bunches so that an individual kick imparted to a suspended particle would be due
to the simultaneous action of a large number of molecules.
Gouy was also the first to note that it was not easy to comprehend Brownian
motion from a thermodynamic point of view. It seemed possible to him—at least
in principle—that one could construct a perpetuum mobile of the second kind
driven by those ceaseless movements (It should be mentioned that the explicit dis-
proof of this statement is delicate. The best paper on this question is by Leo Szi-
lard [S4].). This led Gouy to express the belief that Carnot's principle (the second
law of thermodynamics) might not apply to domains with linear dimensions of the
order of one micrometer [G2].
Poincare—often called on at the turn of the century to pronounce on the status
of physics—brought these ideas to the attention of large audiences. In his opening
address to the 1900 International Congress of Physics in Paris, he remarked, after
referring to Gouy's ideas on Brownian motion, 'One would believe seeing Max-
well's demon at work' [P5]. In a lecture entitled 'The Crises of Mathematical
Physics,' given before the Congress of Arts and Science in St. Louis in 1904, he
put Carnot's principle at the head of his list of endangered general laws: '[Brown]
first thought that [Brownian motion] was a vital phenomenon, but soon he saw
that inanimate bodies dance with no less ardor than the others; then he turned the
matter over to the physicists.. .. We see under our eyes now motion transformed
into heat by friction, now heat changed inversely into motion. This is the contrary
of Carnot's principle' [P6].
2. The Overdetermination of N. In 1905, Einstein was blissfully unaware of
the detailed history of Brownian motion. At that time, he knew neither Poincare's
work on relativity nor the latter's dicta 'On the Motion Required by the Molec-
ular Kinetic Theory of Heat of Particles Suspended in Fluids at Rest,' as Einstein
entitled his first paper on Brownian motion [E2]. In referring to fluids at rest, he
clearly had in mind the fluids in motion dealt with in his previous paper, finished
eleven days earlier. The absence of the term Brownian motion in this title is
explained in the second sentence of the paper: 'It is possible that the motions dis-
cussed here are identical with the so-called Brownian molecular motion; the ref-
erences accessible to me on the latter subject are so imprecise, however, that I
could not form an opinion about this.'
This paper, received by the Annalen der Physik on May 11, 1905, marks the
third occasion in less than two months on which Einstein makes a fundamental
discovery bearing on the determination of Avogadro's number. The three methods
are quite distinct. The first one (submitted to the Annalen on March 18, 1905),
in which use is made of the long-wavelength limit of the blackbody radiation law,
THE REALITY OF MOLECULES 95
gave him N = 6.17 X 1023 (!).* The second one makes use of the incompressible
flow of solutions and gave him TV = 2.1 X 1023, as we saw in the previous section.
The third one, on Brownian motion, gave him a formula but not yet a number.
'May some researcher soon succeed in deciding the question raised here, which is
important for the theory of heat,' he wrote at the end of this paper.** Even though
he did not know the literature, he was right in surmising that the appropriate data
were not yet available. It would soon be otherwise. Incidentally, neither in his
thesis nor in his Brownian motion paper does Einstein mention that in 1905 he
had made not just one but several proposals for determining N. If sparseness of
references to the work of others is typical of his writings, so it is with references
to his own work. He never was a man to waste much time on footnotes.
Einstein was still not done with the invention of new ways for obtaining Avo-
gadro's number. Later in the year, in December, he finished his second paper on
Brownian motion, which contains two further methods for finding N [E8]. In
1907 he noted that measurements of voltage fluctuations give another means for
determining TV [E9]. In 1910 he gave yet another method, critical opalescence
[E10]. He must have realized that the ubiquity of TV would once and for all settle
the problem of molecular reality, as indeed it did.
It was indicated earlier that, as the nineteenth century drew to an end, the
acceptance of the reality of atoms and molecules was widespread, though there
were still some pockets of resistance. Nevertheless, it is correct to say that the
debate on molecular reality came to a close only as a result of developments in the
first decade of the twentieth century. This was not just because of Einstein's first
paper on Brownian motion or of any single good determination of N. Rather, the
issue was settled once and for all because of the extraordinary agreement in the
values of N obtained by many different methods. Matters were clinched not by a
determination but by an overdetermination of TV. From subjects as diverse as
radioactivity, Brownian motion, and the blue in the sky, it was possible to state,
by 1909, that a dozen independent ways of measuring TV yielded results all of
which lay between 6 and 9 X 1023. In concluding his 1909 memoir on the subject,
Perrin [P7, P8] had every reason to state, 'I think it is impossible that a mind free
from all preconception can reflect upon the extreme diversity of the phenomena
which thus converge to the same result without experiencing a strong impression,
and I think that it will henceforth be difficult to defend by rational arguments a
hostile attitude to molecular hypotheses' [P8].f
3. Einstein's First Paper on Brownian Motion. Enlarging on an earlier com-
ment, I shall explain next in what sense this first paper on Brownian motion is
* See Section 19b.
**I heed Einstein's remark [E2] that his molecular-kinetic derivation of van 't Hoff's law, also
contained in this article, is not essential to an understanding of the rest of his arguments.
fFor the status of our knowledge about N in 1980, see [D3].
where n(x, t) is the number of particles per unit volume around x at time t.
The essence of Einstein's attack on Brownian motion is his observation that, as
far as these three facts are concerned, what is good for solutions is good for
suspensions:
1. Van 't Hoff's laws should hold not only for dilute solutions but also for dilute
suspensions: 'One does not see why for a number of suspended bodies the same
osmotic pressure should not hold as for the same number of dissolved mole-
cules' [E2].
2. Without making an explicit point of it, Einstein assumes that Stokes's law
holds. Recall that this implies that the liquid is treated as a continuous medium.
(It also implies that the suspended particles all have the same radius.)
3. Brownian motion is described as a diffusion process subject to Eq. 5.15. (For
simplicity, Einstein treats the motion as a one-dimensional problem.)
Now then, consider the fundamental solution of Eq. 5.15 corresponding to a
situation in which at time t = 0 all particles are at the origin:96 STATISTICAL PHYSICS
a scholium to the doctoral thesis. To this end, I return to the relation between the
diffusion coefficient D and the viscosity 17 discussed previously
where a is the radius of the hard-sphere molecules dissolved in the liquid. Recall
the following main points that went into the derivation of Eq. 5.12:
1. The applicability of van 't Kofi's laws (Eqs. 5.2 and 5.3)
2. The validity of Stokes's law (Eq. 5.10)
3. The mechanism of diffusion in the x direction, described by the equation (not
explicitly used in the foregoing)
where n = \n(x)dx. Then, the mean square displacement (x2) from the origin
is given by
THE REALITY OF MOLECULES 97
In this, Einstein's fundamental equation for Brownian motion, (x2), t, a, 77 are
measurable; therefore TV can be determined. As mentioned earlier, one never
ceases to experience surprise at this result, which seems, as it were, to come out
of nowhere: prepare a set of small spheres which are nevertheless huge compared
with simple molecules, use a stopwatch and a microscope, and find Avogadro's
number.
As Einstein emphasized, it is not necessary to assume that all particles are at
the origin at t = 0. That is to say, since the particles are assumed to move inde-
pendently, one can consider n(x,t)dx to mean the number of particles displaced
by an amount between x and x + dx in t seconds. He gave an example: for water
at 17°C, a « 0.001 mm, N « 6 X 1023, one has (x2)1/2 « 6 urn if t = 1
minute.
Equation 5.18 is the first instance of a fluctuation-dissipation relation: a mean
square fluctuation is connected with a dissipative mechanism phenomenologically
described by the viscosity parameter.
Einstein's paper immediately drew widespread attention. In September 1906
he received a letter from Wilhelm Conrad Roentgen asking him for a reprint of
the papers on relativity. In the same letter Roentgen also expressed great interest
in Einstein's work on Brownian motion, asked him for his opinion on Gouy's
ideas and added, 'It is probably difficult to establish harmony between [Brownian
motion] and the second law of thermodynamics' [R6]. It is hard to imagine that
Einstein would not have replied to such a distinguished colleague. Unfortunately,
Einstein's answer (if there was one) has not been located.
4. Diffusion as a Markovian Process. All the main physics of the first Einstein
paper on Brownian motion is contained in Eq. 5.18. However, this same paper
contains another novelty, again simple, again profound, having to do with the
interpretation of Eq. 5.15. This equation dates from the nineteenth century and
was derived and applied in the context of continuum theories. In 1905 Einstein,
motivated by his reflections on Brownian motion, gave a new derivation of the
diffusion equation.
As was already done in the derivation of Eq. 5.12, assume (Einstein said) that
the suspended particles move independently of each other. Assume further that we
can define a time interval T that is small compared with the time interval of obser-
vation (t in Eq. 5.18) while at the same time T is so large that the motion of a
particle during one interval r does not depend on its history prior to the com-
mencement of that interval. Let $(A)<iA be the probability that a particle is dis-
placed, in an interval r, by an amount between A and A + c/A. The probability
0 is normalized and symmetric:
STATISTICAL PHYSICS
Since the particles move independently, we can relate n(x,t + r)dx to the distri-
bution at time t by
Develop the Ihs to first order in T, the rhs to second order in A, and use Eq. 5.19.
Then we recover Eq. 5.15, where D is now defined as the second moment of the
probability distribution 0:
All information on the dynamics of collision is contained in the explicit form of
$(A). The great virtue of Eq. 5.18 is therefore that it is independent of all details
of the collision phenomena except for the very general conditions that went into
the derivation of Eq. 5.21.
Today we would say that, in 1905, Einstein treated diffusion as a Markovian
process (so named after Andrei Andreievich Markov, who introduced the so-called
Markov chains in 1906), thereby establishing a link between the random walk of
a single particle and the diffusion of many particles.
5. The Later Papers. I give next a brief review of the main points contained
in Einstein's later papers on Brownian motion.
1) December 1905 [E8]. Having been informed by colleagues that the consid-
erations of the preceding paper indeed fit, as to order of magnitude, with the
experimental knowledge on Brownian motion, Einstein entitles his new paper 'On
the Theory of Brownian Motion.' He gives two new applications of his earlier
ideas: the vertical distribution of a suspension under the influence of gravitation
and the Brownian rotational motion for the case of a rotating solid sphere. Cor-
respondingly, he finds two new equations from which N can be determined. He
also notes that Eq. 5.18 cannot hold for small values of t since that equation
implies that the mean velocity, (x2)^2/t, becomes infinite as t —* 0. 'The reason
for this is that we ... implicitly assumed that, during the time t, the phenomenon
is independent of [what happened] in earlier times. This assumption applies less
well as t gets smaller.'*
2) December 1906 [E9]. A brief discussion of 'a phenomenon in the domain
of electricity which is akin to Brownian motion': the (temperature-dependent)
mean square fluctuations in the potential between condensor plates.
3) January 1907 [Ell]. Einstein raises and answers the following question.
Since the suspension is assumed to obey van 't HofFs law, it follows from the
equipartition theorem that (v2), the mean square of the instantaneous particle
velocity, equals 3RT/mN (m is the mass of the suspended particle). Thus, (v2)
*The general solution for all ( was given independently by Ornstein [O2] and Fiirth [F3].98
THE REALITY OF MOLECULES 99
is larger by many orders of magnitude than {x2) /t2, the squared average velocity
computed from Eq. 5.18 for reasonable values of t. Is this paradoxical? It is not,
since one can estimate that the instantaneous velocity changes magnitude and
direction in periods of about 10~7 s; (v2) is therefore unobservable in Brownian
motion experiments. Here is also the answer to the Naegeli-Ramsey objection.
4) 1908. At the suggestion of the physical chemist Richard Lorenz, Einstein
writes an elementary expose of the theory of Brownian motion [E12].
This completes the account of Einstein's contributions to Brownian motion in
the classical domain. Applications to the quantum theory will be discussed in Part
VI. I conclude with a few scattered comments on the subsequent history of clas-
sical Brownian motion.
Einstein's relation (Eq. 5.18) is now commonly derived with the help of the
Langevin equation (derived by Paul Langevin in 1908 [L3]). The first review
article on Brownian motion appeared in 1909 [Jl]. In later years, the subject
branched out in many directions, including the behavior for small values of t, the
non-Stokesian case, and the presence of external forces [W4]. Brownian motion
was still a subject of active research in the 1970s [B9].
The rapid experimental confirmation of Einstein's theory by a new generation
of experiments, in particular the key role of Jean Perrin and his school, has been
described by Nye [Nl]. Perrin's own account in his book Les Atomes [P9], first
published in 1913 (and also available in English translation [P10]), remains as
refreshing as ever.* This work contains not only an account of the determination
of TV from Brownian motion but also a summary of all methods for determining
N which had been put to the test at that time. It is remarkable that the method
proposed by Einstein in his thesis is missing. I mentioned earlier that a commu-
nication by a pupil of Perrin had led Einstein to discover a mistake in his thesis.
Perrin must have known about this, since Einstein wrote to him shortly afterward
to thank him for this information and to inform him of the correct result [El3].
Einstein's very decent value for ./V (Eq. 5.14) was published in 1911. Its absence
in Perrin's book indicates that Einstein's doctoral thesis was not widely appreci-
ated in the early years. This is also evident from a brief note published by Einstein
in 1920 [El4] for the sole purpose of drawing attention to his erratum published
in 1911 [E7] 'which till now seems to have escaped the attention of all who work
in this field.'
'I had believed it to be impossible to investigate Brownian motion so precisely,'
Einstein wrote to Perrin from Zurich late in 1909 [El5]. This letter also shows
that, by that time, Einstein's preoccupation had moved to the quantum theory. He
asked Perrin if any significance should be attached to the 15 per cent difference
between the values of ./V obtained from Planck's blackbody radiation law and from
*Perrin's collected papers are also strongly recommended [Pll].
100 STATISTICAL PHYSICS
Brownian motion. This difference seemed to him to be 'disquieting, since one must
say that the theoretical foundation of Planck's formula is fictitious.'
The foregoing account of Einstein's work on Brownian motion emphasizes its
role in securing general acceptance of the reality of molecules. That, however, was
not the only thing nor, in Einstein's own opinion, the most important thing that
his theory of Brownian motion did for the development of physics. In 1915, he
wrote about this work:
[It] is of great importance since it permits an exact computation of TV. ... The
great significance as a matter of principle is, however, . . . that one sees directly
under the microscope part of the heat energy in the form of mechanical energy.
[E6]
and in 1917:
Because of the understanding of the essence of Brownian motion, suddenly all
doubts vanished about the correctness of Boltzmann's interpretation of the ther-
modynamic laws. [El6]
5e. Einstein and Smoluchowski; Critical Opalescence
If Marian Ritter von Smolan-Smoluchowski had been only an outstanding theo-
retical physicist and not a fine experimentalist as well, he would probably have
been the first to publish a quantitative theory of Brownian motion.
Smoluchowski, born to a Polish family, spent his early years in Vienna, where
he also received his university education. After finishing his studies in 1894, he
worked in several laboratories abroad, then returned to Vienna, where he became
Privatdozent. In 1900 he became professor of theoretical physics in Lemberg (now
Lvov), where he stayed until 1913. In that period he did his major work. In 1913
he took over the directorship of the Institute for Experimental Physics at the
Jagiellonian University in Cracow. There he died in 1917, the victim of a dys-
entery epidemic.*
It is quite remarkable how often Smoluchowski and Einstein simultaneously
and independently pursued similar if not identical problems. In 1904 Einstein
worked on energy fluctuations [El7], Smoluchowski on particle number fluctua-
tions [S5] of an ideal gas. Einstein completed his first paper on Brownian motion
in May 1905; Smoluchowski his in July 1906 [S3]. Later on, we shall encounter
a further such example. Let us first stay with Brownian motion, however.
Unlike Einstein, Smoluchowski was fully conversant with the nineteenth cen-
*For a detailed account of the life and work of Smoluchowski, the reader is referred to the biography
by Teske [T4], in which the Einstein-Smoluchowski correspondence referred to hereafter is repro-
duced. My understanding of Smoluchowski's contributions was much helped by my reading of an
unpublished manuscript by Mark Kac.
THE REALITY OF MOLECULES 101
tury studies on Brownian motion, not least because he had remained in touch with
Felix Exner, a comrade from student days who had done very good experimental
work on the subject. Indeed, Smoluchowski's paper of 1906 contains a critique of
all explanations of the phenomenon prior to Einstein's. Like Einstein (but prior
to him) Smoluchowski also refuted the Naegeli-Ramsey objection, pointing out
that what we see in Brownian motion is actually the average motion resulting
from about 1020 collisions per second with the molecules of the ambient liquid. He
also countered another objection: 'Naegeli believes that [the effect of the collisions]
should in the average cancel each other. . .. This is the same conceptual error as
when a gambler would believe that he could never lose a larger amount than a
single stake.' Smoluchowski followed up this illustrative comment by computing
the probability of some fixed gain (including sign!) after a prescribed number of
tosses of a coin.
Smoluchowski began his 1906 paper [S3] by referring to Einstein's two articles
of 1905: 'The findings [of those papers] agree completely with some results which
I had . . . obtained several years ago and which I consider since then as an impor-
tant argument for the kinetic nature of this phenomenon.' Then why had he not
published earlier? 'Although it has not been possible for me till now to undertake
an experimental test of the consequences of this point of view, something I origi-
nally intended to do, I have decided to publish these considerations....' In support
of this decision, he stated that his kinetic method seemed more direct, simpler, and
therefore more convincing than Einstein's, in which collision kinetics plays no
explicit role. Whether or not one agrees with this judgment of relative merits (I
do not) depends to some extent on familiarity with one or the other method. In
any case, Smoluchowski's paper is an outstanding contribution to physics, even
though the priority of Einstein is beyond question (as Smoluchowski himself
pointed out [S6]).
Smoluchowski treats the suspended particles as hard spheres with a constant
instantaneous velocity given by the equipartition value. He starts out with the
Knudsen case (the mean free path is large compared with the radius a), uses the
kinematics of hard-sphere collisions, calculates the average change in direction per
collision between the suspended particle and a molecule of the liquid, and there-
from finds an expression for (x2) (different from Eq. 5.18 of course). He must
have treated the Knudsen case first since it is kinetically much easier than the
Stokesian case, for which the free path is small compared with a. For the latter
case, he arrived at Eq. 5.18 for (x2) but with an extra factor 27/64 on the rhs.
This incorrect factor was dropped by Smoluchowski in his later papers.
Six letters between Einstein and Smoluchowski have survived. All show cor-
diality and great mutual respect. The correspondence begins with a note in 1908
by Einstein informing Smoluchowski that he has sent Smoluchowski some reprints
and requesting some reprints of Smoluchowski's work [E18]. The next commu-
nication, in November 1911, is again by Einstein and deals with a new subject to
which both men had been drawn: critical opalescence.
It had been known since the 1870s [A2] that the scattering of light passing
102 STATISTICAL PHYSICS
through a gas increases strongly in a neighborhood O(1°C) of the critical point.
In 1908 Smoluchowski became the first to ascribe this phenomenon to large den-
sity fluctuations [S7]. He derived the following equation for the mean square par-
ticle number fluctuations S5:
valid up to terms O((d}p/dV^)T). For an ideal gas, W ~ I/TV, but near the critical
point, where (dp/dV)T = (8ip/dV2)T = 0, the rhs of Eq. 5.22 blows up. 'These
agglomerations and rarefactions must give rise to corresponding local density fluc-
tuations of the index of refraction from its mean value and thus the coarse-
grainedness of the substance must reveal itself by Tyndall's phenomenon, with a
very pronounced maximal value at the critical point. In this way, the critical
opalescence explains itself very simply as the result of a phenomenon the existence
of which cannot be denied by anybody accepting the principles of kinetic theory'
[S8].
Thus, Smoluchowski had seen not only the true cause of critical opalescence
but also the connection of this phenomenon with the blueness of the midday sky
and the redness at sunset. Already in 1869 John Tyndall had explained the blue
color of the sky in terms of the scattering of light by dust particles or droplets, the
'Tyndall phenomenon' [T5]. Rayleigh, who worked on this problem off and on
for nearly half a century, had concluded that the inhomogeneities needed to
explain this phenomenon were the air molecules themselves. Smoluchowski
believed that the link between critical opalescence and Rayleigh scattering was a
qualitative one. He did not produce a detailed scattering calculation: 'A precise
calculation .. . would necessitate far-reaching modifications of Rayleigh's calcu-
lations' [S7].
Along comes Einstein in 1910 and computes the scattering in a weakly inho-
mogeneous nonabsorptive medium and finds [E10] (for monochromatic polarized
light)
where r is the ratio of the scattered to the primary intensity, n the index of refrac-
tion, v the specific volume, A the incident wavelength, $ the irradiated gas volume,
A the distance of observation, and t? the scattering angle. For an ideal gas (n «
1),
'[Equation 5.24] can also be obtained by summing the radiations off the individual
molecules as long as these are taken to be randomly distributed'. Thus Einstein
THE REALITY OF MOLECULES 1O3
found that the link between critical opalescence and Rayleigh scattering is quan-
titative and, once again, obtained (for the last time) new methods for measuring
Avogadro's number. As we read in Perrin's Les Atomes, these measurements were
made shortly afterward.
Smoluchowski was delighted. In a paper published in 1911, he spoke of Ein-
stein's contribution as 'a significant advance' [S9]. However, he had not quite
understood Einstein's argument. In an appendix to his 1911 paper Smoluchowski
mentioned that the blue of the sky is due to two factors: scattering off molecules
and scattering that results from density fluctuations. Einstein objected by letter
[El9]. There is one and only one cause for scattering: 'Reileigh [sic] treats a spe-
cial case of our problem, and the agreement between his final formula and my
own is no accident.' Shortly thereafter, Smoluchowski replied; 'You are completely
right' [S10J.
Smoluchowski's last contribution to this problem was experimental: he wanted
to reproduce the blue of the sky in a terrestrial experiment. Preliminary results
looked promising [Sll], and he announced that more detailed experiments were
in progress. He did not live to complete them.*
After Smoluchowski's death, Sommerfeld [S12] and Einstein [E16] wrote obit-
uaries in praise of a good man and a great scientist. Einstein called him an inge-
nious man of research and a noble and subtle human being.
Finally:
Einstein's paper on critical opalescence and the blue of the sky was written in
October 1910. It was submitted from Zurich, where he was an associate professor
at the university. It was his last major paper on classical statistical physics. In
March 1911 he moved to Prague—to become a full professor for the first time—
and began his main attack on general relativity.
Ostwald conceded in 1908. Referring to the experiments on Brownian motion
and those on the electron, he stated that their results 'entitle even the cautious
scientist to speak of an experimental proof for the atomistic constitution of space-
filled matter' [O3].
Mach died in 1916, unconvinced.**
Perrin received the Nobel prize in 1926 for his work on Brownian motion. Les
Atomes, one of the finest books on physics written in the twentieth century, con-
tains a postmortem, in the classical French style, to the struggles with the reality
of molecules:
*For references to later experimental work on critical opalescence, see, e.g., [C7]. The problems of
the modern theory of critical opalescence are reviewed in [M9].
"'Stefan Meyer recalled Mach's reaction upon being shown, in Vienna, the scintillations produced
by alpha particles: 'Now I believe in atoms' [M10]. Mach's text on optics, written after he left
Vienna, shows that this belief did not last, however [Mil].
104 STATISTICAL PHYSICS
La theorie atomique a triomphe. Nombreux encore naguere, ses adversaires
enfin conquis renoncent 1'un apres 1'autre aux defiances qui longtemps furent
legitimes et sans doute utiles.**
References
Al. A. Avogadro, /. de Phys. 73, 58 (1811); Alembic Reprints, No. 4. Livingstone,
Edinburgh, 1961.
A2. M. Avenarius, Ann. Phys. Chem. 151, 306 (1874).
Bl. Quoted in The Atomic Debates (W. H. Brock, Ed.), p. 8. Leicester University
Press, Leicester, 1967.
B2. Quoted by W. H. Brock and M. Knight, Isis 56, 5 (1965).
B3. D. Bernoulli, Hydrodynamica. Dulsecker, Strassbourg, 1738. German translation
by K. Flierl, published by Forschungsinstitut fur die Gesch. d. Naturw. und Tech-
nik, Series C, No. la, 1965.
B4. S. G. Brush, The Kind of Motion We Call Heat, Vol. 1, Chap. 1. North Holland,
Amsterdam, 1976.
B5. R. Brown, Phil. Mag. 4, 161 (1828); see also, Phil. Mag. 6, 161 (1829).
B6. G. K. Batchelor and J. T. Green, /. Fluid Mech. 56, 401 (1972).
B7. , /. Fluid Mech. 83, 97 (1977).
B8. S. G. Brush, [B4], Vol. 2, Chap. 15.
B9. G. K. Batchelor, /. Fluid Mech. 74, 1 (1976).
Cl. S. Cannizzaro, Alembic Reprints, No. 18, Livingstone, Edinburgh, 1961.
C2. R. Clausius, AdP 10, 353 (1857).
C3. M. Curie, Rev. Scientifique 14, 65 (1900).
C4. E. Cohen, Naturw. 3, 118 (1915).
C5. T. Cawkell and E. Garfield, in Einstein, the First Hundred Years (M. Goldsmith,
A. McKay, and J. Woudhuysen, Eds.), p. 31. Pergamon Press, London, 1980.
C6. G. Cantoni, N. Cimento 27, 156 (1867).
C7. B. Chu and J. S. Lin, /. Chem. Phys. 53, 4454 (1970).
Dl. J. Dalton, New System of Chemical Philosophy. Bickerstaff, London, Vol. 1, Part
1: 1808; Vol. 1, Part 2: 1810; Vol. 2: 1827.
D2. , [Dl], Vol. 1, Part 2, Appendix.
D3. R. D. Deslattes, Ann. Rev. Phys. Chem. 31, 435 (1980).
D4. R. K. Dewan and V. A. Bloomfield, /. Dairy Sci. 56, 66 (1973).
D5. J. Delsaulx, quoted in T. Svedberg, Die Existenz der Molekule, p. 91. Akadem-
isches Verlag, Leipzig, 1912.
El. P. Ehrenfest, Collected Scientific Papers (M. J. Klein, Ed.), p. 364. North Hol-
land, Amsterdam, 1959.
E2. A. Einstein, AdP 17, 549 (1905).
E3. , Eine neue Bestimmung der Molekiildimensionen. Wyss, Bern, 1905.
E4. , letter to the Dekan der II. Sektion der philosophischen Fakultat der Uni-
versitat Zurich, July 20, 1905.
**The atomic theory has triumphed. Until recently still numerous, its adversaries, at last overcome,
now renounce one after another their misgivings, which were, for so long, both legitimate and
undeniably useful.
THE REALITY OF MOLECULES 105
E5. —, AdP 19, 289 (1906).
E6. , in Kultur der Gegenwart (E. Lecher, Ed.). Teubner, Leipzig, 1915 (2nd
edn., 1925).
E7. -—, AdP34,59\ (1911).
E8. , AdP 19, 371 (1906).
E9. , AdP 22, 569 (1907).
E10. , AdP 33, 1275 (1910).
Ell. ——, Z. Elektrochem. 13, 41 (1907).
E12. —, Z. Elektrochem. 14, 235 (1908).
E13. , letter to J. Perrin, January 12, 1911.
E14. , Kolloidzeitschr 27, 137 (1920).
E15. , letter to J. Perrin, November 11, 1909.
£16. , Naturw. 5, 737 (1917).
E17. —, AdP 14, 354 (1904).
E18. , letter to M. v. Smoluchowski, June 11, 1908.
E19. , letter to M. v. Smoluchowski, November 27, 1911.
Fl. R. Fiirth, Ed., Untersuchungen iiber die Theone der Brownschen Bewegung.
Akademische Verlags Gesellschaft, Leipzig, 1922.
F2. , Investigations on the Brownian Movement (A. D. Cowper, Tran.).
Methuen, London, 1926.
F3. —, Z.'Phys. 2, 244 (1922).
Gl. J. L. Gay-Lussac, Mem. Soc. d'Arceuil 2, 207 (1809); Alembic Reprint, No. 4,
Livingstone, Edinburgh, 1961.
G2. L. G. Gouy, /. de Phys. 7, 561 (1888).
HI. J. H. van 't Hoff, Arch. Need, des Sci. Exactes et Nat. 20, 239 (1886); Alembic
Reprint, No. 19, Livingstone, Edinburgh, 1961.
Jl. S. Jahn, Jahrb. Rad. Elektr. 6, 229 (1909).
Kl. H. Kogan, The Great Encyclopedia Britannica. University of Chicago Press, Chi-
cago, 1958.
LI. J. Loschmidt, Wiener Ber. 52, 395 (1866).
L2. C. Lanczos, The Einstein Decade, p. 140. Academic Press, New York, 1974.
L3. P. Langevin, C. R. Ac. Set. Paris 146, 530 (1908).
Ml. Cf. C. de Milt, Chymia 1, 153 (1948).
M2. E. von Meyer, /. Prakt. Chem. 83, 182 (1911).
M3. D. Mendeleev, The principles of chemistry, Vol. 1, p. 315. Translated from the
5th Russian edn. by G. Kamensky. Greenaway, London, 1891.
M4. J. C. Maxwell, Collected Works, Vol. 2, pp. 376-7. Dover, New York.
M5. E. Mach, Popular Scientific Lectures, p. 207. Open Court, Chicago, 1910.
M6. J. C. Maxwell, [M4], Vol. 2, p. 361.
M7. ——, Theory of Heat, Chap. 22. Longmans, Green and Co., London, 1872.
Reprinted by Greenwood Press, Westport, Conn.
M8. E. W. Miiller, Phys. Rev. 102, 624 (1956); /. Appl. Phys. 27, 474 (1956); 28, 1
(1957); Sci. Amer., June 1957, p. 113.
M9. A. Munster, Handbuch der Physik (S. Fliigge, Ed.), Vol. 13, p. 71. Springer,
Berlin, 1962.
M10. S. Meyer, Wiener Ber. 159, 1 (1950).
Mil. E. Mach, The Principles o/Physical Optics, preface. Methuen, London, 1926.
Nl. M. J. Nye, Molecular Reality, Elsevier, New York, 1972.
1O6 STATISTICAL PHYSICS
N2. , [Nl], p. 4.
N3. Nobel Lectures in Chemistry, p. 3. Elsevier, New York, 1966.
N4. M. J. Nye, [Nl], pp. 9-13 and 21-9.
01. W. Ostwald, Verh. Ges. Deutsch. Naturf. Arzte 1, 155 (1895); French translation:
Rev. Gen. Sci. 6, 956 (1895).
02. L. S. Ornstein, Versl. K. Ak. Amsterdam 26, 1005 (1917); Proc. K. Ak. Amster-
dam 21, 96 (1919).
03. W. Ostwald, Grundriss der Physikalischen Chemie, introduction. Grossbothen,
1908.
PI. W. Prout, Ann. Phil. 6, 321 (1815).
P2. , Ann. Phil. 7, 111 (1816); Alembic Reprints, No. 20. Gurney and Jackson,
London, 1932.
P3. M. Planck, AdP 19, 358 (1883).
P4. W. Pfeflfer, Osmotische Untersuchungen. Engelmann, Leipzig, 1877.
P5. H. Poincare in Rapports du Congres International de Physique (C. Guillaume
and L. Poincare, Eds.), Vol. 1, p. 27. Gauthier-Villars, Paris, 1900.
P6. H. Poincare in The Foundations of Science, p. 305. Scientific Press, New York,
1913.
P7. J. Perrin, Ann. Chim. Phys. 18, 1 (1909).
P8. —, Brownian Movement and Molecular Reality (F. Soddy, Tran.). Taylor and
Francis, London, 1910.
P9. ——, Les Atomes, 4th edn. Librairie Alcan, Paris, 1914.
P10. , Atoms (D. L. Hammick, Tran.). Van Nostrand, New York, 1916.
Pll. —, Oeuvres Scientifiques, CNRS, Paris, 1950.
Rl. Lord Rayleigh, Phil. Mag. 30, 456 (1890).
R2. A. W. Rucker, /. Chem. Soc. (London) 53, 222 (1888).
R3. H. R. Robinson, Proc. Phys. Soc. (London) 55, 161 (1943).
R4. M. Reiner, Deformation, Strain and Flow. Lewis, London, 1949.
R5. R. Rutgers, Rheol. Acta 2, 202, 305 (1965).
R6. W. C. Roentgen, letter to A. Einstein, September 18, 1906.
51. A. Sommerfeld, Wiener Chem. Zeitung 47, 25 (1944).
52. Se, p. 112.
S2a. W. Sutherland, Phil. Mag. 9, 781 (1905).
53. M. von Smoluchowski, AdP 21, 756 (1906).
54. L. Szilard, Z. Phys. 53, 840 (1929). Reprinted in The Collected Works of Leo
Szilard (B. T. Feld and G. W. Szilard, Eds.), p. 103. MIT Press, Cambridge,
Mass., 1972.
55. M. von Smoluchowski, Boltzmann Festschrift, p. 627. Earth, Leipzig, 1904.
56. , letter to J. Perrin, undated; quoted in [T4], p. 161.
57. , AdP 25, 205(1908).
58. , Phil. Mag. 23, 165 (1912).
59. , Bull. Ac. Sci. Cracovie, Classe Sci. Math. Nat., 1911, p. 493.
510. , letter to A. Einstein, December 12, 1911.
511. , Bull. Ac. Sci. Cracovie, Classe Sci. Math. Nat. 1916, p. 218.
512. A. Sommerfeld, Phys. Zeitschr. 18, 534 (1917).
Tl. W. Thomson, Nature 1, 551 (1870).
T2. C. Truesdell, Arch. Hist. Ex. Sci. 15, 1 (1976).
THE REALITY OF MOLECULES 107
T3. J. J. Thomson, Phil. Mag. 48, 565 (1899).
T4. A. Teske, Marian Smoluchowski, Leben und Werk. Polish Academy of Sciences,
Warsaw, 1977.
T5. J. Tyndall, Phil. Mag. 37, 384 (1869); 38, 156 (1869).
Wl. A. W. Williamson, /. Chem. Soc. (London) 22, 328 (1869).
W2. Quoted by L. P. Williams, Contemp. Phys. 2, 93 (1960).
W3. J. D. van der Waals, Over de Continuiteit van den Gas-en Vloeistoftoestand. Syth-
off, Leiden, 1873.
W4. N. Wax (Ed.), Selected Papers on Noise and Stochastic Processes. Dover, New
York, 1954.
Yl. T. Young, Miscellaneous Works. Murray, London, 1855. Reprinted by Johnson
Reprint, New York, 1972, Vol. 9, p. 461.
Y2. Y. I. Yalamov, L. Y. Vasiljeva, and E. R. Schukin, /. Coll. Interface Sci. 62, 503
(1977).
This page intentionally left blank Ill
RELATIVITY, THE SPECIAL THEORY
This page intentionally left blank 