25
Einstein's Response
to the New Dynamics
Everyone familiar with modern physics knows that Einstein's attitude regarding
quantum mechanics was one of skepticism. No biography of him fails to mention
his saying that God does not throw dice. He was indeed given to such utterances
(as I know from experience), and stronger ones, such as 'It seems hard to look in
God's cards. But I cannot for a moment believe that He plays dice and makes use
of "telepathic" means (as the current quantum theory alleges He does)' [El].
However, remarks such as these should not create the impression that Einstein
had abandoned active interest in quantum problems in favor of his quest for a
unified field theory. Far from it. In fact, even in the search for a unified theory,
the quantum riddles were very much on his mind, as I shall discuss in Chapter
26. In the present chapter, I shall describe how Einstein's position concerning
quantum mechanics evolved in the course of time. To some extent this is reflected
in his later scientific papers. It becomes evident more fully in several of his more
autobiographical writings and in his correspondence. My own understanding of
his views has been helped much by discussions with him.
To begin with, I turn to the period 1925-31, during which he was much con-
cerned with the question, Is quantum mechanics consistent?
25a. 1925-31: The Debate Begins
Schroedinger was not the only one who had profited from the study of Einstein's
three papers on the new gas theory. Half a year before Schroedinger's first paper
on wave mechanics, Walter Elsasser, likewise acknowledging the stimulus of Ein-
stein's articles, suggested that slow electrons would be ideally suited for testing
'[ Einstein's] assumption that to every translational motion of a particle one must
associate a wavefield which determines the kinematics of the particle' [E2]. He
also pointed out that the existing experimental results of Ramsauer, Davisson and
Kunsman, and others already seemed to give evidence of diffraction and interfer-
ence of matter waves. Heisenberg wrote to Pauli that, after having studied Ein-
stein's papers, he was enthusiastic about Elsasser's ideas [HI].
Also Einstein himself continued thinking about the meaning of wavefields, old
440
EINSTEIN S RESPONSE TO THE NEW DYNAMICS 441
and new. Eugene Wigner, who was in Berlin in 1925, told me that Einstein had
at that time the idea of wavefields serving as 'Fiihrungsfelder,' guiding fields, for
light-quanta or other particles, one field for each particle. 'Einstein, though in a
way he was fond of [this idea], never published it' [Wl] since his idea of one field
per particle was incompatible with strict energy-momentum conservation—a dif-
ficulty which was overcome when Schroedinger introduced one guiding field, the
Schroedinger wave function, for joint particle configurations.
As was mentioned earlier, Einstein considered his work on the quantum gas
only a temporary digression. During the very early days of quantum mechanics,*
we find him 'working strenuously on the further development of a theory on the
connection between gravitation and electricity' [E3]. Yet the great importance of
the new developments in quantum theory was not lost on him. Bose, who visited
Berlin in November 1925, recalled that 'Einstein was very excited about the ne
quantum mechanics. He wanted me to try to see what the statistics of light-quanta
and the transition probabilities of radiation would look like in the new theory'
[Ml]. It was not Bose but Dirac who answered that question by giving the
dynamic derivation of expressions for Einstein's A and B coefficients in a paper
in which he laid the foundations of quantum electrodynamics [Dl]. Initially, Ein
stein's reaction to Dirac's contributions was decidedly negative. In 1926 he wrote
to Ehrenfest, 'I have trouble with Dirac. This balancing on the dizzying path
between genius and madness is awful' [E4], and again, a few days later, 'I don't
understand Dirac at all (Compton effect)' [E5]. Some years later, however, he
wrote admiringly of 'Dirac, to whom, in my opinion, we owe the most logically
perfect presentation of [quantum mechanics]' [E6].
Let us return to the fall of 1925. Einstein's deep interest in quantum mechanics
must have led him to write to Heisenberg soon after the publication of the latter's
paper [H2].** All the letters from Einstein to Heisenberg have been lost. How-
ever, a number of letters from Heisenberg to Einstein are extant. One of these
. (dated November 30, 1925) is clearly in response to an earlier letter from Einstein
to Heisenberg in which Einstein appears to have commented on the new quantum
mechanics. One remark by Heisenberg is of particular interest. 'You are probably
right that our formulation of quantum mechanics is more adapted to the Bohr-
Kramers-Slater attitude, but this [BKS theory] constitutes, in fact, one aspect of
the radiation phenomena. The other is your light-quantum theory, and we have
the hope that the validity of the energy and momentum laws in our quantum
mechanics will one day make possible the connection with your theory' [H4]. I
find it remarkable that Einstein apparently sensed that there was some connection
between the BKS theory and quantum mechanics. No such connection exists, of
'Recall that Heisenberg's first paper on this subject was completed in July 1925, Schroedinger's in
January 1926.
**The two men met for the first time in the spring of 1926. See [H3] for an attempt at reconstruction
of their early discussions.
442 THE QUANTUM THEORY
course. Nevertheless, the BKS proposal contains statistical features,* as we have
seen. Could Einstein have surmised as early as 1925 that some statistical element
is inherent in the quantum mechanical description?
During the following months, Einstein vacillated in his reaction to the Heisen-
berg theory. In December 1925 he expressed misgivings [E7], but in March 1926
he wrote to the Borns, 'The Heisenberg-Born concepts leave us all breathless and
have made a deep impression on all theoretically oriented people. Instead of a dull
resignation, there is now a singular tension in us sluggish people' [E8]. The next
month he expressed again his conviction that the Heisenberg-Born approach was
off the track. That was in a letter in which he congratulated Schroedinger on his
new advance [E9]. In view of the scientific links between Einstein's and Schroe-
dinger's work, it is not surprising that Einstein would express real enthusiasm
about wave mechanics: 'Schroedinger has come out with a pair of wonderful
papers on the quantum rules', he wrote in May 1926 [E10]. It was the last time
he would write approvingly about quantum mechanics.
There came a parting of ways.
Nearly a year passed after Heisenberg's paper before there was a first clarifi-
cation of the conceptual basis of quantum mechanics. It began with Born's obser-
vation in June 1926 that the absolute square of a Schroedinger wave function is
to be interpreted as a probability density. Born's brief and fundamental paper goes
to the heart of the problem of determinism. Regarding atomic collisions he wrote:
One does not get an answer to the question, What is the state after collision?
but only to the question, How probable is a given effect of the collision? . . .
From the standpoint of our quantum mechanics, there is no quantity [Grosze]
which causally fixes the effect of a collision in an individual event. Should we
hope to discover such properties later . . . and determine [them] in individual
events? ... I myself am inclined to renounce determinism in the atomic world,
but that is a philosophical question for which physical arguments alone do not
set standards. [Bl]
One month later, Born wrote a more elaborate sequel to this paper, in which he
pointed out that the starting point of his considerations was 'a remark by Einstein
on the relation between [a] wavefield and light-quanta; he [E.] said approximately
that waves are there only to point out the path to the corpuscular light-quanta,
* Heisenberg remarked much later that 'the attempt at interpretation by Bohr, Kramers, and Slater
nevertheless contained some very important features of the later correct interpretation [of quantum
mechanics],' [H5], I do not share this view, but shall not argue the issue beyond what has been said
in Chapter 22.
EINSTEIN'S RESPONSE TO THE NEW DYNAMICS 443
and spoke in this sense of a "Gespensterfeld"', ghost field [B2], clearly a reference
to Einstein's idea of a Tuhrungsfeld.' Shortly thereafter, Born wrote to Einstein:
My idea to consider Schroedinger's wavefield as a 'Gespensterfeld' in your sense
of the word proves to be more useful all the time. . . . The probability field
propagates, of course, not in ordinary space but in phase space (or configuration
space). [B3]*
Once more, but now for the last time, we encounter Einstein as a transitional
figure in the period of the birth of quantum mechanics.
Bern's papers had a mixed initial reception. Several leading physicists found it
hard if not impossible to swallow the abandonment of causality in the classical
sense, among them Schroedinger. More than once, Bohr mentioned to me that
Schroedinger told him he might not have published his papers had he been able
to foresee what consequences they would unleash.** Einstein's position in the
years to follow can be summarized succinctly by saying that he took exception to
every single statement in Bern's papers and in the letter Born subsequently wrote
to him. His earliest expressions of lasting dissent I know of date from December
1926 and are, in fact, contained in his reply to one of Bern's letters: 'Quantum
mechanics is very impressive. But an inner voice tells me that it is not yet the real
thing. The theory produces a good deal but hardly brings us closer to the secret
of the Old One. I am at all events convinced that He does not play dice. Waves
in 3n-dimensional space whose velocity is regulated by potential energy (e.g., rub-
ber bands) ...' [Ell].
'Einstein's verdict . . . came as a hard blow' to Born [B4]. There are other
instances as well in which Einstein's reactions were experienced with a sense of
loss, of being abandoned in battle by a venerated leader. Thus Goudsmit told me
of a conversation that took place in mid-1927 (to the best of his recollection [Gl])
between Ehrenfest and himself. In tears, Ehrenfest said that he had to make a
choice between Bohr's and Einstein's position and that he could not but agree with
Bohr. Needless to say, Einstein's reactions affected the older generation more
intensely than the younger.
Of the many important events in 1927, four are particularly significant for the
present account.
February 1927. In a lecture given in Berlin, Einstein is reported to have said
that 'what nature demands from us is not a quantum theory or a wave theory;
rather, nature demands from us a synthesis of these two views which thus far has
exceeded the mental powers of physicists' [El2]. At this point in the developments,
as others are about to take over, it should be recalled one more time that as early
"This important letter is not included in the published Born-Einstein correspondence. I thank John
Stachel for drawing my attention to its existence.
** Schroedinger retained reservations on the interpretation of quantum mechanics for the rest of his
life [SI].
444 THE QUANTUM THEORY
as 1909 Einstein had been the first to stress the need for incorporating a particle-
wave duality in the foundations of physical theory (see Section 2la).
March 1927. Heisenberg states the uncertainty principle [H6]. (In this paper,
Heisenberg, too, referred to 'Einstein's discussions of the relation between waves
and light-quanta.') In June 1927 Heisenberg writes a letter to Einstein which
begins, 'Many cordial thanks for your kind letter; although I really do not know
anything new, I would nevertheless like to write once more why I believe that
indeterminism, that is, the nonvalidity of rigorous causality, is necessary [his ital-
ics] and not just consistently possible' [H7]. This letter is apparently in response
to another lost letter by Einstein, triggered, most probably, by Heisenberg's work
in March. I shall return to Heisenberg's important letter in Chapter 26.1 mention
its existence at this point only in order to emphasize once again that Einstein did
not react to these new developments as a passive bystander. In fact, at just about
that time, he was doing his own research on quantum mechanics (his first, I
believe). 'Does Schroedinger's wave mechanics determine the motion of a system
completely or only in the statistical sense?'* he asked. Heisenberg had heard
indirectly that Einstein 'had written a paper in which you .. . advocate the view
that it should be possible after all to know the orbits of particles more precisely
than I would wish.' He asked for more information 'especially because I myself
have thought so much about these questions and only came to believe in the uncer-
tainty relations after many pangs of conscience, though now I am entirely con-
vinced' [H8]. Einstein eventually withdrew his paper.
September 16, 1927. At the Volta meeting in Como (Einstein had been invited
but did not attend), Bohr enunciates for the first time the principle of comple-
mentarity: 'The very nature of the quantum theory . . . forces us to regard the
space-time coordination and the claim of causality, the union of which character-
izes the classical theories, as complementary but exclusive features of the descrip-
tion, symbolizing the idealization of observation and definition, respectively' [B5].
October 1927. The fifth Solvay Conference convenes. All the founders of the
quantum theory were there, from Planck, Einstein, and Bohr to de Broglie, Hei-
senberg, Schroedinger, and Dirac. During the sessions, 'Einstein said hardly any-
thing beyond presenting a very simple objection to the probability
interpretation.. . . Then he fell back into silence' [B5a]. As was mentioned in
Chapter 23, Einstein had declined an invitation to give a paper on quantum sta-
tistics at that conference.
However, the formal meetings were not the only place for discussion. All par-
ticipants were housed in the same hotel, and there, in the dining room, Einstein
was much livelier. Otto Stern has given this first-hand account**:
"This is the title of a paper Einstein submitted for the May 5, 1927, meeting of the Prussian Acad-
emy in Berlin. The records show that the paper was in print when Einstein requested by telephone
that it be withdrawn. The unpublished manuscript is in the Einstein archive. See also [Kl],
**In a discussion with Res Jost, taped on December 2, 1961. I am very grateful to Jost for making
available to me a transcript of part of this discussion.
EINSTEIN'S RESPONSE TO THE NEW DYNAMICS 445
Einstein came down to breakfast and expressed his misgivings about the new
quantum theory, every time [he] had invented some beautiful experiment from
which one saw that [the theory] did not work. . . . Pauli and Heisenberg, who
were there, did not pay much attention, 'ach was, das stimmt schon, das stimmt
schon' [ah, well, it will be all right, it will be all right]. Bohr, on the other hand,
reflected on it with care and in the evening, at dinner, we were all together and
he cleared up the matter in detail.
Thus began the great debate between Bohr and Einstein. Both men refined and
sharpened their positions in the course of time. No agreement between them was
ever reached. Between 1925 and 1931, the only objection by Einstein that
appeared in print in the scientific literature is the one at the 1927 Solvay confer-
ence [E13]. However, there exists a masterful account of the Bohr-Einstein dia-
logue during these years, published by Bohr in 1949 [B6]. I have written else-
where about the profound role that the" discussions with Einstein played in Bohr's
life [PI].
The record of the Solvay meeting contains only minor reactions to Einstein's
comments. Bohr's later article analyzed them in detail. Let us consider next the
substance of Einstein's remarks.
Einstein's opening phrase tells more about him than does many a book: 'Je dois
m'excuser de n'avoir pas approfondi la mecanique des quanta,' I must apologize
for not having penetrated quantum mechanics deeply enough [El3]*.
He then went on to discuss an experiment in which a beam of electrons hits a
fixed screen with an aperture in it. The transmitted electrons form a diffraction
pattern, which is observed on a second screen. Question: does quantum mechanics
give a complete description of the individual electron events in this experiment?
His answer: this cannot be. For let A and B be two distinct spots on the second
screen. If I know that an individual electron arrives at A, then I know instanta-
neously that it did not arrive at B. But this implies a peculiar instantaneous action
at a distance between A and B contrary to the relativity postulate. Yet (Einstein
notes) in the Geiger-Bothe experiment on the Gompton effect [B7], there is no
limitation of principle to the accuracy with which one can observe coincidences in
individual processes, and that without appeal to action at a distance. This circum-
stance adds to the sense of incompleteness of the description for diffraction.
Quantum mechanics provides the following answer to Einstein's query. It does
apply to individual processes, but the uncertainty principle defines and delimits
the optimal amount of information obtainable in a given experimental arrange-
*The original German text reads, 'Ich [bin] mir des Umstandes bewusst dass ich in das Wesen der
Quantenmechanik nicht tief genug eingedrungen bin' [El4],
446 THE QUANTUM THEORY
ment. This delimitation differs incomparably from the restrictions on information
inherent in the coarse-grained description of events in classical statistical mechan-
ics. There the restrictions are wisely self-imposed in order to obtain a useful
approximation to a description in terms of an ideally knowable complete specifi-
cation of momenta and positions of individual particles. In quantum mechanics,
the delimitations mentioned earlier are not self-imposed but are renunciations of
first principle (on the fine-grained level, one might say). It is true that one would
need action at a distance if one were to insist on a fully causal description involving
the localization of the electron at every stage of the experiment on hand. Quantum
mechanics denies that such a description is called for and asserts that, in this
experiment, the final position of an individual electron cannot be predicted with
certainty. Quantum mechanics nevertheless makes a prediction in this case con-
cerning the probability of an electron arriving at a given spot on the second screen.
The verification of this prediction demands, of course, that the 'one-electron exper-
iment' be repeated as often as necessary to obtain this probability distribution with
the desired accuracy.
Nor is there a conflict with Geiger-Bothe, since now one refers to another
experimental arrangement in which localization in space-time is achieved, but
this time at the price of renouncing information on sharp energy-momentum
properties of the particles observed in coincidence. From the point of view of quan-
tum mechanics, these renunciations are expressions of laws of nature. They are
also applications of the saying, 'II faut reculer pour mieux sauter,' It is necessary
to take a step back in order to jump better. As we shall see, what was and is an
accepted renunciation to others was an intolerable abdication in Einstein's eyes.
On this score, he was never prepared to give up anything.
I have dwelt at some length on this simple problem since it contains the germ
of Einstein's position, which he stated more explicitly in later years. Meanwhile,
the debate in the corridors between Bohr and Einstein continued during the sixth
Solvay Conference (on magnetism) in 1930. This time Einstein thought he had
found a counterexample to the uncertainty principle. The argument was inge-
nious. Consider a box having in one of its walls a hole that can be opened or closed
by a shutter controlled by a clock inside the box. The box is filled with radiation.
Weigh the box. Set the shutter to open for a brief interval during which a single
photon escapes. Weigh the box again, some time later. Then (in principle) one
has found to arbitrary accuracy both the photon energy and its time of passage,
in conflict with the energy-time uncertainty principle.
'It was quite a shock for Bohr ... he did not see the solution at once. During
the whole evening he was extremely unhappy, going from one to the other and
trying to persuade them that it couldn't be true, that it would be the end of physics
if Einstein were right; but he couldn't produce any refutation. I shall never forget
the vision of the two antagonists leaving the club [ of the Fondation Universitaire]:
Einstein a tall majestic figure, walking quietly, with a somewhat ironical smile,
EINSTEIN'S RESPONSE TO THE NEW DYNAMICS 447
Bohr's drawing of Einstein's clock-in-the-box experiment [B6]. (Reproduced with the
kind permission of Professor A. Schilpp.)
and Bohr trotting near him, very excited. . . . The next morning came Bohr's
triumph' [Rl].
Bohr later illustrated his arguments [B6] with the help of the experimental
arrangement reproduced above. The initial weighing is performed by recording
the position of the pointer attached to the box relative to the scale attached to the
fixed frame. The loss of weight resulting from the escape of the photon is com-
pensated by a load (hung underneath the box) that returns the pointer to its initial
position with a latitude Aq. Correspondingly, the weight measurement has an
uncertainty Am. The added load imparts to the box a momentum which we can
measure with an accuracy Ap delimited by ApAq « h. Obviously A/> < tgAm,
448 THE QUANTUM THEORY
where t is the time taken to readjust the pointer and g is the gravitational accel-
eration. Thus, tgAmAq > h. Next, Bohr used the red shift formula*: the uncer-
tainty Aqr of the position of the clock in the gravitational field implies an uncer-
tainty At = c~2gtAq in the determination of t. Hence, c2Am&t = AEAt > h.
Thus the accuracy with which the energy of the photon is measured restricts the
precision with which its moment of escape can be determined, in accordance with
the uncertainty relations for energy and time.
Note that every one of the many details in the figure serves an experimental
purpose: the heavy bolts fix the position of the scale along which the pointer
moves, the spring guarantees the mobility of the box in the gravitational field, the
weight attached to the box serves to readjust its position, and so on. There was
nothing fanciful in Bohr's insistence on such details. Rather he had them drawn
in order to illustrate that, since the results of all physical measurements are
expressed in classical language, it is necessary to specify in detail the tools of mea-
surement in that language as well.
After this refutation by Bohr, Einstein ceased his search for inconsistencies. By
1931 his position on quantum mechanics had undergone a marked change.
First of all, his next paper on quantum mechanics [El 5], submitted in February
1931, shows that he had accepted Bohr's criticism.** It deals with a new variant
of the clock-in-the-box experiment. Experimental information about one particle
is used to make predictions about a second particle. This paper, a forerunner of
the Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen article to be discussed below, need not be remem-
bered for its conclusions.!
A far more important expression of Einstein's opinions is found in a letter he
wrote the following September. In this letter, addressed to the Nobel committee
in Stockholm, Einstein nominated Heisenberg and Schroedinger for the Nobel
prize. In his movitation, he said about quantum mechanics, 'Diese Lehre enthalt
nach meiner Uberzeugung ohne Zweifel ein Stuck endgiiltiger Wahrheit.'^: Ein-
stein himself was never greatly stirred by honors and distinctions. Even so, his
nominations reveal a freedom of spirit and a generosity of mind. In addition, they
show most clearly his thoughts: he came to accept that quantum mechanics was
not an aberration but rather a truly professional contribution to physics.
'Recall that the only ingredients for the derivation of this formula are the special relativistic time
dilation and the equivalence principle.
**The Gedankenexperiment in this paper involved a time measurement. The authors take care to
arrange things so that 'the rate of the clock ... is not disturbed by the gravitational effects involved
in weighing the box.'
•f-The authors are 'forced to conclude that there can be no method for measuring the momentum of
a particle without changing its value,' a statement which, of course, is unacceptable.
^'1 am convinced that this theory undoubtedly contains a part of the ultimate truth.' Einstein had
already proposed Heisenberg and Schroedinger in 1928, and proposed Schroedinger again in 1932
(see Chapter 31).
EINSTEIN'S RESPONSE TO THE NEW DYNAMICS 449
Not that from then on he desisted from criticizing quantum mechanics. He had
recognized it to be part of the truth, but was and forever remained deeply con-
vinced that it was not the whole truth. From 1931 on, the issue for him was no
longer the consistency of quantum mechanics but rather its completeness.
During the last twenty-five years of life, Einstein maintained that quantum
mechanics was incomplete. He no longer believed that quantum mechanics was
wrong but did believe that the common view of the physics community was wrong
in ascribing to the postulates of quantum mechanics a degree of finality that he
held to be naive and unjustified. The content and shape of his dissent will grad-
ually unfold in what follows.
In November 1931 Einstein gave a colloquium in Berlin 'on the uncertainty
relation' [El6]. The report of this talk does not state that Einstein objected to
Heisenberg's relations. Rather it conveys a sense of his discomfort about the free-
dom of choice to measure precisely either the color of a light ray or its time of
arrival. My friend Gasimir has written to me about a colloquium Einstein gave
in Leiden, with Ehrenfest in the chair [Cl] (this must have been in November
1930). In his talk, Einstein discussed several aspects of the clock-in-the-box exper-
iments. In the subsequent discussion, it was mentioned that no conflict with quan-
tum mechanics existed. Einstein reacted to this statement as follows: 'Ich weiss es,
widerspruchsfrei ist die Sache schon, aber sie enthalt meines Erachtens doch eine
gewisse Harte' (I know, this business is free of contradictions, yet in my view it
contains a certain unreasonableness).
By 1933 Einstein had stated explicitly his conviction that quantum mechanics
does not contain logical contradictions. In his Spencer lecture, he said of the
Schroedinger wave functions: 'These functions are supposed to determine in a
mathematical way only the probabilities of encountering those objects in a partic-
ular place or in a particular state of motion, if we make a measurement. This
conception is logically unexceptionable and has led to important successes' [El7].
It was in 1935 that Einstein stated his own desiderata for the first time in a
precise form. This is the criterion of objective reality, to which he subscribed for
the rest of his life. By 1935 Einstein was settled in Princeton. At this point, I
interrupt the account of the quantum theory in order to describe what happened
to Einstein and his family from 1932 to 1945.
25b. Einstein at Princeton
Einstein settled permanently in the United States in October 1933. His thoughts
of leaving Germany had begun to take shape two years earlier, however. In
December 1931, he wrote in his travel diary: 'Today, I made my decision essen-
tially to give up my Berlin position' [E18]. He was on board ship at that time, en
route to his first stay in Pasadena. It was an atmosphere conducive to reflecting
on the recent happenings in Germany. A year earlier, the National Socialists had
450 THE QUANTUM THEORY
made a stunning advance, increasing their number of seats in the Reichstag from
twelve to one hundred and seven.
Einstein's decision to move to Princeton was the result of three meetings with
Abraham Flexner [Fl]. The first of these was unplanned. Early in 1932, Flexner
had come to Pasadena to discuss with faculty members at CalTech his project for
a new center of research, The Institute for Advanced Study. On that occasion, he
was introduced to Einstein. The two men discussed the Institute plan in general
terms. When they met again in Oxford, in the spring of 1932, Flexner asked if
Einstein himself might be interested in joining the Institute. At their third meeting,
in Caputh in June 1932, Einstein said he was enthusiastic about coming, provided
he could bring his assistant, Walther Mayer; for himself he requested an annual
salary of $3000. 'He asked .. . "could I live on less"?' [F2]. Formal negotiations
began at once [E19]. The appointment was approved in October 1932 [II]. His
salary was set at $15000 per year. The remarkable story of the negotiations con-
cerning Walther Mayer is found in Chapter 29.
Einstein originally intended to spend five months of the year in Princeton and
the rest of the time in Berlin [K2]. It never worked out that way. New elections
in July 1932 gave the Nazis 230 Reichstag seats. It was the following December
that Einstein told his wife that she would never see Caputh again (section 16d).
On December 10, 1932, the Einsteins, accompanied by thirty pieces of luggage,
left Bremerhaven on board the steamer Oakland, once again bound for California.
As it turned out, it was their permanent departure from Germany.
On January 30, 1933, Hitler came to power. Three days later, Einstein still
wrote to the secretariat of the Prussian Academy concerning his salary arrange-
ments [K3]. The situation deteriorated rapidly, however, and in a letter dated
March 28, 1933, Einstein sent his resignation to the Akademie in Berlin [K4].*
A week earlier, The New York Times had reported that 'one of the most perfect
raids of recent German history was carried out' [Nl]. The SA had raided the
Einsteins' Caputh home to search for hidden weapons. According to the Times,
all they found was a breadknife.
March 28 was also the day on which the Einsteins arrived in Antwerp, return-
ing from California. They had to return to Europe because Einstein had obliga-
tions and because arrangements had to be made for the move to Princeton, which
now, of course, was to be their only home. Family and friends helped them find
a temporary European abode, the villa Savoyard in Le Coq sur Mer on the Bel-
gian coast. There they were joined by Use and Margot, who had meanwhile gone
to Paris. Helen Dukas came from Zurich, Walther Mayer from Vienna. Their
establishment was completed by two guards (assigned by the Belgian government)
who were to watch over their safety. Rumors were rife of planned attempts on
Einstein's life.
Practical arrangements were made. Einstein's son-in-law Rudolf Kayser saw
*On April 21 he also resigned from the Bavarian Academy.
EINSTEIN S RESPONSE TO THE NEW DYNAMICS 451
to it that Einstein's papers in Berlin were saved and sent to the Quai d'Orsay by
French diplomatic pouch. Furniture from the home on the Haberlandstrasse was
prepared for shipment (and arrived safely in Princeton some time later). Einstein
traveled. He lectured several times in Brussels; he went to Zurich, where he saw
his son Eduard for the last time; he went to Oxford, where on June 10 he gave
the Spencer lecture, which I have often quoted [El7].
Two days later, he lectured again in Oxford and on June 20 was in Glasgow
to give the first Gibson lecture, dealing with the origins of general relativity
[E20].* During a brief second visit to England, in July, he met with Churchill
and other prominent personalities. Meanwhile, offers for academic positions
reached him from several sides. Weizmann asked him to come to Jerusalem. Ein-
stein refused outright because he was highly critical of the Hebrew University's
administration. He was approached by Leiden and Oxford. Offers for chairs came
from Madrid and Paris.
In the midst of these happenings, Einstein and Mayer managed to do a little
physics and complete two papers on semivectors, which they sent from Le Goq to
Holland for publication in the Royal Dutch Academy proceedings [E21, E22].
These were sequels to a joint paper they had finished a few days before Einstein
had set off for Pasadena [E23]. This work was stimulated by Ehrenfest's insis-
tence on a better understanding of the relation between single-valued and double-
valued representations of the Lorentz group [E23]. In response, this is what they
did. Associate a 2 X 2 matrix X to a special relativistic 4-vector ACM:
each of the two columns of X transforms into itself. These columns, called semi-
vectors by Einstein and Mayer, are double-valued representations of the proper
Lorentz group; up to linear combinations they are spinors.** Not all of this was
new [K5], but it was nice work, done independently. They went on to relate semi-
*A report in The New York Times [N2] that Einstein was present at a Zionist Congress in Prague
in August is incorrect.
**The detailed connection between semivectors and spinors was discussed by Bargmann [B8].where A and B are complex 2X2 matrices. This transformation is length-pre-
serving if det^4 detfi = 1. Scale in such a way that dttA = 1; then det^4 = det5
= 1. With these constraints, Eq. 25.2 represents the general complex Lorentz
group excluding reflections; reality preservation demands that B = A'. Under the
transformationso that detX equals the vector's (invariant length)2. Transform X by
(25.2)
(25.3_(25.1)452 THE QUANTUM THEORY
vectors to the Dirac equation and to generalize the formalism to general relativity.
Their studies of semivector pairs led them to believe that for 'the first time ... an
explanation has been given for the existence of two electric elementary particles
of different mass, with charges that are [equal and] opposite' [E21], a conclusion
that did not survive.*
On September 9 Einstein left the Continent for good. Le Goq was too close to
the German border for his safety. Again he went to England, where he spent a
few quiet weeks in the country. On October 3 he addressed a mass meeting in
London, chaired by Rutherford, which was designed to draw attention to the need
for aid to scholars in exile [N3]. Then it was time to go. Use and Margot returned
to Paris. Elsa, Helen Dukas, and Walther Mayer** boarded the Westmoreland
in Antwerp. On October 7 Einstein joined them in Southampton. Carrying visi-
tors' visas, the four of them set out for a new life.
On October 17 they arrived in New York and were met at quarantine by Edgar
Bamberger and Herbert Maass, trustees of the Institute, who handed Einstein a
letter from Flexner, the Institute's first director. The letter read in part: 'There is
no doubt whatsoever that there are organized bands of irresponsible Nazis in this
country. I have conferred with the local authorities . .. and the national govern-
ment in Washington, and they have all given me the advice . .. that your safety
in America depends upon silence and refraining from attendance at public func-
tions. .. . You and your wife will be thoroughly welcome at Princeton, but in the
long run your safety will depend on your discretion' [F3]. The party was taken
by special tug from quarantine to the Battery. From there, they were driven
directly to Princeton, where rooms at the Peacock Inn were waiting for them. A
few days later, the Einsteins and Helen Dukas moved to a rented house at 2
Library Place. There they stayed until 1935, when Einstein bought the house at
112 Mercer Street from Mary Marden, paying for it in cash. In the autumn of
that year, they moved in. It was to be Einstein's last home. In 1939 Mussolini's
racial laws forced Einstein's sister, Maja Winteler, to leave the small estate outside
Florence which Einstein had bought for her and her husband, Paul. Maja came
to live with her brother in Princeton. Paul moved in with the Michaele Bessos in
Geneva.
Death struck in the early years. Use died in Paris after a painful illness. There-
after Margot joined her family in Princeton. In May 1935 Einstein and his wife
as well as Margot and her husbandf sailed for Bermuda, in order to obtain immi-
grant visas upon reentry. This was Einstein's last trip outside the United States.
Not long thereafter, Elsa became gravely ill. She died on December 20, 1936, of
heart disease.
"These papers are rather bizarre since the authors were aware of the recent discovery of the positron
[E21].
**One biographer's story [C2] that Mayer had joined Einstein in England is incorrect.
fMargot was briefly married to Dimitri Marianoff.
EINSTEIN'S RESPONSE TO THE NEW DYNAMICS 453
In 1938 Einstein's son Hans Albert came to the United States. In 1926 he had
obtained the diploma as civil engineer at the ETH. In 1928 he married Frida
Knecht in Dortmund, where he worked for some years as a steel designer. In 1930
their son Bernhard Caesar was born, Einstein's first grandchild. In 1936, Hans
Albert obtained his PhD degree at the ETH. From 1947 to 1971 he was professor
of hydraulic engineering at the University of California in Berkeley. About his
father's influence on him, he once remarked, 'Probably the only project he ever
gave up on was me. He tried to give me advice, but he soon discovered that I was
too stubborn and that he was just wasting his time' [N3a].
Shortly after arriving in the United States, Einstein gave the Queen of Belgium
his early impressions of Princeton: 'A quaint ceremonious village of puny demi-
gods on stilts' [E24]. A year and a half later he wrote to her again: 'I have locked
myself into quite hopeless scientific problems—the more so since, as an elderly
man, I have remained estranged from the society here' [E25]. After he came to the
United States, his charisma did not wane. In January 1934 he and Elsa had stayed
with the Roosevelts at the White House and had spent a night in the Franklin
Room. There were the same odd demands on his energies and time, as, for exam-
ple, when he was asked to write a letter for a time capsule to be placed at the site
of the New York World's Fair and to be opened in the year 6369 (he did [N4]).
But Princeton, small, genteel, was not like the Berlin of the Weimar days, large,
vibrant, and perverse. Even a man with a strong inner life like Einstein had to
adjust himself to a new environment. He did, and very well. The more peaceful
new life began to grow on him. There was music in the home. He found old
friends and made new ones. He could be seen on Carnegie Lake in the small
sailboat he had bought, which had been christened Tinnefby Helen Dukas (Yid-
dish for 'cheaply made'). The name stuck. He never owned a car nor did he ever
learn to drive. There were occasional trips to New York and to other cities. There
were vacations, on the shores of Long Island or in the Adirondacks. In 1936 Ein-
stein took out his citizenship papers. On October 1, 1940, in Trenton, he, Margot,
and Helen Dukas were sworn in as United States citizens by that wonderful judge
Phillip Forman. (I cherish his memory; he inducted me, too.) On the following
November 5, the three of them waited their turn to vote in the Roosevelt-Willkie
election.
Einstein went on with his physics. What he did in those years was described in
other chapters and will be returned to in the next section. The Institute did not
yet have its own buildings when he arrived. He and other faculty members were
given space in Princeton University's 'old' Fine Hall (now the Gest Institute of
Oriental Studies). After 1939 they moved to the Institute's newly built Fuld Hall.
His only official duty was to attend faculty meetings. This he did until his retire-
ment at age 65, in 1944, and continued to do until early 1950. A number of people
came to work with him. These we shall meet in Chapter 29. He was readily
accessible to all who wanted to discuss science with him.
454 THE QUANTUM THEORY
During the years 1933-45 Einstein spoke out less on political issues than he
had done before or would do again after the war.* The reasons for this relative
quietude are obvious. In the early years he was not yet a U.S. citizen. When the
war came there was only one issue: to win it. From 1933 until after the war he
desisted from advocating world disarmament and conscientious objection. 'Orga-
nized power can be opposed only by organized power. Much as I regret this, there
is no other way' [N6]. During the war years he acted as occasional consultant to
the Navy Bureau of Ordnance.
Much has been written about Einstein's letters to President Roosevelt on the
importance of the development of atomic weapons [E26]. Opinions on the influ-
ence of these letters are divided.** It is my own impression that this influence was
marginal. It is true that Roosevelt appointed a three-man Advisory Committee on
Uranium on the same day he replied to Einstein's first letter. However, he only
decided to go ahead with full scale atomic weapons development in October 1941.
At that time he was mainly influenced, I believe, by the British efforts. It was not
until then that Secretary of War Stimson heard about the project for the first time
[S2]. In his later years, Einstein himself said more than once that he regretted
having signed these letters. 'Had I known that the Germans would not succeed in
producing an atomic bomb, I would not have lifted a finger' [VI].
The story of Einstein in Princeton will be continued and concluded in Chapter
27. Before returning to objective reality, I mention one anecdote of Einstein's early
years in the United States, a story I owe to Helen Dukas.
During a speech by a high official at a major reception for Einstein, the honored
guest took out his pen and started scribbling equations on the back of his program,
oblivious to everything. The speech ended with a great flourish. Everybody stood
up, clapping hands and turning to Einstein. Helen whispered to him that he had
to get up, which he did. Unaware of the fact that the ovation was for him, he
clapped his hands, too, until Helen hurriedly told him that he was the one for
whom the audience was cheering.
25c. Einstein on Objective Reality
In his Como address, Bohr had remarked that quantum mechanics, like relativity
theory, demands refinements of our everyday perceptions of inanimate natural
phenomena. 'We find ourselves here on the very path taken by Einstein of adapt-
ing our modes of perception borrowed from the sensations to the gradually deep-
ening knowledge of the laws of Nature' [B5]. Already then, in 1927, he empha-
sized that we have to treat with extreme care our use of language in recording the
results of observations that involve quantum effects. 'The hindrances met with on
this path originate above all in the fact that, so to say, every word in the language
*See [N5] for some of Einstein's opinions during the period 1933-45.
**For comments by General Groves, I. I. Rabi, and E. P. Wigner see [LI].
EINSTEIN S RESPONSE TO THE NEW DYNAMICS 455
refers to our ordinary perception.' Bohr's deep concern with the role of language
in the appropriate interpretation of quantum mechanics never ceased. In 1948 he
put it as follows:
Phrases often found in the physical literature, as 'disturbance of phenomena by
observation' or 'creation of physical attributes of objects by measurements,' rep-
resent a use of words like 'phenomena' and 'observation' as well as 'attribute'
and 'measurement' which is hardly compatible with common usage and prac-
tical definition and, therefore, is apt to cause confusion. As a more appropriate
way of expression, one may strongly advocate limitation of the use of the word
phenomenon to refer exclusively to observations obtained under specified cir-
cumstances, including an account of the whole experiment. [B9]
This usage of phenomenon, if not generally accepted, is the one to which nearly
all physicists now subscribe.
In contrast to the view that the concept of phenomenon irrevocably includes the
specifics of the experimental conditions of observation, Einstein held that one
should seek for a deeper-lying theoretical framework which permits the descrip-
tion of phenomena independently of these conditions. That is what he meant by
the term objective reality. After 1933 it was his almost solitary position that quan-
tum mechanics is logically consistent but that it is an incomplete manifestation of
an underlying theory in which an objectively real description is possible.
In an article written in 1935 with Boris Podolsky and Nathan Rosen [E27],
Einstein gave reasons for his position by discussing an example, simple as always.
This paper 'created a stir among physicists and has played a large role in philo-
sophical discussion' [BIO].* It contains the following definition. 'If without in any
way disturbing a system we can predict with certainty (i.e., with a probability
equal to unity) the value of a physical quantity, then there exists an element of
physical reality corresponding to this physical quantity.' The authors then con-
sider the following problem. Two particles with respective momentum and posi-
tion variables (p\,q\) and (p2,q2) are in a state with definite total momentum
P=p\ + pi and definite relative distance q= c/, — q2. This, of course, is possible
since P and q commute. The particles are allowed to interact. Observations are
made on particle 1 long after the interaction has taken place. Measure p\ and one
knows p2 without having disturbed particle 2. Therefore (in their language), p2
is an element of reality. Next, measure qt and one knows q2 again without having
disturbed particle 2. Therefore q2 is also an element of reality, so that both p2 and
q2 are elements of reality. But quantum mechanics tells us that p2 and q2 cannot
simultaneously be elements of reality because of the noncommutativity of the
"This stir reached the press. On May 4, 1935, The New York Times carried an article under the
heading 'Einstein attacks quantum theory,' which also includes an interview with another physicist.
Its May 7 issue contains a statement by Einstein in which he deprecated this release, which did not
have his authorization.
456 THE QUANTUM THEORY
momentum and position operators of a given particle. Therefore quantum
mechanics is incomplete.
The authors stress that they 'would not arrive at our conclusion if one insisted
that two . . . physical quantities can be regarded as simultaneous elements of real-
ity only when they can be simultaneously measured or predicted' (their italics).
Then follows a remark that is the key to Einstein's philosophy and which I have
italicized in part:
This [simultaneous predictability] makes the reality of p2 and q2 depend upon
the process of measurement carried out on the first system which does not dis-
turb the second system in any way. No reasonable definition of reality could be
expected to permit this.
The only part of this article that will ultimately survive, I believe, is this last
phrase, which so poignantly summarizes Einstein's views on quantum mechanics
in his later years. The content of this paper has been referred to on occasion as
the Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen paradox. It should be stressed that this paper con-
tains neither a paradox nor any flaw of logic. It simply concludes that objective
reality is incompatible with the assumption that quantum mechanics is complete.
This conclusion has not affected subsequent developments in physics, and it is
doubtful that it ever will.
'It is only the mutual exclusion of any two experimental procedures, permitting
the unambiguous definition of complementary physical quantities which provides
room for new physical laws,' Bohr wrote in his rebuttal [Bl 1]. He did not believe
that the Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen paper called for any change in the interpre-
tation of quantum mechanics. Most physicists (myself included) agree with this
opinion.
This concludes an account of Einstein's position. He returned to his criterion
for objective reality in a number of later papers [E28, E29, E30, E31], in which
he repeated the EPR argument on several occasions. These papers add nothing
substantially new. In one of them [E30], he discussed the question of whether the
quantum-mechanical notion of phenomenon should also apply to bodies of every-
day size. The answer is, of course, in the affirmative.
Bohr was, of course, not the only one to express opposition to objective reality;
nor was Einstein the only one critical of the complementarity interpretation.* I
have chosen to confine myself to the exchanges between Einstein and Bohr because
I believe that Einstein's views come out most clearly in juxtaposing them with
Bohr's. Moreover, I am well acquainted with their thoughts on these issues
because of discussions with each of them. Bohr was in Princeton when he put the
*In 1950 Einstein mentioned Schroedinger and von Laue as the only ones who shared his views
[E32]. There were many others who at that time (and later) had doubts about the complementarity
interpretation, but their views and Einstein's did not necessarily coincide or overlap (see [E33]).
Note also that the term hidden variable does not occur in any of Einstein's papers or letters, as far
as I know.
EINSTEIN S RESPONSE TO THE NEW DYNAMICS 457
finishing touches to his 1949 article [B6], and we discussed these matters often at
that time. (It was during one of these discussions that Einstein sneaked in to steal
some tobacco [PI].) However, it needs to be stressed that other theoretical physi-
cists and mathematicians have made important contributions to this area of prob-
lems. Experimentalists have actively participated, as well. A number of experi-
mental tests of quantum mechanics in general and also of the predictions of specific
alternative schemes have been made.* This has not led to any surprises.
It has been stressed many times that, in order to follow Einstein's thinking, it
is necessary to see him both as a critic and as a visionary. In this chapter the critic
has been portrayed. In the next we meet the visionary.
References
Bl. M. Born; Z. Phys. 37, 863 (1926).
B2. , Z. Phys. 38, 803 (1926).
B3. , letter to A. Einstein, November 30, 1926.
B4. The Born-Einstein Letters, p. 130. Walker, New York, 1971.
B5. N. Bohr, Nature 121, 580 (1928).
B5a. L. de Broglie, New Perspectives in Physics, p. 150. Basic, New York, 1962.
B6. N. Bohr in Albert Einstein: Philosopher-Scientist (P. Schilpp, Ed.), p. 199.
Tudor, New York, 1949.
B7. W. Bothe and H. Geiger, Naturw. 13, 440 (1925) Z. Phys. 32, 639 (1925).
B8. V. Bargmann, Helv. Phys. Acta 7, 57, (1933).
B9. N. Bohr, Dialectica 2, 312 (1948).
BIO. , [B6], p. 232.
Bll. , Phys. Rev. 48, 696 (1935).
Cl. H. B. G. Casimir, letter to A. Pais, December 31, 1977.
02. R. W. Clark, Einstein: The Life and Times, p. 603. Avon Books, New York, 1971.
Dl. P.A.M. Dirac, Proc. Roy. Soc. A114, 243 (1927).
El. A. Einstein, letter to C. Lanczos, March 21, 1942.
E2. W. Elsasser, Naturw. 13,711 (1925).
E3. A. Einstein, letter to R. A. Millikan, September 1, 1925.
E4. , letter to P. Ehrenfest, August 23, 1926.
E5. , letter to P. Ehrenfest, August 28, 1926.
E6. , in James Clark Maxwell, p. 66. Macmillan, New York, 1931.
E7. , letter to M. Besso, December 25, 1925; EB, p. 215.
E8. , letter to H. Born, March 7,1926. Reprinted in The Born-Einstein Letters
(M. Born, Ed.), p. 91. Walker, New York, 1971.
E9. , letter to E. Schroedinger, April 26, 1926. Reprinted in Letters on Wave
Mechanics (M. Klein, Ed.). Philosophical Library, New York, 1967.
E10. , letter to M. Besso, May 1, 1926; EB, p. 224.
"Typically, these tests deal with variants of the EPR arrangement, such as long-range correlations
between spins or polarizations. I must admit to being insufficiently familiar with the extensive the-
oretical and experimental literature of these topics. My main guides have been a book by Jammer
[Jl] and a review article by Pipkin [P2]. Both contain extensive references to other literature.
458 THE QUANTUM THEORY
El 1. , letter to M. Born, December 4, 1926; The Born-Einstein Letters, p. 90.
£12. , Z. Angew. Chemie 40, 546 (1927).
E13. —— ,in Proceedings of the Fifth Solvay Conference, p. 253. Gauthier-Villars, Paris,
1928.
E14. , letter to H. A. Lorentz, November 21, 1927.
E15. , R. Tolman, and B. Podolsky, Phys. Rev. 37, 780 (1931).
El 6. , Z. Angew. Chemie 45, 23 (1932).
E17. ,On the Method of Theoretical Physics. Oxford University Press, New York,
1933. Reprinted in Phil. Sci. 1, 162 (1934).
E18. , personal travel diary, December 6, 1931.
E19. , letter to A. Flexner, June 8, 1932.
E20. ,0rigins of the General Theory of Relativity. Glasgow University, Publ. No.
30, 1933.
E21. , and W. Mayer, Proc. K. Ak. Amsterdam 36, 497 (1933).
E22. , and , Proc. K. Ak. Amsterdam 36, 615 (1933).
E23. , and , PAW, 1932, p. 522.
E24. —, letter to Queen Elizabeth of Belgium, November 20, 1933.
E25. , letter to Queen Elizabeth of Belgium, February 16, 1935.
E26. ,letters to F. D. Roosevelt, August 2, 1939; March 7, 1940. Reprinted in [N3],
pp. 294, 299.
E27. —, B. Podolsky, and N. Rosen, Phys. Rev. 47, 777 (1935).
E28. , Dialectica 2, 320 (1948).
E29. , in Albert Einstein: philosopher-scientist (P. Schilpp, Ed.). Tudor, New
York, 1949.
E30. , in Scientific Papers Presented to Max Born, Hafner, New York, 1951. p. 33.
E31. in Louis de Broglie, Physicien et Penseur, p. 5. Michel, Paris, 1953.
E32. , letter to E. Schroedinger, December 22, 1950.
E33. , letter to M. Born, May 12, 1952.
Fl. A. Flexner, I Remember. Simon and Schuster, New York, 1940.
F2. , The New York Times, April 19, 1955.
F3. , letter to A. Einstein, October 13, 1933.
Gl. S. Goudsmit, letter to A. Pais, January 16, 1978.
HI. W. Heisenberg, postcard to W. Pauli, June 29, 1925. Reprinted in W. Fault Sci-
entific Correspondence, Vol. 1, p. 229. Springer, New York, 1979.
H2. , Z. Phys. 33, 879 (1926).
H3. , Der Teil und das Game, pp. 90-100. Piper, Munich, 1969.
H4. , letter to A. Einstein, November 30, 1925.
H5. ,in Niels Bohr and the Development of Physics (W. Pauli, Ed.), p. 12.
McGraw-Hill, New York, 1955.
H6. , Z. Phys. 43, 172 (1927).
H7. , letter to A. Einstein, June 10, 1927.
H8. , letter to A. Einstein, May 19, 1927.
II. The Institute for Advanced Study, excerpt from minutes, October 10, 1932.
Jl. M. Jammer, The Philosophy of Quantum Mechanics. Wiley, New York, 1974.
Kl. C. Kirsten and H. J. Treder, Einstein in Berlin, Vol. 2. p. 268. Akademie, Berlin,
1979.
EINSTEIN'S RESPONSE TO THE NEW DYNAMICS 459
K2. and , [Kl], Vol. 1, p. 241.
K3. and , [Kl], Vol. 1, p. 242.
K4. — and , [Kl], Vol. 1, p. 246.
K5. F. Klein, Vorlesungen iiber die Entwicklung der Mathematik im 19 Jahrhun-
dert, Vol. 2, Chap. 2, Sec. 2. Springer, New York, 1979.
LI. A. B. Lerner, Einstein and Newton, pp. 212-15. Lerner, Minneapolis, 1973.
Ml. J. Mehra, Biogr. Mem. Fell. Roy. Soc. 21, 117 (1975).
Nl. New York Times, March 20, 1933.
N2. New York Times, August 22, 1933.
N3. O. Nathan and M. Norden, Einstein on Peace, p. 236. Schocken, New York, 1968.
N3a. New York Times, July 27, 1973.
N4. New York Times, September 16, 1938.
N5. O. Nathan and M. Norden, [N3], Chaps. 8-10.
N6. and , [N3], p. 319.
PI. A. Pais in Niels Bohr, p. 215. North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1967.
P2. F. M. Pipkin, Adv. At. Mol. Phys. 14, 281 (1978).
Rl. L. Rosenfeld in Proceedings of the Fourteenth Solvay Conference, p. 232. Inter-
science, New York, 1968.
51. W. T. Scott, Erwin Schroedinger, University of Massachusetts Press, Amherst,
1967.
52. H. L. Stimson, On active Service in Peace and War, Chap. 23. Harper New
York 1947.
VI. A. Vallentin, The Drama of Albert Einstein, p. 278. Doubleday, New York, 1954.
Wl. E. P. Wigner, Proceedings, Einstein Centennial Conference at Princeton, p. 461.
Addison-Wesley, Reading, Mass., 1980.
