24
Einstein as aTransitionalFigure:
The Birth of Wave Mechanics
We now leave the period of the old quantum theory and turn to the time of tran-
sition, during which matter waves were being discussed by a tiny group of phys-
icists at a time when matter wave mechanics had not yet been discovered. This
period begins in September 1923 with two brief communications by Louis de
Broglie to the French Academy of Sciences [Bl, B2]. It ends in January 1926
with Schroedinger's first paper on wave mechanics [SI]. The main purpose of this
chapter is to stress Einstein's key role in these developments, his influence on de
Broglie, de Broglie's subsequent influence on him, and, finally, the influence of
both on Schroedinger.
Neither directly nor indirectly did Einstein contribute to an equally fundamen-
tal development that preceded Schroedinger's discovery of wave mechanics: the
discovery of matrix mechanics by Heisenberg [HI]. Therefore, I shall have no
occasion in this book to comment in any detail on Heisenberg's major
achievements.
24a. From Einstein to de Broglie
During the period that began with Einstein's work on needle rays (1917) and
ended with Debye's and Gompton's papers on the Compton effect (1923), there
were a few other theoreticians also doing research on photon questions. Of those,
the only one* whose contribution lasted was de Broglie.
De Broglie had finished his studies before the First World War. In 1919, after
a long tour of duty with the French forces, he joined the physics laboratory headed
by his brother Maurice, where X-ray photoeffects and X-ray spectroscopy were
the main topics of study. Thus he was much exposed to questions concerning the
nature of electromagnetic radiation, a subject on which he published several
papers. In one of these [B6], de Broglie evaluated independently of Bose (and
"The other ones I know of are Brillouin [B3], Wolfke [Wl], Bothe [B4], Bateman [B5], and Orn-
stein and Zernike [Ol].
435
436 THE QUANTUM THEORY
published before him) the density of radiation states in terms of particle (photon)
language. That was in October 1923—one month after his enunciation of the
epochal new principle that particle-wave duality should apply not only to radia-
tion but also to matter. 'After long reflection in solitude and meditation, I suddenly
had the idea, during the year 1923, that the discovery made by Einstein in 1905
should be generalized by extending it to all material particles and notably to elec-
trons' [B7].
He made the leap in his September 10, 1923, paper [Bl]: E = hv shall hold
not only for photons but also for electrons, to which he assigns a 'fictitious asso-
ciated wave.' In his September 24 paper [B2], he indicated the direction in which
one 'should seek experimental confirmations of our ideas': a stream of electrons
traversing an aperture whose dimensions are small compared with the wavelength
of the electron waves 'should show diffraction phenomena.'
Other important aspects of de Broglie's work are beyond the scope of this book
(for more details, see, e.g.. [Kl]). The mentioned articles were extended to form
his doctoral thesis [B7], which he defended on November 25, 1924. Einstein
received a copy of this thesis from Langevin, who was one of de Broglie's exam-
iners. A letter to Lorentz (in December) shows that Einstein was impressed and
also that he had found a new application of de Broglie's ideas:
A younger brother of . . . de Broglie has undertaken a very interesting attempt
to interpret the Bohr-Sommerfeld quantum rules (Paris dissertation 1924). I
believe it is a first feeble ray of light on this worst of our physics enigmas. I,
too, have found something which speaks for his construction. [El]
24b. From de Broglie to Einstein
In 1909 and again in 1917, Einstein had drawn major conclusions about radiation
from the study of fluctuations around thermal equilibrium. It goes without saying
that he would again examine fluctations when, in 1924, he turned his attention
to the molecular quantum gas.
In order to appreciate what he did this time, it is helpful to again present the
formula (Eq. 21.5) given earlier for the mean square energy fluctuation of elec-
tromagnetic radiation:
Put Vpdv=n(v)hv and (e2) = A(v)2(hv)2. The term n(v) can be interpreted as
the average number of quanta in the energy interval dv, and A(c)2 as the mean
square fluctuation of this number. One can now write Eq. 24.1 in the form
(24.1)
(21.2)EINSTEIN AS A TRANSITIONAL FIGURE: THE BIRTH OF WAVE MECHANICS 437
where Z(v) is the number of states per interval dv given in Eq. 23.4. In his paper
submitted on January 8, 1925, Einstein showed that Eq. 24.2 holds equally well
for his quantum gas, as long as one defines v in the latter case by E = hv = p1/
2m and uses Eq. 23.15 instead of Eq. 23.4 for the number of states [E2].
When discussing radiation in 1909, Einstein recognized the second term of Eq.
24.1 as the familiar wave term and the first one as the unfamiliar particle term.
When in 1924 he revisited the fluctuation problem for the case of the quantum
gas, he noted a reversal of roles. The first term, at one time unfamiliar for radia-
tion, was now the old fluctuation term for a Poisson distribution of (distinguish-
able) particles. What to do with the second term (which incorporates indistin-
guishability effects of particles) for the gas case? Since this term was associated
with waves in the case of radiation, Einstein was led to 'interpret it in a corre-
sponding way for the gas, by associating with the gas a radiative phenomenon'
[E2]. He added, 'I pursue this interpretation further, since I believe that here we
have to do with more than a mere analogy.'
But what were the waves?
At this point, Einstein turned to de Broglie's thesis [B7], 'a very notable pub-
lication.' He suggested that a de Broglie-type wavefield should be associated with
the gas and pointed out that this assumption enabled him to interpret the second
term in Eq. 24.2. Just as de Broglie had done, he also noted that a molecular
beam should show diffraction phenomena but added that the effect should be
extremely small for manageable apertures. He also remarked that the de Broglie
wavefield had to be a scalar (the polarization factor is 2 for Eq. 23.4, as noted
above, but it is 1 for Eq. 23.15!).
It is another of Einstein's feats that he would be led to state the necessity of the
existence of matter waves from the analysis of fluctuations. One may wonder what
the history of twentieth century physics would have looked like had Einstein
pushed the analogy still further. However, with the achievement of an indepen-
dent argument for the particle-wave duality of matter, the twenty-year period of
highest scientific creativity in Einstein's life, at a level probably never equalled,
came to an end.
Postscript, Summer 1978. In the course of preparing this chapter, I noticed
a recollection by Pauli of a statement made by Einstein during a physics meeting
held in Innsbruck in 1924. According to Pauli, Einstein proposed in the course of
that meeting 'to search for interference and diffraction phenomena with molecular
beams' [PI]. On checking the dates of that meeting, I found them to be September
21-27. This intrigued me. Einstein arrived at the particle-wave duality of matter
via a route that was independent of the one taken by de Broglie. The latter
defended his thesis in November. If Pauli's memory is correct, then Einstein made
his remark about two months prior to that time. Could he have come upon the
wave properties of matter independently of de Broglie? After all, Einstein had
been thinking about the molecular gas since July. The questions arise, When did
438 THE QUANTUM THEORY
Einstein become aware of de Broglie's work? In particular, when did he receive
de Broglie's thesis from Langevin? Clearly, it would be most interesting to know
what Professor de Broglie might have to say about these questions. Accordingly
I wrote to him. He was kind enough to reply. With his permission, I quote from
his answers.
De Broglie does not believe that Einstein was aware of his three short publi-
cations [Bl, B2, B3] written in 1923. 'Nevertheless, since Einstein would receive
the Comptes Rendus and since he knew French very well, he might have noticed
my articles' [B8]. De Broglie noted further that he had given Langevin the first
typed copy of his thesis early in 1924. 'I am certain that Einstein knew of my
These since the spring of 1924' [B9]. This is what happened. 'When in 1923 I
had written the text of the These de Doctoral which I wanted to present in order
to obtain the Doctorat es Sciences, I had three typed copies made. I handed one
of these to M. Langevin so that he might decide whether this text could be
accepted as a These. M. Langevin, probablement un peu etonne par la nouveaute
de mes idees,* asked me to furnish him with a second typed copy of my These for
transmittal to Einstein. It was then that Einstein declared, after having read my
work, that my ideas seemed quite interesting to him. This made Langevin decide
to accept my work' [B8].
Thus, Einstein was not only one of the three fathers of the quantum theory,
but also the sole godfather of wave mechanics.
24c. From de Broglie and Einstein to Schroedinger
Late in 1925, Schroedinger completed an article entitled 'On Einstein's Gas The-
ory' [S2]. It was his last paper prior to his discovery of wave mechanics. Its con-
tents are crucial to an understanding of the genesis of that discovery [K2].
In order to follow Schroedinger's reasoning, it is necessary to recall first a der-
ivation of Planck's formula given by Debye in 1910 [Dl]. Consider a cavity filled
with radiation oscillators in thermal equilibrium. The spectral density is
8irv2e(v, 7)/c3, where e is the equilibrium energy of a radiation field oscillator with
frequency v. Debye introduced the quantum prescription that the only admissible
energies of the oscillator shall be nhv, n = 0, 1, 2, .... In equilibrium, the nth
energy level is weighted with its Boltzmann factor. Hence € = 'E,nhvyn/T^yn, y
= exp (—hv/kT). This yields Planck's law.**
Now back to Schroedinger. By his own admission, he was not much taken with
the new BE statistics [S2]. Instead, he suggested, why not evade the new statistics
* Probably a bit astonished by the novelty of my ideas.
**This derivation differs from Planck's in that the latter quantized material rather than radiation
oscillators. It differs from Bose's photon gas derivation in that here the energy nhv is interpreted as
the nth state of a single oscillator, not (as was done in Chapter 23) as a state of n particles with
energy hv.
EINSTEIN AS A TRANSITIONAL FIGURE: THE BIRTH OF WAVE MECHANICS 439
by treating Einstein's molecular gas according to the Debye method? That is, why
not start from a wave picture of the gas and superimpose on that a quantization
condition a la Debye? Now comes the key sentence in the article: 'That means
nothing else but taking seriously the de Broglie-Einstein wave theory of moving
particles' [S2]. And that is just what Schroedinger did. It is not necessary to discuss
further details of this article, which was received by the publisher on December
25, 1925.
Schroedinger's next paper was received on January 27, 1926 [SI]. It contains
his equation for the hydrogen atom. Wave mechanics was born. In this new paper,
Schroedinger acknowledged his debt to de Broglie and Einstein:
I have recently shown [S2] that the Einstein gas theory can be founded on the
consideration of standing waves which obey the dispersion law of de Broglie.. . .
The above considerations about the atom could have been presented as a gen
eralization of these considerations.
In April 1926, Schroedinger again acknowledged the influence of de Broglie and
'brief but infinitely far-seeing remarks by Einstein' [S3].
References
Bl. L. de Broglie, C. R. Acad. Sci. Pans 177, 507 (1923).
B2. , C. R. Acad. Set. Pans 177, 548 (1923).
B3. L. Brillouin, /. de Phys. 2, 142 (1921).
B4. W. Bothe, Z. Phys. 20, 145 (1923).
B5. H. Bateman, Phil. Mag. 46, 977 (1923).
B6. L. de Broglie, C. R. Acad. Sci. Paris 177, 630 (1923).
B7. , preface to his reedited 1924 PhD thesis, Recherches sur la Theorie des
Quanta, p. 4. Masson, Paris, 1963.
B8. , letter to A. Pais, August 9, 1978.
B9. —, letter to A. Pais, September 26, 1978.
Dl. P. Debye, AdP 33, 1427 (1910).
El. A. Einstein, letter to H. A. Lorentz, December 16, 1924.
E2. , PAW, 1925. p. 3.
HI. W. Heisenberg, Z. Phys. 33, 879 (1926).
Kl. F. Kubli, Arch. Hist. Ex. Sci. 7, 26 (1970).
K2. M. Klein, Nat. Phil. 3, 1 (1964).
Ol. L. S. Ornstein and F. Zernike, Proc. K. Akad. Amsterdam 28, 280 (1919).
PI. W. Pauli in Albert Einstein: Philosopher-Scientist (P. A. Schilpp, Ed.), p. 156.
Tudor, New York, 1949.
51. E. Schroedinger, AdP 79, 361 (1926).
52. , Phys. Zeitschr. 27, 95 (1926).
53. , AdP 79, 734, (1926); footnote on p. 735.
Wl. M. Wolfke, Phys. Zeitschr. 22, 315 (1921).
