!5
The New Dynamics
15a. From 1915 to 1980
Einstein arrived at the special theory of relativity after thinking for ten years about
the properties of light. Electromagnetism was not the only area of physics that
attracted his attention during those years. In the intervening time, he also thought
hard about statistical mechanics and about the meaning of Planck's radiation law.
In addition, he tried his hand at experiments. The final steps leading to his June
1905 paper were made in an intense burst of activity that lasted for less than two
months.
Einstein arrived at the general theory of relativity after thinking for eight years
about gravitation. This was not the only area of physics which attracted his atten-
tion during those years. In the intervening time, he also thought hard about quan-
tum physics and about statistical mechanics. In addition, he tried his hand at
experiments. The final steps leading to his November 25,1915, paper were made
in an intense burst of activity that lasted for less than two months.
In every other respect, a comparison of the development of the special and the
general theory is a tale of disparities. In June 1905, Einstein at once gave special
relativity its ultimate form in the first paper he ever wrote on the subject. By
contrast, before November 25, 1915, he had written more than a dozen papers on
gravitation, often retracting in later ones some conclusions reached earlier. The
November 25 paper is a monumental contribution, of that there can be no doubt.
Yet this paper—again in contrast with the paper of June 1905—represents only
a first beach-head in new territory, the only sure beacon at its time of publication
(but what a beacon) being the one-week-old agreement between theory and exper-
iment in regard to the perihelion precession of Mercury. Both in 1905 and in
1915, Einstein presented new fundamental principles. As I have stressed repeat-
edly, the theory of 1905 was purely kinematic in character. Its new tenets had
already been digested to a large extent by the next generation of physicists. By
contrast, general relativity consists of an intricate web of new kinematics and new
dynamics. Its one kinematic novelty was perfectly transparent from the start:
Lorentz invariance is deprived of its global validity but continues to play a central
role as a local invariance. However, the new dynamics contained in the equations
of general relativity has not been fully fathomed either during Einstein's life or in
the quarter of a century following his death. It is true that since 1915 the under-
266
THE NEW DYNAMICS 267
standing of general relativity has vastly improved, our faith in the theory has
grown, and no assured limitations on the validity of Einstein's theory have been
encountered. Yet, even on the purely classical level, no one today would claim to
have a full grasp of the rich dynamic content of the nonlinear dynamics called
general relativity.
Having completed my portrait of Einstein as the creator of general relativity.
I turn to a brief account of Einstein as its practitioner. For the present, I exclude
his work on unified field theory, a subject that will be dealt with separately in
Chapter 17.
As I prepare to write this chapter, my desk is cluttered. Obviously, copies of
Einstein's papers are at hand. In addition, I have the following books within
reach: Pauli's encyclopedia article on relativity completed in 1920 [PI] as well as
its English translation [P2], of particular interest because of the notes Pauli added
in the mid-1950s; several editions of Weyl's Raum, Zeit, Materie (including the
English translation of the fourth edition [Wl]), of importance because the vari-
ances in the different editions are helpful for an understanding of the evolution of
general relativity in the first decade after its creation; the book by North dealing
with the history of modern cosmology to 1965 [Nl]; the fine source book on cos-
mology published by the American Association of Physics Teachers [SI]; and, for
diversion, the collection of papers on cosmology assembled by Munitz [Ml], in
which Plato appears as the oldest and my friend Dennis Sciama as the youngest
contributor. Taken together, these books are an excellent guide to the decade
1915-25. They enable me to confine myself to a broad outline of this period and
to refer the reader to these readily accessible volumes for more details.
There are more books on my desk. The modern texts by Weinberg [W2] and
by Misner, Thorne, and Wheeler [M2] (affectionately known as the 'telephone
book') serve as sources of information about developments in general relativity
during the rest of Einstein's life and the years beyond. Finally, my incomplete
little library is brought up to date by a recent report of a workshop on sources and
detectors of gravitational radiation [S2], the Einstein centenary survey by Hawk-
ing and Israel [HI], the record of the centennial symposium in Princeton [W3],
and the two centenary volumes published by the International Society on General
Relativity and Gravitation [H2]. I have these five books near me for two reasons,
first to remind me that these authoritative and up-to-date reviews of recent devel-
opments free me from writing a full history of general relativity up to the present,
a task which in any event would far exceed the scope of this book and the com-
petence of its author, and second to remind me that my own understanding would
lack perspective if I failed to indicate the enormous changes that have taken place
in the ways general relativity is practiced today as compared with the way things
were in Einstein's lifetime. I do indeed intend to comment on those changes, but
will often urge my reader to consult these recent books for further particulars.
268 RELATIVITY, THE GENERAL THEORY
In preparation for the subsequent short sections which deal more directly with
Einstein's work, I turn next to a general outline of the entire period from 1915 to
the present.
The decade 1915-25 was a period of consolidation and of new ideas. The main
advances were the introduction in mathematics of parallel transport by Levi-Civ-
ita in 1917 [LI], a concept soon widely used in general relativity; the emergence
of a better understanding of the energy-momentum conservation laws as the result
of the work by Einstein, Hilbert, Felix Klein, Lorentz, Schroedinger, and Her-
mann Weyl; Einstein's first papers on gravitational waves; and the pioneering
explorations of general relativistic cosmologies by Einstein, Willem de Sitter, and
Aleksandr Aleksandrovich Friedmann. The number of participating theoretical
physicists is small but growing.
There were also two major experimental developments. The solar eclipse expe-
ditions of 1919 demonstrated that light is bent by an amount close to Einstein's
prediction [El] of November 18, 1915. (I shall return to this event in the next
chapter.) The first decade of general relativity ends with the announcement by
Edwin Powell Hubble in December 1924 of an experimental result which settled
a debate that had been going on for well over a century: the first incontrovertible
evidence for the existence of an extragalactic object, Messier 31, the Andromeda
nebula [H3].* Theoretical studies of cosmological models received even more
important stimulus and direction from Hubble's great discovery of 1929 that the
universe is expanding: nebulas are receding with a velocity proportional to their
distance. In Hubble's own words, there exists ' . . . a roughly linear relation
between velocities and distances.. . . The outstanding feature ... is ... the pos-
sibility that numerical data may be introduced into discussions of the general cur-
vature of space' [H3a].** Still, the literature on cosmology remained modest in
size, though high in quality.f Several attempts to revert to a neo-Euclidean theory
of gravitation and cosmology were also made in this period [N4]. These have left
no trace.
The number of those actively engaged in research in general relativity continued
to remain small in the 1930s, 1940s, and early 1950s. Referring to those years,
Peter Bergmann once said to me, 'You only had to know what your six best friends
were doing and you would know what was happening in general relativity.' Stud-
ies of cosmological models and of special solutions to the Einstein equations con-
*A brief history of cosmic distances is found in [W4].
**The history of the antecedents of Hubble's law as well as of the improvements in the determination
of Hubble's constant during the next few decades is given in [N2].
•(•The most detailed bibliography on relativity up to the beginning of 1924 was compiled by Lecat
[L2]. See also [N3]. A list of the principal papers on cosmology for the years 1917 to 1932 is found
in[Rlj.
THE NEW DYNAMICS 269
tinued. There was also further research on the problem of motion (which had
interested Einstein since 1927), the question of if and how the equations of motion
of a distribution of matter can be obtained as a consequence of the gravitational
field equations. By and large, throughout this period the advances due to general
relativity are perceived to be the 'three successes'—the precession of the perihelion
of Mercury, the bending of light, and the red shift—and a rationale for an
expanding universe.
However, in the 1930s a new element was injected which briefly attracted
attention, then stayed more or less quiescent for a quarter of a century, after which
time it became one of general relativity's main themes. Principally as an exercise
in nuclear physics, J. Robert Oppenheimer and his research associate Robert Ser-
ber decided to study the relative influence of nuclear and gravitational forces in
neutron stars [Ol].* One of their aims was to improve the estimate made by Lev
Davidovich Landau for the limiting mass above which an ordinary star becomes
a neutron star. (Landau discussed a model in which this mass is ~ 0.001 O. He
also suggested that every star has an interior neutron core [L2a].) Their work
attracted the attention of Richard Chase Tolman. As a result of discussions
between Tolman and Oppenheimer and his co-workers, there appeared in 1939,
a pair of papers, one by Tolman on static solutions of Einstein's field equations
for fluid spheres [Tl] and one, directly following it, by Oppenheimer and George
Volkoff entitled 'On massive neutron cores' [O2]. In this paper, the foundations
are laid for a general relativistic theory of stellar structure. The model discussed
is a static spherical star consisting of an ideal Fermi gas of neutrons. The authors
found that the star is stable as long as its mass < % O. (The present best value
for a free-neutron gas is — 0.7 O and is called the Oppenheimer-Volkoff limit.)**
Half a year later, the paper 'On continued gravitational attraction' by Oppenhei-
mer and Hartland Snyder came out [O3]. The first line of its abstract reads,
'When all thermonuclear sources of energy are exhausted, a sufficiently heavy star
will collapse; [a contraction follows which] will continue indefinitely.' Thus began
the physics of black holes, the name for the ultimate collapsed state proposed by
John Archibald Wheeler at a conference held in the fall of 1967 at the Goddard
Institute of Space Studies in New York [W5]. At that time, pulsars had just been
discovered and neutron stars and black holes were no longer considered 'exotic
objects [which] remained a textbook curiosity. . . . Cooperative efforts of radio and
optical astronomers [had begun] to reveal a great many strange new things in the
sky' [W6].
Which brings us to the change in style of general relativity after Einstein's
death.
During Einstein's lifetime, there was not one major international conference
*I am indebted to Robert Serber for a discussion of the papers on neutron stars by Oppenheimer
and his collaborators.
**For further details, see [M2], p. 627.
270 RELATIVITY, THE GENERAL THEORY
exclusively devoted to relativity theory and gravitation.* The first international
conference on relativity convened in Bern, in July 1955, three months after his
death. Its purpose was to celebrate the fiftieth anniversary of relativity. Einstein
himself had been invited to attend but had to decline for reasons of health. How-
ever, he had written to the organizers requesting that tribute be paid to Lorentz
and Poincare. Pauli was in charge of the scientific program. Browsing through
the proceedings of the meeting! one will note (how could it be otherwise) that the
subjects dealt with are still relativity in the old style. This conference, now known
as GR04 had 89 participants from 22 countries. It marked the beginning of a
series of international congresses on general relativity and gravitation: GR1 was
held in Chapel Hill, N.C. (1957), GR2 in Royaumont (1959), GR3 in Warsaw
(1962), GR4 in London (1965), GR5 in Tblisi (1968), GR6 in Copenhagen
(1971), GR7 in Tel Aviv (1974), and GR8 in Waterloo, Canada (1977). The
most recent one, GR9, took place in Jena in June 1980. The growth of this field
is demonstrated by the fact that this meeting was attended by about 800 partici-
pants from 53 countries.
What caused this growth and when did it begin? Asked this question, Dennis
Sciama replied: 'The Bern Conference was followed two years later by the Chapel
Hill Conference organized by Bryce de Witt. . .. This was the real beginning in
one sense; that is, it brought together isolated people, showed that they had
reached a common set of problems, and inspired them to continue working. The
"relativity family" was born then. The other, no doubt more important, reason
was the spectacular observational developments in astronomy. This began perhaps
in 1954 when Cygnus A—the second strongest radio source in the sky—was iden-
tified with a distant galaxy. This meant that (a) galaxies a Hubble radius away
could be picked up by radio astronomy (but not optically), (b) the energy needed
to power a radio galaxy (on the synchrotron hypothesis) was the rest mass energy
« 108 solar masses, that is, 10~3 of a galaxy mass. Then came X-ray sources in
1962, quasars in 1963, the 3°K background in 1965, and pulsars in 1967. The
black hole in Cygnus X-l dates from 1972. Another climax was the Kruskal treat-
ment** of the Schwarzschild solution in 1960, which opened the doors to modern
black hole theory' [S5]. Thus new experimental developments were a main stim-
*The Solvay conferences (which over the years have lost their preeminent status as summit meetings)
did not deal with these subjects until 1958 [M3].
f These were published in 1956 as Supplement 4 of Helvetica Physica Ada.
:|Some call it GR1, not giving the important Chapel Hill meeting a number. Proceedings were pub-
lished in the cases of GRO, GR1 (Rev. Mod. Phys. 29, 351 -546, 1957), GR2 (CNRS Report 1962),
GR3 (Conference Internationale sur les Theories de la Gravitation, Gauthier-Villars, 1964) and
GR7 [S3]. Some of the papers presented at the GR conferences after 1970 are found in the journal
General Relativity and Gravitation.
**Here Sciama refers to the coordinate system introduced independently by Kruskal [Kl] and by
Szekeres [S4]. For details see [M2], Chapter 31.
THE NEW DYNAMICS 271
ulus for the vastly increased activity and the new directions in general relativity.
The few dozen practitioners in Einstein's days are followed by a new generation
about a hundred times more numerous.
Now, in 1982, the beginning of a new era described by Sciama has already been
followed by further important developments. In June 1980 I attended the GR9
conference in order to find out more about the status of the field. Some of my
impressions are found in what follows. Each of the next five sections is devoted to
a topic in general relativity in which Einstein himself was active after 1915. In
each section I shall indicate what he did and sketch ever so briefly how that subject
developed in later years. In the final section, I list those topics which in their
entirety belong to the post-Einsteinian era.
15b. The Three Successes
In 1933 Einstein, speaking in Glasgow on the origins of the general theory of
relativity [E2], recalled some of his struggles, the 'errors in thinking which caused
me two years of hard work before at last, in 1915,1 recognized them as such and
returned penitently to the Riemann curvature, which enabled me to find the rela-
tion to the empirical facts of astronomy.'
The period 1914-15 had been a confusing two years, not only for Einstein but
also for those of his colleagues who had tried to follow his gyrations. For example,
when in December 1915 Ehrenfest wrote to Lorentz, he referred to what we call
the theory of general relativity as 'the theory of November 25, 1915.' He asked if
Lorentz agreed with his own understanding that Einstein had now abandoned his
arguments of 1914 for the impossibility of writing the gravitational field equations
in covariant form [E3]. All through December 1915 and January 1916, the cor-
respondence between Lorentz and Ehrenfest is intense and reveals much about
their personalities. Lorentz, aged 62, is calculating away in Haarlem, making
mistakes, correcting them, finally understanding what Einstein has in mind. In a
letter to Ehrenfest he writes, 'I have congratulated Einstein on his brilliant result'
[L3]. Ehrenfest, aged 35, in Leiden, ten miles down the road, is also hard at work
on relativity. His reply to Lorentz's letter shows a glimpse of the despair that
would ultimately overwhelm him: 'Your remark "I have congratulated Einstein
on his brilliant results" has a similar meaning for me as when one Freemason
recognizes another by a secret sign' [E4].
Meanwhile Lorentz had received a letter from Einstein in which the latter
expressed his happiness with Lorentz's praise. Einstein added, 'The series of my
papers about gravitation is a chain of false steps [Irrwegen] which nevertheless by
and by led to the goal. Thus the basic equations are finally all right but the der-
ivations are atrocious; this shortcoming remains to be eliminated' [E5]. He went
on to suggest that Lorentz might be the right man for this task. 'I could do it
myself, since all is clear to me. However, nature has unfortunately denied me the
gift of being able to communicate, so that what I write is correct, to be sure, but
272 RELATIVITY, THE GENERAL THEORY
also thoroughly indigestible.' Shortly afterward, Lorentz once again wrote to
Ehrenfest. 'I had written to Einstein that, now that he has reached the acme of
his theory, it would be important to give an expose of its principles in as simple
a form as possible, so that every physicist (or anyway many of them) may famil-
iarize himself with its content. I added that I myself would very much like to try
doing this but that it would be more beautiful if he did it himself [L4].
Lorentz's fatherly advice must have been one of the incentives that led Einstein
to write his first synopsis of the new theory [E6].* This beautiful, fifty-page
account was completed in March 1916. It was well received. This may have
encouraged Einstein—who did not communicate all that badly—to do more writ-
ing. In December 1916 he completed Uber die spezielle und die allgemeine Rela-
livitdtstheorie, gemeinverstdndlich,** his most widely known work [E8a].
Demand for it became especially high after the results of the eclipse expedition
caused such an immense stir (see Chapter 16). Its tenth printing came out in 1920,
the twenty-second in 1972.
Einstein's paper of March 1916 concludes with a brief section on the three new
predictions: the red shift, the bending of light, and the precession of the perihelion
of Mercury. In the final paragraph of that section is recorded the single major
experimental confirmation which at that time could be claimed for the theory: the
Mercury anomaly. In 1916 next to nothing was known about the red shift; the
bending of light was first observed in 1919.
Commenting on the status of experimental relativity in 1979, David Wilkinson
remarked:
[These] two early successes [—the perihelion precession and the bending of
light—were] followed by decades of painfully slow experimental progress. It
has taken nearly sixty years finally to achieve empirical tests of general relativ-
ity at the one per cent level. Progress . . . required development of technology
and experimental techniques well beyond those available in the early 1920s.
[W7]
I refer the reader to Wilkinson's paper for further remarks on the technological
and sociological aspects of modern relativity experiments. For a summary of the
present status of the experimental verification of general relativity (excluding cos-
mology), the reader should consult the report by Irwin Shapiro wherein it will be
found that, within the errors, all is well with the red shift (both astronomically
and terrestrially), with the bending of light, with the precession of the perihelia
of Mercury and other bodies, and also with the modern refined tests of the equiv-
*This article was published both in the Annalen der Physik and, also in 1916, as a separate booklet
[E7] which went through numerous printings and was also translated into English [E8].
** On the Special and the General Relativity Theory, a Popular Exposition. Under this title, the
English translation appeared in 1920 (Methuen, London). Einstein used to joke that the book should
rather be called 'gemeinunverstandlich,' commonly ununderstandable.
THE NEW DYNAMICS 273
alence principle [S6]. In another modern review, the current situation is sum-
marized as follows:
So far [general relativity] has withstood every confrontation, but new confron-
tations, in new arenas, are on the horizon. Whether general relativity survives
is a matter of speculation for some, pious hope for some, and supreme confi-
dence for others. [W8]
With fervent good wishes and with high hopes for further experiments with rock-
ets, satellites, and planetary probes, I hereby leave the subject of the comparison
between theory and experiment in general relativity.
What did Einstein himself have to say in later years about the three successes?
I described in the previous chapter his high excitement at the time he found the
right value for the precession of the perihelion of Mercury. He still considered
this to be a crucial discovery when he sent Lorentz his New Year's wishes for
1916 ('I wish you and yours a happy year and Europe an honest and definitive
peace'): 'I now enjoy a hard-won clarity and the agreement of the perihelion
motion of Mercury' [E9]. As will be seen in the next chapter, the results of the
solar eclipse expeditions in 1919 also greatly stirred him personally. But, as is
natural, in later times he tended to emphasize the simplicity of the theory rather
than its consequences. In 1930 he wrote, 'I do not consider the main significance
of the general theory of relativity to be the prediction of some tiny observable
effects, but rather the simplicity of its foundations and its consistency' [E10]. More
and more he stressed formal aspects. Again in 1930 he expressed the opinion that
the idea of general relativity 'is a purely formal point of view and not a definite
hypothesis about nature. .. . Non-[generally] relativistic theory contains not only
statements about things but [also] statements which refer to things and the coor-
dinate systems which are needed for their description; also from a logical point of
view such a theory is less satisfactory than a relativistic one, the content of which
is independent of the choice of coordinates' [Ell]. In 1932 he went further: 'In
my opinion this theory [general relativity] possesses little inner probability....
The field variables g^ and </>„ [the electromagnetic potentials] do not correspond
to a unified conception of the structure of the continuum' [E12].
Thus we see Einstein move from the joy of successfully confronting experimen-
tal fact to higher abstraction and finally to that discontent with his own achieve-
ments which accompanied his search for a unified field theory. He did not live to
again use tiny effects for the purpose of advancing physical knowledge. Nor have
we to this day recognized any tiny effects which we can be sure pose a threat to
the physical principles with which we, perhaps clumsily, operate.
General relativity does predict new tiny effects of a conventional kind, however.
One of these caught Einstein's attention in 1936 when R. W. Mandl pointed out
to him [ M4] that if an observer is perfectly aligned with a 'near' and a 'far' star,
then he will observe the image of the far star as an annular ring as a result of the
bending of its light by the near star. The idea was, of course, not new. Eddington
274 RELATIVITY, THE GENERAL THEORY
knew already that one may obtain two pointlike images of the far star if the align-
ment is imperfect [E12a]. In any event, to Mandl's delight [M5] Einstein went
on to publish a calculation of the dependence of the image intensity upon the
displacement of the observer from the extended line of centers of the two stars
[E12b].* He believed that 'there is no hope of observing this phenomenon.' How-
ever, in 1979 it was shown that the apparent double quasar 0957 + 561 A,B is
actually the double image of a single quasar [W8a]. An intervening galaxy acts
as the gravitational lens [Yl].
15c. Energy and Momentum Conservation; the Bianchi Identities
The collected works of Felix Klein contain a set of papers devoted to the links
between geometry on the one hand and group theory and the theory of invariants
on the other, his own Erlangen program. The last three articles of this set deal
with general relativity. ('For Klein .. . the theory of relativity and its connection
with his old ideas of the Erlangen program brought the last flare-up of his math-
ematical interests and mathematical production' [W9].) One of those three, com-
pleted in 1918, is entitled 'On the Differential Laws for the Conservation of
Momentum and Energy in the Einstein Theory of Gravitation' [K2]. In its intro-
duction Klein observed, 'As one will see, in the following presentation [of the con-
servation laws] I really do not any longer need to calculate but only to make use
of the most elementary formulae of the calculus of variations.' It was the year of
the Noether theorem.
In November 1915, neither Hilbert nor Einstein was aware of this royal road
to the conservation laws. Hilbert had come close. I recall here some of his conclu-
sions, discussed in Section 14d. He had derived the gravitational equations from
the correct variational principle
for variations g^ —*• g^ + dg^, where the dg,,, are infinitesimal and vanish on
the boundary of the integration domain. Without proof, he had also stated the
theorem that if / is a scalar function of n fields and if
then there exist four identities between the n fields. He believed that these ident-
ities meant that electromagnetism is a consequence of gravitation and failed to see
that this theorem at once yields the conservation laws [H4]. In a sequel to his
work of 1915, presented in December 1916 [H5], his interpretation of Eq. 15.2
had not changed. (In view of the relations between Hilbert and Einstein, it is of
interest to note that in this last paper Hilbert refers to his subject as 'the new
*For references to later calculations of this effect, see [S6a].
THE NEW DYNAMICS 275
physics of Einstein's relativity principle' [H6].) As for Einstein, in 1914 [E13]
and again on November 4, 1915, [E14] he had derived the field equations of grav-
itation from a variational principle—but in neither case did he have the correct
field equations. In his paper of November 25, 1915, [El 5] energy-momentum
conservation appears as a constraint on the theory rather than as an almost
immediate consequence of general covariance; no variational principle is used.
I repeat one last time that neither Hilbert nor Einstein was aware of the Bian-
chi identities in that crucial November. Let us see how these matters were straight-
ened out in subsequent years.
The conservation laws are the one issue on which Einstein's synopsis of March
1916 [E6] is weak. A variational principle is introduced but only for the case of
pure gravitation; the mathematics is incorrect;* matter is introduced in a plausible
but nonsystematic way ([E6], Section 16) and the conservation laws are verified
by explicit computation rather than by an invariance argument ([E6], Section 17).
In October 1916 Einstein came back to energy-momentum conservation [E16].**
This time he gave a general proof (free of coordinate conditions) that for any
matter Lagrangian L the energy-momentum tensor T1" satisfies
as a consequence of the gravitational field equations. I shall return shortly to this
paper, but first must note another development.
In August 1917 Hermann Weyl finally decoded the variational principle (Eq.
15.2) [W10]. Let us assume (he said) that the £* are infinitesimal and that f and
its derivatives vanish on the boundary of the integration domain. Then for the case
that / = L, it follows that Eq. 15.3 holds true, whereas if / = R we obtainf
A correspondence between Felix Klein and Hilbert, published by Klein early in
1918 [K4], shows that also in Goettingcn circles it had rapidly become clear that
the principle (Eq. 15.2), properly used in the case of general relativity, gives rise
to eight rather than four identities, four for / = L and four for / = R.
Interestingly enough, in 1917 the experts were not aware that Weyl's derivation
of Eq. 15.4 by variational techniques was a brand new method for obtaining a
long-known result. Neither Hilbert nor Klein (nor, of course, Einstein) realized
that Eq. 15.4, the contracted Bianchi identities, had been derived much earlier,
first by the German mathematician Aurel Voss in 1880, then independently by
*As Bargmann pointed out to me, Einstein first specializes to the coordinate condition \Jg = 1 and
then introduces a variational principle without a Lagrange multiplier for this condition.
**An English translation of this paper is included in the well-known collection of papers by Einstein,
Lorentz, Minkowksi, and Weyl [S7].
fFor this way of deriving Eqs. 15.3 and 15.4, see [Wll]. Other contributions to this subject are
discussed in [P3]. For the relation of Weyl's results to those of Klein, see [K3].
276 RELATIVITY, THE GENERAL THEORY
Ricci in 1889, and then, again independently, in 1902 by Klein's former pupil
Luigi Bianchi.* The name Bianchi appears neither in any of the five editions of
Weyl's Raum, Zeit, Materie (the fifth edition appeared in 1923) nor in Pauli's
review article of 1921 [PI]. In 1920, Eddington wrote in his book Space, Time
and Gravitation, 'I doubt whether anyone has performed the laborious task of
verifying these identities by straightforward algebra' [El7]. The next year he per-
formed this task himself [E18]. In 1922 a simpler derivation was given [Jl], soon
followed by the remark that Eq. 15.4 follows from
now known as the Bianchi identities, where R^, is the Riemann curvature tensor
[H7].** Harward, the author of this paper, remarked, 'I discovered the general
theorem [Eq. 15.5] for myself, but I can hardly believe that it has not been dis-
covered before.' This surmise was, of course, quite correct. Indeed, Eq. 15.5 was
the relation discovered by the old masters, as was finally brought to the attention
of a new generation by the Dutch mathematicians Jan Schouten and Dirk Struik
in 1924: 'It may be of interest to mention that this theorem [Eq. 15.5] is known
especially in Germany and Italy as Bianchi's Identity' [S9].
From a modern point of view, the identities 15.3 and 15.4 are special conse-
quences of a celebrated theorem of Emmy Noether, who herself participated in
the Goettingen debates on the energy-momentum conservation laws. She had
moved to Goettingen in April 1915. Soon thereafter her advice was asked. 'Emmy
Noether, whose help I sought in clarifying questions concerning my energy law
...' Hilbert wrote to Klein [K4], 'You know that Fraulein Noether continues to
advise me in my work,' Klein wrote to Hilbert [K4]. At that time, Noether herself
told a friend that a team in Goettingen, to which she also belonged, was perform-
ing calculations of the most difficult kind for Einstein but that 'none of us under-
stands what they are good for' [Dl]. Her own work on the relation between
invariance under groups of continuous transformations and conservation theorems
was published in 1918 [N5]. Noether's theorem has become an essential tool in
modern theoretical physics. In her own oeuvre, this theorem represents only a
sideline. After her death, Einstein wrote of her, 'In the judgment of the most com-
petent living mathematicians, Fraulein Noether was the most significant creative
mathematical genius since the higher education of women began' [E19].
Let us return to Einstein's article of October 1916. The principal point of that
paper is not so much the differential as the integral conservation laws. As is now
*For more historical details, see the second edition of Schouten's book on Ricci calculus [S8].
**Equation 15.4 follows from Eq. 15.5 by contraction and by the use of symmetry properties of the
Riemann tensor [W12].
THE NEW DYNAMICS 277
well known, this is not a trivial problem. Equation 15.3 can equivalently be writ-
ten in the form
The second term—which accounts for the possibility of exchanging energy-
momentum between the gravitational field and matter—complicates the transition
from differential to integral laws by simple integration over spatial domains. Ein-
stein found a way out of this technical problem. He was the first to cast Eq. 15.6
in the form of a vanishing divergence [El6]. He noted that since the curvature
scalar R is linear in the second derivatives of the g^, one can uniquely define a
quantity R* which depends only on the g^ and their first derivatives by means
of the relation
Next define an object tff by
With the help of the gravitational field equations, it can be shown that Eq. 15.6
can be cast in the alternative form
Therefore, one can define
as the total energy-momentum of a closed system. Einstein emphasized that,
despite appearances, Eq. 15.9 is fully covariant. However, the quantity f^ is not
a generally covariant tensor density. Rather, it is a tensor only relative to affine
transformations.
These results are of particular interest in that they show how Einstein was both
undaunted by and quite at home with Riemannian geometry, which he handled
with ingenuity. In those years, he would tackle difficult mathematical questions
only if compelled by physical motivations. I can almost hear him say, 'General
relativity is right. One must be able to give meaning to the total energy and
momentum of a closed system. I am going to find out how.' I regard it as no
accident that in his October 1916 paper Einstein took the route from Eq. 15.9 to
Eq. 15.6 rather than the other way around! For details of the derivation of Eq.
15.9 and the proof that ^ is an affine tensor, I refer the reader to Pauli's review
article [P4] and the discussion of the energy-momentum pseudotensor by Landau
and Lifshitz [L5].
278 RELATIVITY, THE GENERAL THEORY
The discovery of Eq. 15.9 marks the beginning of a new chapter in general
relativity. New problems arise. Since t\ is not a general tensor density, to what
extent are the definitions of energy and momentum independent of the choice of
coordinate system? During the next two years, this question was discussed by
Felix Klein, Levi-Civita, Lorentz, Pauli, Schroedinger, and others,* as well as by
Einstein himself, who in 1918 came back to this issue one more time. 'The sig-
nificance of [Eq. 15.9] is rather generally doubted,' he wrote. He noted that the
quantity ff can be given arbitrary values at any given point but that nevertheless
the energy and momentum integrated over all space have a definite meaning
[E19b]. Later investigations have shown that /*„ is well defined provided that the
metric suitably approaches the Minkowski metric at spatial infinity.
Many related questions continue to be studied intensely in the era of renewed
activity following Einstein's death. Examples: Can one calculate the energy in a
finite domain? Can one separate the energy into a gravitational and a nongravi-
tational part? Does purely gravitational energy exist? Is the total energy of a grav-
itating system always positive? A status report on these questions (many of them
not yet fully answered) is found in an article by Trautman [T2]. The last-men-
tioned question was the subject of a plenary lecture at GR9. This difficult problem
(known for years as the positive energy program) arises because ^ by itself is not
positive definite. It was found in 1979 that positive definiteness of the total energy
can nevertheless be demonstrated [S10]. After my return from GR9,1 learned that
the original proof can be simplified considerably [W13].
15d. Gravitational Waves
At no time during GR9 did I sense more strongly how much general relativity
belongs to the future than when I listened to the plenary lectures by Kip Thorne
from Pasadena and Vladimir Braginsky from Moscow on the present state of
experiments designed to detect gravitational waves. So far such waves have not
been found, but perhaps, Thorne said, they will be observed in this century. Fif-
teen experimental groups, some of them multinational, are preparing for this
event.
None of these groups is planning to emulate Hertz's discovery of electromag-
netic waves by terrestrial means. The probability of an atomic transition accom-
panied by gravitational radiation is some fifty powers of 10 less than for photon
emission. We have to look to the heavens for the best sources of gravitational
radiation, most particularly to exotic, violent, and rare stellar phenomena such as
the collapse of star cores into neutron stars or supernovas; or the formation of
black holes. Sources like these may produce intensities some fifty powers of 10
higher than what can be attained on earth. Gravitational antennas need to be built
which are sensitive enough to overcome stupendous background problems. Work
"This early work is described in Pauli [P5]. See also [E19a],
THE NEW DYNAMICS 279
is in progress on acoustical detectors, on improved Weber bars (named after
Joseph Weber, whose pioneering work in the 1960s did much to stimulate the
present worldwide efforts [W14]) and monocrystals, and on electromagnetic detec-
tors, such as laser interferometers. These devices are designed to explore the fre-
quency range from about 100 Hz to 10 kHz. The use of space probes in the search
for gravitational waves (in the range 10~2-10~4 Hz) by Doppler tracking is also
being contemplated. Detector studies have led to a burgeoning new technology,
quantum electronics [Cl]. The hope is not just to observe gravitational waves but
to use them for a new kind of experimental astronomy. When these waves pass
through matter, they will absorb and scatter vastly less even than neutrinos do.
Therefore, they will be the best means we may ever have for exploring what hap-
pens in the interior of superdense matter. It is anticipated that gravitational wave
astronomy may inform us about the dynamics of the evolution of supernova cores,
neutron stars, and black holes. In addition, it may well be that gravitational waves
will provide us with experimental criteria for distinguishing between the orthodox
Einsteinian general relativity and some of its modern variants.
Detailed accounts and literature referring to all these extraordinarily interesting
and challenging aspects of gravitational wave physics are found in some of the
books mentioned earlier in this chapter. I mention in particular the proceedings
of a 1978 workshop [S2], the chapter by Weber in the GRG book [H2], the chap-
ters by Douglass and Braginsky and by Will in the Hawking-Israel book [HI],
and the review of reviews completed in 1980 by Thorne [T3]. All these papers
reveal a developing interaction between astrophysics, particle physics, and general
relativity. They also show that numerical relativity has taken great strides with
the help of ever-improving computers.
Einstein contributed the quadrupole formula.
Even before relativity, Lorentz had conjectured in 1900 that gravitation 'can be
attributed to actions which do not propagate with a velocity larger than that of
light' [L6]. The term gravitational wave (onde gravifique) appeared for the first
time in 1905, when Poincare discussed the extension of Lorentz invariance to
gravitation [P6]. In June 1916, Einstein became the first to cast these qualitative
ideas into explicit form [E20]. He used the weak-field approximation:
where rj^ is the Minkowski metric, \hf,\ « 1, and terms of higher order than
the first in h^ are neglected throughout. For the source-free case, he showed that
the quantities
satisfy (D is the Dalembertian)
28O RELATIVITY, THE GENERAL THEORY
in a coordinate system for which the 'gauge condition'
holds true (Eq. 15.14 is sometimes called the Hilbert condition since Hilbert was
the first to prove in general that the coordinate condition Eq. 15.14 can always be
satisfied to the first order in h^ [H5]).
Einstein noted not only that in the weak-field approximation there exist grav-
itational waves which propagate with light velocity but also that only two of the
ten h',,, have independent physical significance, or, as we now say, that there are
only two helicity states. He also pointed out that the existence of radiationless
stable interatomic orbits is equally mysterious from the electromagnetic as from
the gravitational point of view! 'It seems that the quantum theory will have to
modify not only Maxwell's electrodynamics but also the new gravitational theory.'
Perhaps this renewed concern with quantum physics spurred him, a few months
later, to make one of his great contributions to quantum electrodynamics: in the
fall of 1916 he introduced the concepts of spontaneous and induced transitions and
gave a new derivation of Planck's radiation law [E21].
In the same June 1916 paper, Einstein also attempted to calculate the amount
of gravitational radiation emitted by an excited isolated mechanical system with
linear dimensions R. He introduced two further approximations: (1) only wave-
lengths A for which X/R » 1 are considered and (2) all internal velocities of
the mechanical system are « c. At that time he mistakenly believed that a
permanently spherically symmetric mechanical system can emit gravitational
radiation. There the matter lay until he corrected this error in 1918 and presented
the quadrupole formula [E22]: the energy loss of the mechanical system is given
by*
where
is the mass quadrupole moment and p the mass density of the source.
After 1918 Einstein returned one more time to gravitational waves. In 1937 he
and Rosen studied cylindrical wave solutions of the exact gravitational equations
[E23], which were analyzed further in [W15].
*Einstein's result was off by a factor of 2. This factor is corrected in Eq. 15.15, which has also been
written in modernized form. Dots denote time derivatives. Equation 15.15 represents, of course, the
leading term in a gravitational multipole expansion. For a review of this expansion, see [T4].
THE NEW DYNAMICS 28l
Do gravitational waves exist? Is the derivation of the quadrupole formula cor-
rect? If so, does the formula apply to those extreme circumstances mentioned
above, which may offer the most potent sources of gravitational radiation?
There exists an extensive and important literature on these questions, beginning
in 1922 with a remark by Eddington, who believed that the waves were spurious
and 'propagate . . . with the speed of thought' [E24]. In 1937, Einstein briefly
thought that gravitational waves do not exist (see Chapter 29). 'Among the present
day theoretical physicists there is a strong consensus that gravitational radiation
does exist,' one reads in [H8]. At GR9, the validity of the quadrupole formula
was the subject of a plenary lecture and a discussion session. In the closing months
of 1980, there appeared in the literature 'a contribution to the debate concerning
the validity of Einstein's quadrupole formula' [W16].
The difficulties in answering the above questions stem, of course, from the non-
linear nature of gravitation, an aspect not incorporated in Einstein's linearized
approximation. No one doubts that Eq. 15.15 holds true (in the long-wavelength,
slow-motion approximation) for nongravitational sources of gravitational waves,
such as elastically vibrating bars. The hard question is what happens if both
material sources and the gravitational field itself are included as sources of grav-
itational waves. The difficult questions which arise are related in part to the def-
inition of energy localization referred to in the previous section. For a recent
assessment of these difficulties see especially [E25] and [R2]. For a less severe
judgment, see [T5]. I myself have not struggled enough with these problems to
dare take sides.*
Finally, as a gift from the heavens, there comes to us the binary pulsar
PSR1913 + 16, 'the first known system in which relativistic gravity can be used
as a practical tool for the determination of astrophysical parameters' [W17]. This
system offers the possibility of testing whether the quantitative general relativistic
prediction of a change in period due to energy loss arising from gravitational quad-
rupole radiation holds true. At GR9, this loss was reported to be 1.04 + 0.13
times the quadrupole prediction. This result does, of course, not prove the validity
of the quadrupole formula, nor does it diminish the urge to observe gravitational
waves directly. It seems more than fair to note, however, that this binary pulsar
result strengthens the belief that the quadrupole formula cannot be far off the
mark and that the experimental relativists' search for gravitational waves will not
be in vain.
15e. Cosmology
Die Unbegrenztheit des Raumes besitzt . . . eine groszere empir-
ische Gewiszheit als irgend eine aiiszere Erfahrung. Hieraus folgt
aber die Unendlichkeit keineswegs. . . .
Bernhard Riemann, Habilitationsvortrag, 1854.
* I am grateful to J. Ehlers and P. Havas for enlightening discussions on this group of problems.
282 RELATIVITY, THE GENERAL THEORY
7. Einstein and Mach. Einstein was in the middle of preparing his first synopsis
on general relativity when in February 1916 word reached him that the sufferings
of Mach had come to an end. He interrupted his work and prepared a short article
on Mach [E26] which reached the editors of Naturwissenschaften a week before
his synopsis was received by the Annalen der Physik. The paper on Mach is not
just a standard obituary. It is the first occasion on which Einstein shows his excep-
tional talent for drawing with sensitivity a portrait of a man and his work, placing
him in his time and speaking of his achievements and of his frailties with equal
grace.
Mach was successively a professor of mathematics, experimental physics, and
philosophy. In the obituary, Einstein lauded a number of diverse contributions
but reserved his highest praise for Mach's historical and critical analysis of
mechanics [M6], a work that had profoundly influenced him since his student
days [E27], when he was introduced to it by Besso [E28]. He had studied it again
in Bern, together with his colleagues of the Akademie Olympia [Sll]. In 1909 he
had written to Mach that of all his writings, he admired this book the most
[E29].* Initially, Mach seems to have looked with favor on relativity, for Einstein
wrote to him, again in 1909, 'I am very pleased that you enjoy the relativity theory'
[E30]. In the obituary, Einstein cited extensively Mach's famous critique of New-
ton's concepts of absolute space and absolute motion and concluded, 'The cited
places show that Mach clearly recognized the weak sides of classical mechanics
and that he was not far from demanding a general theory of relativity, and that
nearly half a century ago!' [E26]. In his nineteenth century classic, Mach had
indeed criticized the Newtonian view that one can distinguish between absolute
and relative rotation. 'I cannot share this view. For me, only relative motions exist,
and I can see, in this regard, no distinction between rotation and translation,' he
had written [M7].** Einstein had Mach's discussion of rotational motion in mind
when he wrote his own 1916 synopsis: its second section, entitled 'On the Grounds
Which Make Plausible an Extension of the [Special] Relativity Postulate,' begins
with the phrase:
Classical mechanics, and the special theory of relativity not less, suffer from an
epistemological shortcoming [the preferred position of uniform translation over
all other types of relative motion] which was probably emphasized for the first
time by Mach. [E6]
In 1910, Mach had expressed himself positively about the work of Lorentz,
Einstein, and Minkowski [M8]. Around January 1913, Einstein had written to
him how pleased he was with Mach's 'friendly interest which you manifest for
*Four letters from Einstein to Mach have been preserved, none from Mach to Einstein. These letters
are discussed in essays by Herneck [H9] and by Holton [H10], along with more details on the
relations between the two men.
**In this connection, readers may wish to refresh their memory about Newton's rotating bucket
experiment and Mach's analysis thereof; see, e.g., [W18]. In February 1916, Einstein gave a lecture
on the Foucault pendulum [E31].
THE NEW DYNAMICS 283
the new [i.e., the Einstein-Grossmann] theory' [E32]. In his later years, however,
Mach turned his back on relativity. In July 1913 he wrote, 'I must ... as
assuredly disclaim to be a forerunner of the relativists as I withhold from the
atomistic belief of the present day,' and added that to him relativity seemed 'to be
growing more and more dogmatical' [M9]. These phrases appear in a book that
was not published until 1921. Even so, Einstein's esteem for Mach never faltered.
'There can hardly be any doubt that this [reaction by M.] was a consequence of
an absorption capacity diminished by age, since the whole direction of thinking of
this theory is in concordance with that of Mach, so that it is justified to consider
Mach as the precursor of the general theory of relativity,' he wrote in 1930 [E33].
In the last interview given by Einstein, two weeks before his death, he reminisced
with evident pleasure about the one visit he had paid to Mach and he spoke of
four people he admired: Newton, Lorentz, Planck, and Mach [G2]. They, and
Maxwell, and no others, are the only ones Einstein ever accepted as his true
precursors.
In a discussion of Mach's influence on Einstein, it is necessary to make a clear
distinction between three themes.
First, Mach's emphasis on the relativity of all motion. As we have just seen, in
this regard Einstein's respect was and remained unqualified.
Second, Mach's philosophy or, perhaps better, his scientific methodology.
'Mach fought and broke the dogmatism of nineteenth century physics' is one of
the rare approving statements Einstein ever made about Mach's philosophical
positions [E34]. In 1922 he expressed himself as follows before a gathering of
philosophers. 'Mach's system [consists of] the study of relations which exist
between experimental data; according to Mach, science is the totality of these
relations. That is a bad point of view; in effect, what Mach made was a catalog
and not a system. Mach was as good at mechanics as he was wretched at philos-
ophy.* This short-sighted view of science led him to reject the existence of atoms.
It is possible that Mach's opinion would be different if he were alive today' [E35].
His negative opinion of Mach's philosophy changed as little during his later years
as did his admiration for Mach's mechanics. Just before his death,
Einstein said he had always believed that the invention of scientific concepts
and the building of theories upon them was one of the creative properties of the
human mind. His own view was thus opposed to Mach, because Mach assumed
that the laws of science were only an economical way of describing a large col-
lection of facts. [C2]**
*'Autant Mach fut un bon mechanician, autant il fut un deplorable philosophe.'
**In his autobiographical sketch, Einstein mentioned that the critical reasoning required for his
discovery of special relativity was decisively furthered by his reading of Mach's philosophical writ-
ings [E27]. I would venture to guess that at this point Einstein had once again Mach's mechanics in
mind.
284 RELATIVITY, THE GENERAL THEORY
The third theme, Mach's conjecture on the dynamic origins of inertia, leads us
to Einstein's work on cosmology.
2. Einstein and Mach 's Principle. The central innovation in Mach's mechan-
ics is the abolition of absolute space in the formulation of the law of inertia. Write
this law as: A system on which no forces act is either at rest or in uniform motion
relative to xxx. Then
xxx = absolute space Newton
xxx = the fixed stars
idealized as a
rigid system Mach
'When ... we say that a body preserves unchanged its direction and velocity in
space, our assertion is nothing more or less than an abbreviated reference to the
entire universe' [M10]. Those are Mach's words and italics. He argued further
that the reference to the entire universe could be restricted to the heavy bodies at
large distances which make up the fixed stars idealized as a rigid system, since the
relative motion of the body with regard to nearby bodies averages out to zero.
Mach goes on to raise a new question.* Newton's law of inertia refers to
motions that are uniform relative to an absolute space; this law is a kinematic first
principle. By contrast, his own version of the law of inertia refers to motions of
bodies relative to the fixed stars. Should one not seek a dynamic explanation of
such motions, just as one explains dynamically the planetary orbits by means of
gravitational dynamics or the relative motion of electrically-charged particles by
means of electrodynamics? These are not Mach's own words. However, this
dynamic view is implicit in his query: 'What would become of the law of inertia
if the whole of the heavens began to move and the stars swarmed in confusion?
How would we apply it then? How would it be expressed then? ... Only in the
case of a shattering of the universe [do] we learn that all bodies [his italics] each
with its share are of importance in the law of inertia' [Mil]. We do not find in
Mach's book how this importance of all bodies manifests itself; he never proposed
an explicit dynamic scheme for his new interpretation of the law of inertia. Mach
invented Mach's law of inertia, not Mach's principle. Reading his discourse on
inertia is not unlike reading the Holy Scriptures. The text is lucid but one senses,
perhaps correctly, perhaps wrongly, a deeper meaning behind the words. Let us
see how Einstein read Mach.
Soon after Einstein arrived in Prague and broke his long silence on gravitation,
he published a short note entitled 'Does There Exist a Gravitational Action Anal-
ogous to the Electrodynamical Induction Effect?' [E36]. In this paper (based on
the rudimentary gravitation theory of the Prague days), he showed that if a hol-
low, massive sphere is accelerated around an axis passing through its center, then
the inertial mass of a mass point located at the sphere's center is increased, an
effect which foreshadows the Lense-Thirring effect [T6].
*Seealso[Hll].
THE NEW DYNAMICS 285
Enter Mach.
In this note Einstein declared, 'This [conclusion] lends plausibility to the con-
jecture that the total inertia of a mass point is an effect due to the presence of all
other masses, due to a sort of interaction with the latter. . . . This is just the point
of view asserted by Mach in his penetrating investigations on this subject.' From
that time on, similar references to Mach are recurrent. In the Einstein-Gross-
mann paper we read of 'Mach's bold idea that inertia originates in the interaction
of [a given] mass point with all other [masses]' [E37]. In June 1913, Einstein
wrote to Mach about the induction effect as well as about the bending of light,
adding that, if these effects were found, it would be 'a brilliant confirmation of
your ingenious investigations on the foundations of mechanics' [E38]. In his
Vienna lecture given in the fall of 1913, Einstein referred again to Mach's view
of inertia and named it 'the hypothesis of the relativity of inertia' [E39]. He men-
tioned neither this hypothesis nor the problem of inertia in any of his subsequent
articles until February 1917, when he submitted a paper [E40] which once again
marks the beginning of a new chapter in physics: general relativistic cosmology.
A few days before presenting this paper to the Prussian Academy, Einstein had
written to Ehrenfest, 'I have . . . again perpetrated something about gravitation
theory which somewhat exposes me to the danger of being confined in a madhouse'
[E41]. In the paper itself, he mentions the 'indirect and bumpy road' he had fol-
lowed to arrive at the first cosmological model of the new era, an isotropic, homo-
geneous, unbounded, but spatially finite static universe. It must have taken him
a relatively long time to formulate this theory, since already in September 1916
de Sitter mentions a conversation with Einstein about the possibility 'of an entirely
material origin of inertia' and the implementation of this idea in terms of 'a world
which of necessity must be finite' [SI2].
Einstein's paper is no doubt motivated by Machian ideas. However, he begins
with a re-analysis of another problem, the difficulties with a static Newtonian
universe.* He remarked that the Newton-Poisson equation
permits only (average) mass densities p which tend to zero faster than 1/r2 for r
—* oo, since otherwise the gravitational potential would be infinite and the force
on a particle due to all the masses in the universe undetermined. (He realized soon
afterward that this reasoning is incorrect [E41a].) He also argued that even if 0
remains finite for large r, there still are difficulties. For it is still impossible to
have a Boltzmann equilibrium distribution of stars as long as the total stellar
energy is larger than the energy needed to expel stars one by one to infinity as the
result of collisions with other stars during the infinite time the universe has lived.
On the other hand (he notes), if Eq. 15.17 is replaced by
 
*For details and references to cosmology in the nineteenth century, see especially [P7] and [N6]. For
broader historial reviews, see [Ml] and [Ml2].
(15.18)(15.17)286 RELATIVITY, THE GENERAL THEORY
(a proposal which again has nineteenth century origins), where p is a uniform
density, then the solution
0==_l
is dynamically acceptable.
Is it also physically acceptable? Constant p means an isotropic, homogeneous
universe. In 1917 the universe was supposed to consist of our galaxy and presum-
ably a void beyond. The Andromeda nebula had not yet been certified to lie
beyond the Milky Way. Today an individual galaxy is considered as a local dis-
turbance of a distribution which is indeed isotropic and homogeneous, to a degree
which itself demands explanation [SI3]. Einstein had no such physical grounds
for assuming these two properties—except for the fact that, he believed, they led
to the first realization of the relativity of inertia in the model he was about to
unveil. That this model is of the static variety is natural for its time. In 1917 no
large-scale galactic motions were yet known to exist.
Let us return to the transition from Eq. 15.17 to Eq. 15.18. There are three
main points in Einstein's paper. First, he performs the very same transition in
general relativity, that is, he replaces
 
by
(15.21)
Second, he constructs a solution of Eq. 15.21 that resolves the conundrum of the
Newtonian infinite. Third, he proposes a dynamic realization of the relativity of
inertia. His solution, the Einsteinian universe, had to be abolished in later years.
It will nevertheless be remembered as the first serious proposal for a novel topol-
ogy of the world at large. Let us see how he came to it.
Einstein had applied Eq. 15.20 with great success to the motion of planets,
assuming that far away from their orbits the metric is flat. Now he argued that
there are two reasons why this boundary condition is unsatisfactory for the uni-
verse at large. First, the old problem of the Newtonian infinite remains. Second—
and here Mach enters—the flatness condition implies that 'the inertia [of a body]
is influenced by matter (at finite distances) but not determined by it [his italics]
If only a single mass point existed it would have inertia .. . [but] in a consistent
relativity theory there cannot be inertia relative to "space" but only inertia of
masses relative to each other.' Thus Einstein began to give concrete form to
Mach's ideas: since the g^ determine the inertial action, they should, in turn, be
completely determined by the mass distribution in the universe. He saw no way
of using Eq. 15.20 and meeting this desideratum. Equation 15.21, on the other
hand, did provide the answer, it seemed to him,* in terms of the following solution
(i,k =1,2, 3):
*He also noted that this equation preserves the conservation laws, since gme = 0.
(15.20)THE NEW DYNAMICS 287
 
provided that
(15.23)
where p is a constant mass density. In this Einsteinian universe, the Newtonian
infinite no longer causes problems because it has been abolished; three-dimen-
sional space is spherically bounded and has a time-independent curvature. More-
over, if there is no matter, then there is no inertia, that is, for nonzero X, Eq. 15.21
cannot be satisfied if p = 0. Of course, this solution did not specifically associate
inertia with the distant stars, but it seemed a good beginning.
So strongly did Einstein believe at that time in the relativity of inertia that in
1918 he stated as being on equal footing three principles on which a satisfactory
theory of gravitation should rest [E42]:
1. The principle of relativity as expressed by general covariance
2. The principle of equivalence
3. Mach's principle (the first time this term entered the literature): 'Das G-Feld
ist restlos durch die Massen der Korper bestimmt,' that is, the g^ are com-
pletely determined by the mass of bodies, more generally by T^. In 1922, Ein-
stein noted that others were satisfied to proceed without this criterion and
added, 'This contentedness will appear incomprehensible to a later generation,
however' [E42a].
In later years, Einstein's enthusiasm for Mach's principle waned and finally
vanished. I conclude with a brief chronology of his subsequent involvement with
cosmology.
7977. Einstein never said so explicitly, but it seems reasonable to assume that
he had in mind that the correct equations should have no solutions at all in the
absence of matter. However, right after his paper appeared, de Sitter did find a
solution of Eq. 15.21 with p = 0 [S14, W19]. Thus the cosmological term X^
does not prevent the occurrence of 'inertia relative to space.' Einstein must have
been disappointed. In 1918 he looked for ways to rule out the de Sitter solution
[E42b], but soon realized that there is nothing wrong with it.
1919. Einstein suggests [E43] that perhaps electrically-charged particles are
held together by gravitational forces. He starts from Eq. 15.21, assumes that T^
is due purely to electromagnetism so that 7£ = 0, and notes that this yields the
trace condition X = R/4. Thus electromagnetism constrains gravitation. This idea
may be considered Einstein's first attempt at a unified field theory. In 1927 he
wrote a further short note on the mathematical properties of this model [E44].
Otherwise, as is not unusual for him in his later years, a thought comes, is men-
tioned in print, and then vanishes without a trace.
(15.22)288 RELATIVITY, THE GENERAL THEORY
7922. Friedmann shows that Eq. 15.20 admits nonstatic solutions with iso-
tropic, homogeneous matter distributions, corresponding to an expanding universe
[Fl]. Einstein first believes the reasoning is incorrect [E45], then finds an error
in his own objection [E46] and calls the new results 'clarifying.'
7923. Weyl and Eddington find that test particles recede from each other in
the de Sitter world. This leads Einstein to write to Weyl, 'If there is no quasi-
static world, then away with the cosmological term' [E47].
7937. Referring to the theoretical work by Friedmann, 'which was not influ-
enced by experimental facts' and the experimental discoveries of Hubble, 'which
the general theory of relativity can account for in an unforced way, namely, with-
out a A term' Einstein formally abandons the cosmological term, which is 'theo-
retically unsatisfactory anyway' [E48]. In 1932, he and de Sitter jointly make a
similar statement [E49]. He never uses the \ term again [E50].
7954. Einstein writes to a colleague, 'Von dem Mach'schen Prinzip sollte
man eigentlich iiberhaupt nicht mehr sprechen,' As a matter of fact, one should
no longer speak of Mach's principle at all [E51].
It was to be otherwise. After Einstein, the Mach principle faded but never died.
In the post-Einsteinian era of revitalized interest in general relativity, it has
become an important topic of research. At GR9, a discussion group debated the
issue, in particular what one has to understand by this principle. This question
can arouse passion. I am told that the Zeitschrift fur Physik no longer accepts
papers on general relativity on the grounds that articles on Mach's principle pro-
voke too many polemical replies. At stake is, for example, whether a theory is then
acceptable only if it incorporates this principle as a fundamental requirement (as
Einstein had in mind in 1918) or whether this principle should be a criterion for
the selection of solutions within a theory that also has non-Machian solutions.* It
must be said that, as far as I can see, to this day Mach's principle has not brought
physics decisively farther. It must also be said that the origin of inertia is and
remains the most obscure subject in the theory of particles and fields. Mach's prin-
ciple may therefore have a future—but not without quantum theory.
15f. Singularities; the Problem of Motion
In 1917 Einstein wrote to Weyl, 'The question whether the electron is to be
treated as a singular point, whether true singularities are at all admissible in the
physical description, is of great interest. In the Maxwell theory one decided on a
finite radius in order to explain the finite inertia of the electron' [E52]. Probably
already then, certainly later, there was no doubt in his mind (except for one brief
*For a detailed review of the various versions of the principle and a survey of the literature, see
[Gl].
THE NEW DYNAMICS 289
interlude) what the answer to this question was: singularities are anathema. His
belief in the inadmissibility of singularities was so deeply rooted that it drove him
to publish a paper purporting to show that 'the "Schwarzschild singularity" [at
r = 2GM/C2] does not appear [in nature] for the reason that matter cannot be
concentrated arbitrarily .. . because otherwise the constituting particles would
reach the velocity of light' [E53].* This paper was submitted in 1939, two months
before Oppenheimer and Snyder submitted theirs on stellar collapse [O3]. Unfor-
tunately, I do not know how Einstein reacted to that paper. As to the big bang,
Einstein's last words on that subject were, 'One may .. . not assume the validity
of the equations for very high density of field and matter, and one may not con-
clude that the "beginning of expansion" must mean a singularity in the mathe-
matical sense' [E54]. He may very well be right in this.
The scientific task which Einstein set himself in his later years is based on three
desiderata, all of them vitally important to him: to unify gravitation and electro-
magnetism, to derive quantum physics from an underlying causal theory, and to
describe particles as singularity-free solutions of continuous fields. I add a com-
ment on this last point (unified field theory and quantum theory will be discussed
in later chapters). As Einstein saw it, Maxwell's introduction of the field concept
was a revolutionary advance which, however, did not go far enough. It was his
belief that, also, in the description of the sources of the electromagnetic field, and
other fields, all reference to the Newtonian mechanical world picture should be
eradicated. In 1931 he expressed this view in these words:
In [electrodynamics], the continuous field [appears] side by side with the mate-
rial particle [the source] as the representative of physical reality. This dualism,
though disturbing to any systematic mind, has today not yet disappeared. Since
Maxwell's time, physical reality has been thought of as [being] represented by
continuous fields, governed by partial differential equations, and not capable of
any mechanical interpretation. ... It must be confessed that the complete real-
ization of the program contained in this idea has so far by no means been
attained. The successful physical systems that have been set up since then rep-
resent rather a compromise between these two programs [Newton's and
Maxwell's], and it is precisely this character of compromise that stamps them
as temporary and logically incomplete, even though in their separate domains
they have led to great advances. [E55]
That is the clearest expression I know of Einstein's profound belief in a descrip-
tion of the world exclusively in terms of everywhere-continuous fields.
There was a brief period, however, during which Einstein thought that singu-
larities might be inevitable. That was around 1927, when he wrote, 'All attempts
'Actually, the singularity at the Schwarzschild radius is not an intrinsic singularity. It was shown
later that the Schwarzschild solution is a two-sheeted manifold that is analytically complete except
at r = 0. Two-sheetedness was first introduced in 1935 by Einstein and Rosen [E53a], who believed,
however, that the singularity at r = 2GM/C2 is intrinsic.
290 RELATIVITY, THE GENERAL THEORY
of recent years to explain the elementary particles of nature by means of contin-
uous fields have failed. The suspicion that this is not the correct way of conceiving
material particles has become very strong in us after very many failed attempts,
about which we do not wish to speak here. Thus, one is forced into the direction
of conceiving of elementary particles as singular points or world lines.. . . We are
led to a way of thinking in which it is supposed that there are no field variables
other than the gravitational and the electromagnetic field (with the possible excep-
tion of the 'cosmological term' [!]); instead one assumes that singular world lines
exist' [E56]. These phrases are found in a paper, prepared with Jacob Grommer,
in which Einstein made his first contribution to the problem of motion. Let us
recall what that problem is.
Our knowledge of the left-hand side of the gravitational equations (Eq. 15.20)
is complete: R^ and R are known functions of the g^ and their derivatives and
of nothing else. To this day, our knowledge of the right-hand side, the source
7^, is flimsy. However, the left-hand side satisfies the identities Eq. 15.4. This
piece of purely gravitational information implies that 7^ = 0. Thus general rel-
ativity brings a new perspective to energy-momentum conservation: gravitation
alone constrains its own sources to satisfy these laws. Consider now, as the sim-
plest instance of such a source, a structureless point particle, a gravitational mono-
pole. Its motion is necessarily constrained by T% = 0. Question: In view of these
constraints, which are of gravitational origin, does the equation of motion of the
source follow from the gravitational field equations alone? In other words, was
the separate postulate of geodesic motion, already introduced by Einstein in 1914,
unnecessary? Einstein and Grommer showed that this is indeed true for the case
of a weak external gravitational field.
A few weeks later, Weyl wrote to Einstein, thanking him for the opportunity
to see the galley proofs of his new paper and 'for the support [this paper] gives to
my old idea about matter' [W20], adding a reference to an article he had written
in 1922 [W21] in which similar conclusions had been reached. Indeed, as was
discussed in particular by Havas [HI2],* Einstein was one of the independent
originators of the problem of motion, but neither the only nor the first one.
Einstein's reply to Weyl is especially interesting because it adds to our under-
standing of his interest in this problem at that time. 'I attach so much value to the
whole business because it would be very important to know whether or not the
field equations as such are disproved by the established facts about the quanta
[Quantenthatsachen]' [E58]. Recall that we are in 1927, shortly after the discov-
eries by Heisenberg and Schroedinger.
Einstein's last important contribution to general relativity deals again with the
problem of motion. It is the work done with Leopold Infeld and Banesh Hoffmann
"Havas's paper, which also contains a simple derivation of the Einstein-Grommer result, is one of
several important articles on the problem of motion in modern guise found in a volume edited by J.
Ehlers [E57].
THE NEW DYNAMICS 291
on the TV-body problem of motion [E59, E60]. In these papers, the gravitational
field is no longer treated as external. Instead, it and the motion of its (singular)
sources are treated simultaneously. A new approximation scheme is introduced in
which the fields are no longer necessarily weak but in which the source velocities
are small compared with the light velocity. Their results are not new; the same or
nearly the same results were obtained much earlier by Lorentz and Droste, de
Sitter, Fock, and Levi-Civita (P. Havas, private communication). The equations
obtained have found use in situations where Newtonian interaction must be
included. '[These equations] are widely used in analyses of planetary orbits in the
solar system. For example, the Gal Tech Jet Propulsion Laboratory uses them,
in modified form, to calculate ephemerides for high-precision tracking of planets
and spacecraft' [Ml3].
In his report to GR9 on the problem of motion, Ehlers stressed the difficulties
of defining isolated systems in general relativity and the need not to treat the prob-
lem of motion as an isolated question. Rather, the problem should be linked with
other issues, such as the description of extended bodies and gravitational radiation
(see also [E61 ]).* A particle physicist might like to add that the problem of motion
should perhaps not be dissociated from the fact that a body has a Compton wave-
length, a parameter of little interest for big things—and vice versa.
15g. What Else Was New at GR9?
The program of GR9 showed that all the topics discussed in the preceding sections
continue to be of intense interest. I conclude by listing other subjects discussed at
that meeting. Exact solutions are now examined by new analytic methods as well
as by computer studies. Other classical interests include the important Cauchy
problem.** Current experimental results (notably the huge precession of the per-
iastron of PSR 1913 + 16) and future terrestrial and planetary experiments were
discussed, with refined tests of general relativity in mind. There was a debate on
relativistic thermodynamics, a controversial subject to this day. There were reports
on the fundamental advances of our understanding regarding the general structure
of relativity theory, with special reference to singularity theorems, black holes, and
cosmic censorship. We were told that the best of all possible universes is still the
Friedmann universe, not only in our epoch but since time began. These beginnings
(especially the earliest fraction of a second) were reviewed with reference to bary-
*For example, it so happens that in the approximation defined by Eqs. 15.11-15.14, sources move
with constant velocity (!) [E57].
**Mme Y. Choquet-Bruhat told me that Einstein did not show much interest in this problem when
she once discussed it with him.
292 RELATIVITY, THE GENERAL THEOR
on asymmetries in the universe. There were discussions on the neutrino contents
of the universe and on the 3°K background radiation.
And there was discussion of quantum mechanics in general relativistic context,
not only of Hawking radiation, the important theoretical discovery of the 1970s
that particles are steadily created in the background geometry of a black hole, but
also of quantum gravity and supergravity. To the listener at this conference, these
last two topics, more than anything else, brought home most strikingly how much
still remains to be done in general relativity.
References
Cl. C. Caves, K. Thorne, R. Braver, V. Sandberg, and M. Zimmerman, Rev. Mod.
Phys. 52, 341 (1980).
C2. I. B. Cohen, Sci. Amer., July 1955, p. 69.
Dl. A. Dick, Elem. Math. Beiheft 13 (1970).
El. A. Einstein, PAW, 1915, p. 831.
E2. ——, The Origins of the General Theory of Relativity. Jackson, Wylie, Glasgow,
1933.
E3. P. Ehrenfest, letter to H. A. Lorentz, December 23, 1915.
E4. , letters to H. A. Lorentz, January 12 and 13, 1916.
E5. A. Einstein, letter to H. A. Lorentz, January 17, 1916.
E6. ,AdP49, 769 (1916).
E7. ——, Die Grundlage der Allgemeinen Relativitdtstheorie. Barth, Leipzig, 1916.
E8. and H. Minkowski, The Principle of Relativity (M. N. Saha and S. N. Bose,
Trans.). University of Calcutta, Calcutta, 1920.
E8a. , Uber die Spezielle und die Allgemeine Relativitdtstheorie Gemeinverstdn-
dlich. Vieweg, Braunschweig, 1917.
E9. , letter to H. A. Lorentz, January 1, 1916.
E10. , Forum Phil. 1, 173 (1930).
Ell. , The Yale University Library Gazette 6, 3 (1930).
El2. —, unpublished manuscript, probably from 1932.
E12a. A. S. Eddington, Space, Time and Gravitation, p. 134. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, 1920.
E12b. A. Einstein, Science 84, 506 (1936).
£13. , PAW, 1914, p. 1030, Sec. 13.
E14. , PAW, 1915, p. 778.
E15. , PAW, 1915, p. 844.
E16. —, PAW, 1916, p. 1111.
E17. A. Eddington, [E12a], p. 209.
El8. A. Eddington, Espace, Temps et Gravitation, Partie Theorique, p. 89. Hermann,
El8. A. Eddington, Espace, Temps et Gravitation, p. 89. Hermann, Paris, 1921.
E19. A. Einstein, letter to The New York Times, May 4, 1935.
E19a. , Phys. Zeitschr. 19, 115, 165 (1918).
E19b. , PAW, 1918, p. 448.
E20. PAW, 1916, p. 688.
E21. , Verh. Deutsch. Phys. Ges. 18, 318 (1916); Mitt. Phys. Ges. Zurich 16, 
(1916).
THE NEW DYNAMICS 293
E22. , PAW, 1918, p. 154.
E23. and N. Rosen, /. Franklin Inst. 223, 43 (1937).
E24. A. S. Eddington, The Mathematical Theory oj Relativity (2nd edn.), p. 130. Cam-
bridge University Press, Cambridge, 1960.
E25. J. Ehlers, A Rosenblum, J. Goldberg, and P. Havas, Astrophys. J. 208, L77
(1976).
E26. A. Einstein, Naturw. 17, 101 (1916).
E27. in Albert Einstein: Philosopher-Scientist (P. Schilpp, Ed.), p. 21. Tudor,
New York, 1949.
E28. , letter to M. Besso, March 6, 1952; EB, p. 464.
E29. —, letter to E. Mach, August 9, 1909.
E30. , letter to E. Mach, August 17, 1909.
E31. , PAW,\9\6, p. 98.
E32. , letter to E. Mach, undated, around January 1913.
E33. , letter to A. Weiner, September 18, 1930.
E34. , letter to C. B. Weinberg, December 1, 1937.
E35. , Bull. Soc. Fran. Phil. 22, 91 (1922); see also Nature 112, 253 (1923).
E36. , Viertelj. Schnft Ger. Medizin 44, 37 (1912).
E37. and M. Grossmann, Z. Math. Physik. 62, 225, (1914) see p. 228; also, A.
Einstein, Viertelj. Schrift. Naturf. Ges. Zurich 59, 4 (1914).
E38. —, letter to E. Mach, June 25, 1913.
E39. —, Phys. Zeitschr. 14, 1249 (1913), Sec. 9.
E40. , PAW, 1917, p. 142.
E41. , letter to P. Ehrenfest, February 4, 1917.
E41a. , letters to M. Besso, December 1916, August 20, 1918; EB, pp. 96, 134.
E42. , AdP55, 241 (1918); also, Naturw. 8, 1010 (1920).
E42a. —, AdP69, 436 (1922).
E42b. , PAW, 1918, p. 270.
E43. , PAW, 1919, pp. 349, 463.
E44. , Math. Ann. 97, 99 (1927).
E45. , Z. Phys. 11, 326 (1922).
E46. , Z. Phys. 16, 228 (1923).
E47. , letter to H. Weyl, May 23, 1923.
E48. , PAW, 1931, p. 235.
E49. and W. De Sitter, Proc. Nat. Ac. Sci. 18, 213 (1932).
E50. , The Meaning oj Relativity (5th edn.), p. 127. Princeton University Press,
Princeton, N.J., 1955.
E51. —, letter to F. Pirani, February 2, 1954; also, D. Sciama in [W3], p. 396.
E52. , letter to H. Weyl, January 3, 1917.
E53. , Ann. Math. 40, 922 (1939).
E53a. and N. Rosen, Phys. Rev. 48, 73 (1935).
E54. [E50] p. 129.
E55. in James Clerk Maxwell, p. 66. Macmillan, New York, 1931.
E56. and J. Grommer, PAW, 1927, p. 2.
E57. J. Ehlers (Ed.), Isolated Gravitating Systems, Varenna Lectures, Vol 67. Societa
Italiana di Fisica, Bologna, 1979.
E58. A. Einstein, letter to H. Weyl, April 26, 1927.
E59. , L. Infeld and B. Hoffmann, Ann Math. 39, 65 (1938).
294 RELATIVITY, THE GENERAL THEORY
£60. and , Ann Math. 41, 455 (1940).
E61. J. Ehlers, Ann N.Y. Ac. Sci. 336, 279 (1980).
Fl. A. Friedmann, Z. Phys. 10, 377 (1922).
Gl. H. F. Goenner, in Grundlagenproblemen der modernen Physik, BI Verlag, Mann-
heim, 1981.
HI. S. W. Hawking and W. Israel (Eds.), General Relativity, an Einstein Century
Survey. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1979.
H2. A. Held (Ed.), General Relativity and Gravitation. Plenum Press, New York,
1980.
H3. E. P. Hubble, Astrophys. J. 62, 409 (1925); 63, 236 (1926); 64, 321 (1926).
H3a. —, Proc. Nat. Ac. Sci. 15, 169 (1929).
H4. D. Hilbert, Goett. Nachr., 1915, p. 395.
H5. —, Goett. Nachr., 1917, p. 53.
H6. , [H5], p. 63.
H7. A. E. Harward, Phil. Mag. 44, 380 (1922).
H8. S. W. Hawking and W. Israel, [HI], p. 90.
H9. F. Herneck, Einstein und Sein Weltbild, p. 109. Verlag der Morgen, Berlin,
1976.
H10. G. Holton, Thematic Origins of Scientific Thought, p. 219. Harvard University
Press, Cambridge, Mass., 1973.
Hll. H. Honl, Einstein Symposium 1965, Ak. Verl. Berlin, 1966, p. 238.
H12. P. Havas in Isolated Systems in General Relativity (J. Ehlers, Ed.), p. 74. North
Holland, Amsterdam, 1979.
Jl. G. B. Jeffery, Phil. Mag. 43, 600 (1922).
Kl. M. D. Kruskal, Phys. Rev. 119, 1743 (1960).
K2. F. Klein, Goett. Nachr., 1918, p. 71. Reprinted in Felix Klein, Gesammelte
Mathematische Abhandlungen (R. Fricke and A. Ostrowski, Eds.), Vol. 1, p. 568.
Springer, Berlin, 1921.
K3. , [K2], Sec. 8, especially footnote 14.
K4. , Goett. Nachr., 1917, p. 469. Reprinted in Fricke and Ostrowski, [K2], Vol.
l.p.553.
LI. T. Levi-Civita, Rend. Circ. Mat. Palermo 42, 173 (1917).
L2. M. Lecat, Bibliographie de la Relativite. Lamertin, Brussels, 1924.
L2a. L. D. Landau, Nature 141, 333 (1938).
L3. H. A. Lorentz, letters to P. Ehrenfest, January 10 and 11, 1916.
L4. , letter to P. Ehrenfest, January 22, 1916.
L5. L. D. Landau and E. M. Lifshitz, The Classical Theory of Fields, (3rd edn.), p.
304. Addison-Wesley, Reading, Mass., 1971.
L6. H. A. Lorentz, Proc. K. Ak. Amsterdam 8, 603 (1900); Collected Works, Vol. 5,
p. 198. Nyhoff, the Hague, 1937.
Ml. M. K. Munitz, Theories of the Universe, The Free Press, Glencoe, 111., 1957.
M2. C. W. Misner, K. S. Thorne, and J. A. Wheeler, Gravitation. Freeman, San
Francisco, 1973.
M3. J. Mehra, The Solvay Conferences on Physics, Chap. 15. Reidel, Boston, 1975.
M4. R. W. Mandl, letter to A. Einstein, May 3, 1936.
M5. , letter to A. Einstein, December 18, 1936.
M6. E. Mach, Die Mechanik in Ihrer Entwicklung, Historisch-Kritisch Dargestellt.
THE NEW DYNAMICS 295
Brockhaus, Leipzig, 1883. Translated as The Science of Mechanics (4th edn.).
Open Court, Chicago, 1919.
M7. , [M6], English translation, pp. 542, 543.
M8. , Phys. Zeitschr. 11, 599 (1910).
M9. ——, The Principles of Physical Optics, preface. Methuen, London, 1926.
M10. , [M6], Chap. 2, Sec. 6, Subsec. 7.
Mil. , History and Root of the Principle of the Conservation of Energy (2nd edn.;
P. Jourdain, Tran.), pp. 78, 79. Open Court, Chicago, 1911.
M12. C. W. Misner et al., [M2], pp. 752-62.
M13. ,[M2], p. 1095.
Nl. J. D. North, The Measure of the Universe. Oxford University Press, Oxford,
1965.
N2. , [Nl], Chap. 7.
N3. Nature 106, issue of February 17, 1921.
N4. J. D. North, [Nl], Chaps. 8 and 9.
N5. E. Noether, Goett. Nachr., 1918, pp. 37, 235.
N6. J. D. North, [Nl], Chap. 2.
01. J. R. Oppenheimer and R. Serber, Phys. Rev. 54, 540 (1938).
02. and G. M. Volkoff, Phys. Rev. 55, 374 (1939).
03. and H. Snyder, Phys. Rev. 56, 455 (1939).
PI. W. Pauli, 'Relativitatstheorie,' Encyklopadie der Mathematischen Wissenschaf-
ten. Teubner, Leipzig, 1921.
P2. , Theory of Relativity (G. Field, Tran.). Pergamon Press, London, 1958.
P3. _, [PI] or [P2], Sec. 54.
P4. , [PI] or [P2], Sees. 23 and 57.
P5. , [PI] or [P2], Sec. 61.
P6. H. Poincare, C. R. Ac. Sci. Pans 140, 1504 (1905); Oeuvres de H. Poincare, Vol.
9, p. 489. Gauthier-Villars, Paris, 1954.
P7. W. Pauli, [PI] or [P2], Sec. 62.
Rl. H. P. Robertson, Rev. Mod. Phys. 5, 62 (1933).
R2. A. Rosenblum, Phys. Rev. Lett. 41, 1003 (1978).
51. L. S. Shepley and A. A. Strassenberg, Cosmology. AAPT, Stony Brook, N.Y.,
1979.
52. L. L. Smarr (Ed.), Sources of Gravitational Radiation. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, 1979.
53. G. Shaviv and J. Rosen (Eds.), Relativity and Gravitation. Wiley, New York,
1975.
54. G. Szekeres, Pub. Mat. Debrecen. 7, 285 (1960).
55. D. W. Sciama letter to A. Pais, October 16, 1979.
56. I. I. Shapiro, [W3], p. 115.
S6a. N. Sanitt, Nature 234, 199 (1971).
57. A. Sommerfeld (Ed.), The Principle of Relativity. Dover, New York.
58. J. Schouten, Ricci-Calculus (2nd edn.), p. 146. Springer, Berlin, 1954.
59. and D. J. Struik, Phil. Mag. 47, 584 (1924).
510. R. Schoen and S. T. Yau, Phys. Rev. Lett. 43, 1457 (1979).
511. Se, p. 98.
512. W. de Sitter, Proc. K. Ak. Amsterdam 19, 527 (1917), footnote on pp. 531, 532.
296 RELATIVITY, THE GENERAL THEORY
513. D. Sciama, [W3], p. 387.
514. W. de Sitter, Proc. K. Ak. Amsterdam 19, 1217 (1917); 20, 229 (1917).
Tl. R. C. Tolman, Phys. Rev. 55, 364 (1939).
T2. A. Trautman in Gravitation (L. Witten, Ed.), p. 169. Wiley, New York, 1962.
T3. K. Thome, Rev. Mod. Phys. 52, 285 (1980).
T4. —, Rev. Mod. Phys. 52, 299 (1980).
T5. , Rev. Mod. Phys. 52, 290 (1980).
T6. H. Thirring and J. Lense Phys. Z. 19, 156 (1918).
Wl. H. Weyl, Space, Time and Matter (H. L. Brose, Tran.). Dover, New York, 1951.
W2. S. Weinberg, Gravitation and Cosmology. Wiley, New York, 1972.
W3. H. Woolf (Ed.), Some Strangeness in the Proportion. Addison-Wesley, Reading,
Mass., 1980.
W4. S. Weinberg, [W2], Chap. 14, Sec. 5.
W5. J. A. Wheeler, Am. Scholar 37, 248 (1968); Am. Scientist 56, 1 (1968).
W6. S. Weinberg, [W2], p. 297.
W7. D. T. Wilkinson, [W3], p. 137.
W8. C. M. Will, [HI], Chap. 2.
W8a. D. Walsh, R. F. Carswell, and R. J. Weymann, Nature 279, 381 (1979).
W9. H. Weyl, Scripta Math. 3, 201 (1935).
W10. , AdP 54, 117 (1917).
Wll. S. Weinberg, [W2], Chap. 12, Sees. 3 and 4.
W12. , [W2], Chap. 9, Sec. 8.
W13. E. Witten, Comm. Math. Phys. 80, 381 (1981); see further R. Schoen and S. T.
Yau, Phys. Rev. Lett. 48, 369, 1981; G. T. Horowitz and M. J. Perry, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 48, 371,1981.
W14. J. Weber, Phys. Rev. 47, 306 (1960); Phys. Rev. Lett. 22, 1302 (1969).
W15. and J. A. Wheeler, Rev. Mod. Phys. 29, 509 (1957).
W16. M. Walker and C. M. Will, Phys. Rev. Lett. 22, 1741 (1980).
W17. C. M. Will, [HI], Chap. 2.
W18. S. Weinberg, [W2], pp. 16, 17.
W19. See, e.g., [W2], pp. 613ff.
W20. H. Weyl, letter to A. Einstein, February 3, 1927.
W21. , addendum to a paper by R. Bach, Math. Zeitschr. 13, 134 (1922).
Yl. P. Young, J. E. Gunn, J. Kristian, J. B. Oke, and J. A. Westphal, Astrophys. J.
241, 507 (1980).
V
THE LATER JOURNEY
This page intentionally left blank 