H
The Field Equations of Gravitation
14a. From Zurich to Berlin
On November 25, 1915, Einstein presented to the physics-mathematics section of
the Prussian Academy of Sciences a paper in which 'finally the general theory of
relativity is closed as a logical structure' [El]. The title of that paper is identical
with the heading of the present chapter, in which it is described how his field
equations reached their final form.
Einstein was still a professor at the ETII when he presented his report to the
Vienna meeting discussed in Chapter 13. However, by then he had already
decided to leave Zurich.
In the spring of 1913, Planck and Nernst had come to Zurich for the purpose
of sounding out Einstein about his possible interest in moving to Berlin. A com-
bination of positions was held out to him: membership in the Prussian Academy
with a special salary to be paid, half by the Prussian government and half by the
physics-mathematics section of the Academy from a fund maintained with outside
help, a professorship at the University of Berlin with the right but not the obli-
gation to teach, and the directorship of a physics institute to be established. The
new institute was to be under the auspices of the Kaiser Wilhelm Gesellschaft, an
organization founded in 1911 to support basic research with the aid of funds from
private sources.*
Much later, Einstein recalled an interesting exchange between himself and
Planck during this Zurich visit. 'Planck had asked him what he was working on,
and Einstein described general relativity as it was then. Planck said, "As an older
friend I must advise you against it for in the first place you will not succeed; and
even if you succeed, no one will believe you." ' [SI j.
Einstein reacted rapidly and positively to the approach from Berlin. His cor-
respondence from that period makes abundantly clear the principal reason for his
interest in this offer. Neither then nor later was he averse to discussing physics
issues with younger colleagues and students; but he had had enough of teaching
classes. All he wanted to do was think. The catalogue of PhD theses awarded at
"This physics institute started its activities in 1917. In 1921, von Laue took over the main day-to-
day responsibilities.
239
240 RELATIVITY, THE GENERAL THEORY
the ETH shows that he had acted as Korreferent* for four theses, all in experi-
mental physics, but had not taken on PhD students in theoretical physics.
Encouraged by Einstein's response, Planck, Nernst, Rubens, and Warburg
joined in signing a formal laudatio, the statement supporting a proposal for mem-
bership, which was presented to the academy on June 12, 1913 [Kl]. On July 3,
the physics-mathematics section voted on the proposal. The result was twenty-
one for, one against [K2]. A number of arrangements remained to be worked out,
but already in July 1913 Einstein wrote to a friend that he was going to be in
Berlin by the spring of 1914 [E2]. In August he wrote to Lorentz, 'My cordial
thanks for your friendly congratulations concerning the new position. I could not
resist the temptation to accept a position which frees me of all obligations so that
I can devote myself freely to thinking' (Griibelei) [E3]. To similar good wishes by
Ehrenfest, he replied that he 'accepted this odd sinecure because it got on my
nerves to give courses, whereas there [in Berlin] I do not have to lecture' [E4]. To
Zangger he mentioned that contact with the colleagues in Berlin might be stim-
ulating. 'In particular, the astronomers are important to me (at this time)' [E5].
This was in obvious reference to his current interest in the red shift and the bend-
ing of light.
In a letter [K3] sent to the academy on December 7, 1913, Einstein formally
accepted membership and declared that he wished to begin his new position in
April 1914. On February 9, 1914, he gave a farewell talk before the Physical
Society of Zurich, in which he noted that 'we have progressed as little in the theory
of gravitation as the physicists of the eighteenth century when they knew only
Coulomb's law' [E6]. He mentioned the Nordstrom and the Einstein-Grossmann
theories, remarked that the former is simpler and more plausible but does not shed
any light on the relativity of nonuniform motion, and expressed the hope that the
bending of light (present in the Einstein-Grossmann theory, absent in the Nord-
strom theory) would soon lead to an experimental choice between these two
possibilities.
The Einsteins left Zurich in late March 1914. Einstein went for a brief visit to
Leiden and from there to Berlin, which was to be his home until December 1932.
His wife and children went for a few weeks to Locarno [E7] and then joined him
in Berlin, but not for long. Soon after Mileva's arrival, the Einsteins separated.
I do not know what precipitated this course of events at that particular moment.
But the marriage had been an unhappy one. Einstein never put all the blame for
that on Mileva. With inner resistance, he had entered an undertaking which even-
tually went beyond his strength [E7a]. Now Mileva and the boys were to return
to Zurich. Einstein saw them off at the station. 'Weinend ist er vom Bahnhof
zuriickgegangen'.** His love for his boys endured. For many years he would reg-
*The acceptance of an ETH thesis required formal approval by both a principal examiner (Refer-
ent) and a coexaminer (Korreferent). Einstein acted in the latter capacity for the theses of Karl
Renger, Hans Renker, Elsa Frenkel, and August Piccard.
**'He wept as he returned from the railway station.' (H. Dukas, private communication).
THE FIELD EQUATIONS OF GRAVITATION 24!
ularly take them on holiday trips. These contacts were not always easy, since
Mileva never reconciled herself to the separation and subsequent divorce. In later
times, after Einstein's remarriage, the sons would visit and stay with their father
in Berlin.
Soon after the separation, Einstein moved into a bachelor apartment at Wit-
telsbacherstrasse 13. Early in April he wrote to Ehrenfest, 'It is pleasant here in
Berlin. A nice room ... my relations here give me great joy, especially a "Cousine"
[female cousin] of my age to whom I am attached by a long friendship' [E8]. A
year later he told Zangger, 'Concerning my personal circumstances, I have never
been as peaceful and happy as I am now. I live a retiring life, yet not a lonely one
thanks to the loving care of a "Cousine" who in fact drew me to Berlin' [E9].*
We shall hear more about this cousin in Chapter 16.
By the time Einstein arrived in Berlin, he was already a man of great renown,
though not yet the stellar figure he was to become five years later. It was therefore
natural that soon after his arrival, he would be approached by the editors of Die
Vossische Zeitung, a major German daily newspaper, with the request that he
explain something of his work to their readers. Einstein accepted. On April 26,
1914, his first newspaper article appeared, entitled 'Vom Relativitatsprinzip,'
About the relativity principle [E10]. It is nicely written and deals mainly with
topics in the special theory. Its last paragraph begins with the question, 'Is the
[special] relativity theory sketched above essentially complete or does it represent
only a first step of a farther-reaching development?' Einstein remarked that the
second alternative appeared to him to be the correct one but added that 'on this
point, the views even of those physicists who understand relativity theory are still
divided.'**
This divergence in views on the future of relativity theory, characteristic for the
period 1913-15, was much in evidence on the occasion of Einstein's inaugural
address before the Prussian Academy, on July 2, 1914 [E12]. After expressing his
gratitude for the opportunity given him to devote himself 'fully to scientific study,
free of the excitements and cares of a practical profession,' he turned to the major
current issues in physics. He spoke in praise of Planck, whose 'quantum hypoth-
esis overthrew classical mechanics for the case of sufficiently small masses moving
with sufficiently small velocities and large accelerations. . .. Our position regard-
ing the basic laws of these [molecular] motions is similar to that of the pre-New-
tonian astronomers in regard to planetary motions.' Then he went on to relativity
theory and observed that the special theory 'is not fully satisfactory from the the-
oretical point of view because it gives a preferred position to uniform motion.'
Planck replied [PI], welcoming Einstein and remarking, 'I know you well
enough to dare say that your real love belongs to that direction of work in which
*' . . . die mich ja uberhaupt nach Berlin zog.'
**A 1915 review of relativity theory by Einstein [Ell] has the same tenor as his newspaper article.
It is almost entirely devoted to the special theory and toward the end contains phrases nearly identical
to the ones just quoted.
242 RELATIVITY, THE GENERAL THEORY
the personality can unfold itself in the freest possible way.' Then he, too, addressed
the question of the preferred uniform motions in the special theory. 'In my opin-
ion, one could just as well take the opposite view [of Einstein's] and look upon the
preferred position of uniform motion as precisely a very important and valuable
characteristic of the theory'. For, Planck notes, natural laws always imply certain
restrictions on infinitely many possibilities. 'Should we consider Newton's law of
attraction unsatisfactory because the power 2 plays a preferred role?' Could one
perhaps not relate the preferred uniform motion to 'the special privilege which
indeed singles out the straight line among all other spatial curves'?! These are not
impressive comments. However, one must side with Planck when he courteously
and justly chided Einstein, noting that in the latter's general theory not all coor-
dinate systems are on an equal footing anyway, 'as you yourself have proved only
recently.' Planck ended by expressing the hope that the expedition planned to
observe the solar eclipse of August 21, 1914, would provide information about the
bending of light predicted (not yet correctly) by Einstein. These hopes were dashed
by the outbreak of the First World War.
Einstein's productivity was not affected by the deep troubles of the war years,
which, in fact, rank among the most productive and creative in his career. During
this period, he completed the general theory of relativity, found the correct values
for the bending of light and the displacement of the perihelion of Mercury, did
pioneering work on cosmology and on gravitational waves, introduced his A and
B coefficients for radiative transitions, found a new derivation of Planck's radia-
tion law—and ran into his first troubles with causality in quantum physics. Dur-
ing the war he produced, in all, one book and about fifty papers, an outpouring
all the more astounding since he was seriously ill in 1917 and physically weakened
for several years thereafter.
This intense scientific activity did not banish from Einstein's mind a genuine
and intense concern for the tragic events unfolding in the world around him. On
the contrary, the period of 1914-18 marks the public emergence of Einstein the
radical pacifist, the man of strong moral convictions who would never shy away
from expressing his opinions publicly, whether they were popular or not. Early
in the war, he and a few other scholars signed a 'manifesto to Europeans' criticiz-
ing scientists and artists for having 'relinquished any further desire for the contin-
uance of international relations' and calling 'for all those who truly cherish the
culture of Europe to join forces.. . . We shall endeavor to organize a League of
Europeans' (an effort that came to naught). This appears to be the first political
document to which Einstein lent his name. He also joined the pacifist Bund Neues
Vaterland, League of the New Fatherland.* It gave him joy to find colleagues
who 'stand above the situation and do not let themselves be driven by the murky
* Einstein on Peace by Otto Nathan and Heinz Norden describes in detail Einstein's political activ-
ities during the First World War [Nl]. The quotations from the manifesto are taken from that book,
which contains its full text.
THE FIELD EQUATIONS OF GRAVITATION 243
currents of [our] time.. .. Hilbert regrets .. . having neglected to foster interna-
tional relations more.. .. Planck does all he can to keep the chauvinist majority
of the Academy in check. I must say that in this respect the hostile nations are
well matched' [El3].
The strength of Einstein's own convictions was not lessened by the amused
detachment with which throughout his life he regarded human folly. 'I begin to
feel comfortable amid the present insane tumult (wahnsinnige Gegenwartsrum-
mel), in conscious detachment from all things which preoccupy the crazy com-
munity (die verriickte Allgemeinheit). Why should one not be able to live con-
tentedly as a member of the service personnel in the lunatic asylum? After all, one
respects the lunatics as the ones for whom the building in which one lives exists.
Up to a point, one can make one's own choice of institution—though the distinc-
tion between them is smaller than one thinks in one's younger years' [El4].
Einstein's initial hopes that the voices of reason might prevail yielded to increas-
ing pessimism as the war dragged on. In 1917 he wrote to Lorentz, 'I cannot help
being constantly terribly depressed over the immeasurably sad things which bur-
den our lives. It no longer even helps, as it used to, to escape into one's work in
physics' [El5]. These feelings of dejection may have been enhanced, I think, by
Einstein's own illness at that time.
After this digression on Einstein and the war, I return to the developments in
general relativity. We are in the fall of 1914, at which time Einstein wrote a long
paper for the proceedings of the Prussian Academy [El6]. Its main purpose was
to give a more systematic and detailed discussion of the methods used and the
results obtained in the first paper with Grossmann [El7]. Nearly half the paper
deals with an expose of tensor analysis and differential geometry. Einstein clearly
felt the need to explain these techniques in his own way; they were as new to him
as to most other physicists. The paper also contains several new touches concern-
ing physics. First of all, Einstein takes a stand against Newton's argument for the
absolute character of rotation (as demonstrated, for example, by Newton's often
reproduced discussion of the rotating bucket filled with water [Wl]). Instead, Ein-
stein emphasizes, 'we have no means of distinguishing a "centrifugal field" from
a gravitational field, [and therefore] we may consider the centrifugal field to be a
gravitational field.' The paper contains another advance. For the first time, Ein-
stein derives the geodesic equation of motion of a point particle (cf. Eq. 12.28)
[E18] and shows that it has the correct Newtonian limit (cf. Eq. 12.30) [E19]. He
also shows that his earlier results about the red shift and the bending of light (still
the old value, off by a factor of 2) are contained in the tensor theory [E20]. As a
final positive result, an important comment about the character of space-time
should be mentioned, which (to my knowledge) he makes here for the first time:
'According to our theory, there do not exist independent (selbstandige) qualities
of space' [E21].
Regarding the covariance properties of the gravitational field equations, how-
ever, there is no progress. If anything, the situation is getting slightly worse.
We saw in Section 12d that early in 1913 Einstein and Grossmann had been
244 RELATIVITY, THE GENERAL THEORY
unable to find generally covariant gravitational field equations [El7] and that
Einstein had given a 'physical argument' for the impossibility of such general
covariance. Now, late in 1914, Einstein reproduced this same argument in his
long paper. Not only did he still believe it, but he prefaced it with the remark that
'we must restrict this requirement [of general covariance] if we wish to be in full
agreement with the law of causality' [E22]. This remark is understandable in the
context of Einstein's unjustified criterion that the metric tensor g^ should be
uniquely determined by its source, the energy momentum tensor. In the 1914
paper he returned to the division of space-time into two domains L, and L2, as
described in Section 12d. Recall that he had found g^ ¥= g^ in the matter-free
region L2. This time, he wrote this inequality in more detail: g^x) =£ g'^x'). But,
he now adds, grua(x') = g'm(x'(x)) = /^(x). Anyone familiar with tensor fields
will not be shocked by the fact that g^x) ¥= /^(x). Einstein, on the other hand,
concluded from this inequality that generally covariant gravitational field equa-
tions are inadmissible. In 1914 not only did he have some wrong physical ideas
about causality but in addition he did not yet understand some elementary math-
ematical notions about tensors [HI]. Once again he insisted that the gravitational
field equations can be covariant only under linear transformations.*
Einstein next proceeded to show that this restricted covariance uniquely deter-
mines the gravitational Lagrangian, provided that the latter is assumed to be
homogeneous and of the second degree in the (ordinary, noncovariant) first deriv-
atives of the gp, [E24]. In the course of 1915 he realized, however, that this
'argument for the determination of the Lagrange function of the gravitational field
was entirely illusory, since it could easily be modified in such a way that [this
Lagrangian] . .. could be chosen entirely freely' [E25].
The mathematical details of the October 1914 paper are of no interest for the
understanding of the evolution of the general theory and will be omitted. This
paper gave rise to a correspondence between Einstein and Levi-Civita, early in
1915. The latter pointed out some technical errors. Einstein was grateful for hav-
ing these brought to his attention. Above all, however, he was happy to have
finally found a professional who took a keen interest in his work. 'It is remarkable
how little my colleagues are susceptible to the inner need for a real relativity the-
ory. ... It is therefore doubly gladdening to get to know better a man like you'
[E26].
In summary, toward the end of 1914 Einstein could look back on a year which
had brought major changes to his personal life and his professional career. He
was still essentially alone in his convictions about the future of relativity theory
and confused about some of its crucial features. One year later, he had corrected
his conceptual errors, completed the theory, and seen others participate actively in
its development.
"The slight extension of the set of allowed transformations given in the second Einstein-Grossmann
paper [E23] (Section 12d) must have been found shortly afterward.
THE FIELD EQUATIONS OF GRAVITATION 245
14b. Interlude: Rotation by Magnetization
'I firmly believe that the road taken is in principle the correct one and that later
[people] will wonder about the great resistance the idea of general relativity is
presently encountering' [E27]. This prophesy was made by Einstein in the first
week of 1915. It would be fulfilled before the year was out, but not until Einstein
had passed through a crisis followed by an exhausting struggle. Toward the
autumn of 1915 he finally realized* that his theory up until then was seriously
wrong in several respects.
Meanwhile, early in 1915 he did not publish anything substantially new on
relativity.** He did write two review articles, one on relativity theory [Ell] and
one on the atomic theory of matter [E29], and a short paper on the statistical
properties of electromagnetic radiation in thermal equilibrium [E30]. Of more
interest are his activities in experimental physics. At that time Einstein made good
use of a temporary guest appointment at the Physikalisch Technische Reichsan-
stalt in Charlottenburg [K4]. 'In my old age, I am acquiring a passion for exper-
iment' [E31]. This passion led to the discovery of the Einstein-de Haas (EdH)
effect, the torque induced in a suspended cylinder (made of iron, for example) as
a consequence of its being abruptly magnetized. The present interlude is devoted
to a brief account of these activities.
Wander Johannes de Haas was a Dutch physicist of Einstein's age. He received
his PhD in Leiden, in 1912, with Kamerlingh Onnes. Later that same year, he
went to the University of Berlin to work in the laboratory of Henri du Bois.f In
August 1913, when Lorentz sent congratulations to Einstein on his forthcoming
appointment in Berlin, he must have added (the letter is lost) a query concerning
de Haas, as is seen from Einstein's reply: 'At present, I do not know what to do
in the matter of your son-in-law, since in Berlin I will have neither an institute
nor an assistant.' [E3]. Then came the visiting appointment at the Reichsanstalt.
Einstein was now in a position to do something for de Haas—and for Lorentz.^
I do not know when de Haas joined Einstein at the Reichsanstalt. However, their
gyromagnetic experiment was performed 'in a very brief period' [HIa]. De Haas
left the Reichsanstalt in April 1915.
Soon after the conclusion of their collaboration, Einstein wrote enthusiastically
about the results obtained. 'Scientifically, I have done a wonderful experimental
thing this semester, together with Lorentz's son-in-law. We have given firm proof
*See Section 14c.
**It is sometimes incorrectly stated that a brief abstract of a talk by Einstein before the Prussian
Academy [E28] contains the announcement of the final formulation of his theory as published in
November 1915 [Dl],
fin October 1912 the Ehrenfests visited de Haas and his wife in Berlin—at the suggestion of Lorentz
[K5].
HOn one occasion, Einstein referred in print to de Haas as Herr de Haas-Lorentz [E32].
246 RELATIVITY, THE GENERAL THEORY
of the existence of Ampere's molecular currents* (explanation of para- and fer-
romagnetism) . .. within the limits of error (about 10 per cent) the experiment
yielded in all detail a confirmation of the theory' [E14].** Their experiment, sim-
ple in principle, riddled with complexities in practice, gave the first proof of the
existence of rotation induced by magnetization. Their result was qualitatively
right. However, in the pre-spin days of 1915, any dynamic theory of ferromag-
netism had necessarily to be incorrect. Einstein could not know that his theoretical
prediction was wrong by a factor of about 2. Since Einstein and de Haas claimed
to have found agreement between theory and experiment, their experiment had
also to be wrong by a factor of 2. Their estimate of a 10 per cent experimental
error had to be too optimistic. As we shall see, the alleged agreement between
theory and experiment was largely a theoretical prejudice.
Characteristically, Einstein was unaware of earlier efforts to measure gyro-
magnetic effects until some time after his own work had been completed [E33].
These attempts go back to Maxwell, who remarked in his treatise of 1873 that
'there is as yet no experimental evidence to show whether the electric current is
really a current of a material substance' [Ml]. He proposed several methods for
testing this idea: acceleration of a conductor should generate a currentf; and a
magnet should act like a gyroscope, which is the basic idea of the EdH effect [M2].
In 1861 Maxwell himself attempted to detect such gyroscopic effects, but without
success.
Two other instances of related work prior to 1915 must be mentioned.ff The
theoretical derivation by Einstein in 1915 had already been given in 1907 by
Owen Willans Richardson, who had also tried in vain to observe the rotation by
magnetization, at Palmer Laboratory in Princeton [R1J-H In 1909 Samuel Jack-
son Barnett, then at Tulane University, began the study of the inverse effect, mag-
netization by rotation, now known as the Barnett effect. I shall next outline the
EdH work of 1915 and then state the interesting results obtained by Barnett at
about the same time [B2].
Let us first phrase Ampere's hypothesis in modern language. ^^ The magnetic
moment M of a magnetized body (assumed at rest) is due to circulating 'hidden
* Andre-Marie Ampere had conjectured around 1820 that magnetism can be considered to be caused
by electricity in motion.
**There exists a German [E33], a Dutch [E34], and an English [E35] version of the EdH paper.
Each one of these differs slightly from the other two. The statement on the limits of error in each
paper agrees in substance with what is said in the letter quoted in the text. All three papers appeared
in 1915.
•(•This effect was first observed in 1916 [Tl].
ffA detailed early history of gyromagnetic effects is found in papers by Barnett [Bl].
1[For some years after 1915, the effect was called the Einstein-Richardson effect.
HHIn EdH and other early papers, the magnetic moment is defined as cM.
THE FIELD EQUATIONS OF GRAVITATION 247
electric currents.' The hidden flow of current is due to a hidden flow of charged
matter (electrons) moving in closed orbits. Thus there exists a hidden angular
momentum /, related to M by
where — e and m are the charge and mass of the electron, respectively. The factor
g is now called the Lande factor (g > 0 for para- and ferromagnetic substances).
In the model of Richardson and Einstein, the value
was obtained by the following reasoning. Consider one electron moving with uni-
form velocity v in a circular orbit with radius r and circular frequency v. Then
v = 2irrv. The angular momentum has the magnitude mvr = 2irrzmv. An
amount of electricity —ev passes per second through a point of the orbit. The
magnetic moment is therefore equal to (—ev)(irr2)/c. Hence g = 1. The same
value of g should also hold, it was argued, for a piece of paramagnetic or ferro-
magnetic matter as long as magnetism is caused by a set of electrons moving
independently in circular orbits.
Einstein and de Haas knew well that objections could be raised against this
derivation. 'One of these is even more serious than it was in Ampere's days . ..
circulating electrons must lose their energy by radiation . . . the molecules of a
magnetic body would therefore lose their magnetic moment. Nothing of the kind
having ever been observed, the [Ampere] hypothesis seems irreconcilable with a
general validity of the fundamental laws of electromagnetism. It appears . . . that
... as much may be said in favour of Ampere's hypothesis as against it and that
the question concerns important physical principles' [E35]. Clearly the proof that
permanently circulating electrons indeed exist meant far more to Einstein than
only the verification of a century-old hypothesis.* So it did to Bohr, whose theory
of stationary atomic orbits was only two years old at that time. To Bohr the out-
come of the EdH experiment was a confirmation of his own ideas. Later in 1915
he wrote, 'As pointed out by Einstein and de Haas, [their] experiments indicate
very strongly that electrons can rotate in atoms without emission of energy radia-
tion' [B3].**
The EdH technique for measuring g consisted in analyzing the motion of an
iron cylinder hung vertically (in the z direction; 'up' counted as positive) by means
'There was still another reason why Einstein attached great significance to the EdH effect, as is
seen especially clearly in a paper he wrote in May 1915 (E32J: he believed (incorrectly) that the
persistence of ferromagnetism at zero absolute temperature indicated the existence of a zero point
energy of rotation. (In 1913 he had invoked just such a zero point energy in an attempt to explain
certain anomalies in the specific heats of diatomic molecules [E36]. By 1915 he knew that his specific
heat argument was incorrect, however [Fl].)
**The quantum theory is not mentioned in any of the EdH papers, however.
248 RELATIVITY, THE GENERAL THEORY
of a wire. A fixed solenoid is placed coaxially around the cylinder. The iron is
magnetized by an alternating current run through the solenoid. The change AM
of the magnetic moment in the z direction induces a change A/ in the hidden
angular momentum due to the electron motions such that AM = —eg&J/2mc.
Angular momentum conservation demands that A/ be compensated for. Thus the
iron cylinder as a whole acquires an angular momentum — A/, since this body
may be considered rigid. The resulting angular velocity Aa would be given by
egQAa = 2mcAM if only the magnetic force were acting on the cylinder (Q being
the moment of inertia in the z direction). The true Aa results from the interplay
between the magnetic driving force and the restoring force due to the attachment
of the cylinder to the wire. It is clear that the experiment serves to determine g if
the various other magnetic and mechanical parameters are known.
There are many complications. The cylinder has to be hung precisely on its
axis; the magnetic field has to be symmetric with respect to the cylinder axis; it
also has to be uniform in order to give a simple meaning to AM; the effect of the
earth's magnetic field needs to be compensated for; there may be effects due to the
interaction of the alternating current with some remanent magnetization of the
cylinder. No wonder that the cylinder underwent 'the most adventurous motions'
[E33]. Einstein and de Haas showed that many of these difficulties could be over-
come by an ingenious trick, the resonance method. The cylinder is hung by means
of a rather rigid glass wire. The mechanical oscillation frequency of this system
is matched with the frequency of the alternating current. The resulting resonance
makes it much easier to separate the desired effect from perturbing influences.*
Einstein and de Haas took two sets of measurements. They managed to obtain
agreement with their calculated value g = 1 by singling out one of these two sets.
Six years later—after it was clear that g = 1 is not the right value—de Haas
described what they had done.** 'The numbers which we found [for g] are 1.45
and 1.02. The second value is nearly equal to the classical value [g = 1] so that
we thought that experimental errors had made the first value too large.... We
did not measure the field of the solenoid; we calculated it.... We did not measure
the magnetism of the cylinder, either; we calculated or estimated it. All this is
stated in our original memoir. These preliminary results seemed satisfactory to us,
and one can easily understand that we were led to consider the value 1.02 as the
better one ...' [Hla]. I am not aware of a similar confession by Einstein.
This section would not be complete without a few remarks about the transition
to the modern era. It is now known that ferromagnetism is almost purely a spin
* Additional information was obtained by measuring not only at resonance but also around resonance.
The many technical details of the measurement not discussed here can be found in Barnett's article
in the Reviews of Modern Physics [Bl].
**I express the answers in terms of g, thereby slightly changing the wording of de Haas.
THE FIELD EQUATIONS OF GRAVITATION 249
effect. The orbital contributions of earlier days have turned out to be nearly
entirely quenched. The quantum mechanical theory of ferromagnetism, given by
Heisenberg in 1928 [Hlb] provided the basis for a refined treatment of the cor-
responding gyromagnetic effects [H2]. Experimentally, the g value for ferromag-
netic materials has been found to lie close to 2 (except for Fe7S8) with deviations
<10 per cent [S2]. The first experimental indications for g ~ 2 were published
in 1915 by Barnett (then at Ohio State University). In his earlier-mentioned paper
on the Barnett effect [B2], he concluded that 'the magnitude ... is within the
experimental error equal to twice the .. . value computed,' the latter value being
g = 1. However, further measurements done by him in 1917 gave g ~ 1, 'but
the experimental errors . .. are such that great importance cannot, in my opinion,
be attached to the discrepancies [with his earlier results]' [B4]. In the period
1918-20, three independent measurements of the EdH effect were reported. In
chronological order, these came from Princeton [S3], the ETH in Zurich [B5],
and Uppsala [Al]. The answers found were g « 1.96, 1.88, and 1.87, respec-
tively. From that time on, the 'gyromagnetic anomaly' (as it was often called) was
firmly established. Inevitably this led to fairly widespread speculations about
'planetary motions of [positively-charged] constituents of nuclei' [B6]. The first
one to suspect a connection between the anomalous Zeeman effect and this new
gyromagnetic anomaly was Alfred Lande [LI] in 1921, the same year Heisenberg
expressed the opinion in a letter to Pauli that g = 2 could occur only in ferro-
magnetic bodies [H3].
Since de Haas was from Leiden, where the spin was discovered, it was only
natural that I would ask Uhlenbeck whether the EdH effect had played any role
in the discovery of the electron spin by him and Goudsmit (knowing that the effect
is not mentioned in their paper). Uhlenbeck replied that he knew of the effect
because he was in Leiden but that this subject was not in the center of attention
at that time. 'Had Ehrenfest thought it pertinent, he would surely have mentioned
it to us.' Thus the EdH effect served to confirm rather than stimulate subsequent
theoretical developments.
As to Einstein, his interest in gyromagnetism continued after de Haas's depar-
ture. In 1916 he published another paper on the EdH effect. It contains the design
of a new experimental arrangement* for determining g [E37]. He also remained
interested in the activities at the Reichsanstalt. In 1916 he was appointed member
of its Kuratorium (board of governors) and played an active role in the planning
and design of its experimental projects [K6].
Let us now return to our main topic, Einstein's final formulation of his theory
of general relativity.
"The idea was to flip the remanent magnetization of a premagnetized iron cylinder. This method
has the advantage that the cylinder is exposed to a magnetic field for such a brief time (=slO~3 s)
that irritating side effects are largely eliminated.
250 RELATIVITY, THE GENERAL THEORY
14c. The Final Steps
7. The Crisis. On the first of January 1916, when it was all over, Einstein wrote
to Lorentz, 'During the past autumn, the gradually dawning realization of the
incorrectness of the old gravitational equations caused me hard times (bose Zei-
ten)' [E25]. It appears that this crisis occurred between late July and early Octo-
ber 1915. For on July 7, 1915, Einstein described to Zangger the subject of lec-
tures he had just given in Goettingen as 'die nun schon sehr geklarte
Gravitationstheorie,' the by now already quite clarified theory of gravitation
[E38]. A week later, he wrote to Sommerfeld about a tentative plan to write a
short treatise on relativity which was to be oriented toward a general theory of
relativity [E39]. But on November 7 he wrote to Hilbert, 'I realized about four
weeks ago that my methods of proof used until then were deceptive' [E40], and
on October 12, to Lorentz, 'In my paper [of October 1914, [E16]], I carelessly
(leichtsinnig) introduced the assumption that [the gravitational Lagrangian] is an
invariant for linear transformations' [E41]. He abandoned this linear invariance
in a series of papers completed in November 1915, which culminate in the final
form of his gravitational equations, presented on November 25. On November 28
he wrote to Sommerfeld: "During the past month I had one of the most exciting
and strenuous times of my life, but also one of the most successful ones' [E42]. All
these statements taken together convince me that Einstein still believed in the 'old'
theory as late as July 1915, that between July and October he found objections
to that theory, and that his final version was conceived and worked out between
late October and November 25. In December he wrote with irony about his earlier
faith in the old version of the theory. 'That fellow Einstein suits his convenience
(Es ist bequem mil dem E.). Every year he retracts what he wrote the year before
...' [E43].
What made Einstein change his mind between July and October? Letters to
Sommerfeld [E42] and Lorentz [E25] show that he had found at least three objec-
tions against the old theory: (1) its restricted covariance did not include uniform
rotations, (2) the precession of the perihelion of Mercury came out too small by
a factor of about 2, and (3) his proof of October 1914 of the uniqueness of the
gravitational Lagrangian was incorrect. Einstein got rid of all these shortcomings
in a series of four brief articles. 'Unfortunately, I immortalized in [these] academy
papers the last errors made in this struggle' [E42].
2. November the Fourth. Einstein presents to the plenary session of the Prus-
sian Academy a new version of general relativity 'based on the postulate of covar-
iance with respect to transformations with determinant 1' [E44]. He began this
paper by stating that he had 'completely lost confidence' in the equations proposed
in October 1914 [El6]. At that time he had given a proof of the uniqueness of the
gravitational Lagrangian. He had realized meanwhile that this proof 'rested on
misconception,' and so, he continued, 'I was led back to a more general covariance
of the field equations, a requirement which I had abandoned only with a heavy
THE FIELD EQUATIONS OF GRAVITATION 25!
heart in the course of my collaboration with my friend Grossmann three years
earlier.' (It should be said that in matters of science a heavy heart never lasted
very long for Einstein.)
For the last time, I recall that Einstein and Grossmann had concluded [El7]
that the gravitational equations could be invariant under linear transformations
only and that Einstein's justification for this restriction was based on the belief
that the gravitational equations ought to determine the g^ uniquely, a point he
continued to stress in October 1914 [E16]. In his new paper [E44], he finally
liberated himself from this three-year-old prejudice. That is the main advance on
November 4. His answers were still not entirely right. There was still one flaw,
a much smaller one, which he eliminated three weeks later. But the road lay open.
He was lyrical. 'No one who has really grasped it can escape the magic of this
[new] theory.'
The remaining flaw was, of course, Einstein's unnecessary restriction to uni-
modular transformations. The reasons which led him to introduce this constraint
were not deep, I believe. He simply noted that this restricted class of transfor-
mations permits simplifications of the tensor calculus. This is mainly because
Vg is a scalar under unimodular transformations (cf. Eq. 12.14). Therefore the
distinction between tensors and tensor densities no longer exists. As a result, it is
possible to redefine covariant differentiation for tensors of rank higher than 1. For
example, instead of Eq. 12.13, one may use [E45]
Equation 12.17 can be similarly simplified. 'The most radical simplification' con-
cerns the Ricci tensor given in Eq. 12.20. Write*
where [W2]
Up is a vector since yg is a scalar; s^ is the covariant derivative of v^. Therefore,
under unimodular transformations, R^ decomposes into two parts, r^ and s^, each
of which separately is a tensor.
*The quantities /?,,„, ?•„„, $„„ correspond to Einstein's G^, Rf,, Sf, in [E44].
252 RELATIVITY, THE GENERAL THEORY
Having described this splitting of the Ricci tensor, Einstein next proposed his
penultimate version of the gravitational equations:
covariant under local unimodular transformations. They are a vast improvement
over the Einstein-Grossman equations and cure one of the ailments he had diag-
nosed only recently: unimodular transformations do include rotations with arbi-
trarily varying angular velocities. In addition, he proved that Eqs. 14.8 can be
derived from a variational principle; that the conservation laws are satisfied (here
the simplified definitions Eq. 14.3 play a role); and that there exists an identity
where T is the trace of T^. He interpreted this equation as a constraint on the
g^. A week later, he would have more to say on this relation.
In the weak-field limit, g^ = t}^ + h^ (Eq. 12.29), one recovers Newton's law
from Eq. 14.8. Einstein's proof of this last statement is by far the most important
part of this paper. 'The coordinate system is not yet fixed, since four equations
are needed to determine it. We are therefore free to choose* [my italics]
Then Eqs. 14.8 and 14.10 yield
which reduces to the Newton-Poisson equation in the static limit.
The phrase italicized in the above quotation shows that Einstein's understand-
ing of general covariance had vastly improved. The gravitational equations do not
determine the h^ (hence the g^) unambiguously. This is not in conflict with caus-
ality. One may choose a coordinate system at one's convenience simply because
coordinate systems have no objective meaning. Einstein did not say all this explic-
itly in his paper. But shortly afterward he explained it to Ehrenfest. 'The appar-
ently compelling nature of [my old causality objection] disappears at once if one
realizes that ... no reality can be ascribed to the reference system' [E43].
3. November the Eleventh. A step backward. Einstein proposes [E46] a
scheme that is even tighter than the one of a week earlier. Not only shall the
theory be invariant with respect to unimodular transformations—which implies
that g is a scalar field—but, more strongly, it shall satisfy
*'Wir diirfen deshalb willkiirlich festsetzen . . .'. Equation 14.10 is the harmonic coordinate condi-
tion in the weak-field limit [W3].
THE FIELD EQUATIONS OF GRAVITATION 253
He writes the gravitational equations in the form
where R^ is the full Ricci tensor. However, Eqs. 14.7 and 14.12 imply that s^
= 0. Thus Eqs. 14.4 and 14.13 give once again Eq. 14.8, the gravitational equa-
tions of November 4.
Though not compelling, this new idea may seem simple. It is in fact quite mad.
Equation 14.12 together with Eq. 14.9 implies that T = 0. The trace of the
energy momentum tensor does vanish for electromagnetic fields but not for matter.
Thus there seems to be a contradiction, which Einstein proposed to resolve by
means of 'the hypothesis that molecular gravitational fields constitute an essential
part of matter.' The trace density we 'see' in matter, he suggests, is actually the
sum T' of T and the trace of the gravitational field. Then T' can be positive and
yet T = 0. 'We assume in what follows that the condition T = 0 is actually
fulfilled.'
During the next two weeks, Einstein believed that his new equation (Eq. 14.12)
had brought him closer to general covariance. He expressed this opinion to Hilbert
on November 12. 'Meanwhile, the problem has been brought one step forward.
Namely, the postulate \/g = 1 enforces general covariance; the Riemann tensor
yields directly the gravitational equations. If my current modification ... is justi-
fied, then gravitation must play a fundamental role in the structure of matter.
Curiosity makes it hard to work!' [E47].
One week later, he remarked that 'no objections of principle' can be raised
against Eq. 14.12 [E48]. Two weeks later, he declared that 'my recently stated
opinion on this subject was erroneous' [El].
4. November the Eighteenth. Einstein still subscribes to the demands of
unimodular invariance and \/g = 1 • On the basis of this 'most radical relativity
theory,' he presents two of his greatest discoveries [E48]. Each of these changed
his life.
The first result was that his theory 'explains .. . quantitatively .. . the secular
rotation of the orbit of Mercury, discovered by Le Verrier, . . . without the need
of any special hypothesis.' This discovery was, I believe, by far the strongest emo-
tional experience in Einstein's scientific life, perhaps in all his life. Nature had
spoken to him. He had to be right. 'For a few days, I was beside myself with
joyous excitement' [E49]. Later, he told Fokker that his discovery had given him
palpitations of the heart [F2]. What he told de Haas [F2] is even more profoundly
significant: when he saw that his calculations agreed with the unexplained astro-
nomical observations, he had the feeling that something actually snapped in
him. .. .
Einstein's discovery resolved a difficulty that was known for more than sixty
years. Urbain Jean Joseph Le Verrier had been the first to find evidence for an
anomaly in the orbit of Mercury and also the first to attempt to explain this effect.
On September 12, 1859, he submitted to the Academy of Sciences in Paris the text
254 RELATIVITY, THE GENERAL THEORY
of a letter to Herve Faye in which he recorded his findings [L2]. The perihelion
of Mercury advances by thirty-eight seconds per century due to 'some as yet
unknown action on which no light has been thrown* ... a grave difficulty, worthy
of attention by astronomers.' The only way to explain the effect in terms of known
bodies would be (he noted) to increase the mass of Venus by at least 10 per cent,
an inadmissible modification. He strongly doubted that an intramercurial planet,
as yet unobserved, might be the cause. A swarm of intramercurial asteroids was
not ruled out, he believed. 'Here then, mon cher confrere, is a new complication
which manifests itself in the neighborhood of the sun.'
Perihelion precessions of Mercury and other bodies** have been the subject of
experimental study from 1850 up to the present.f The value 43 seconds per cen-
tury for Mercury, obtained in 1882 by Simon Newcomb [Nla], has not changed.
The present best value is 43". 11 + 0.45 [W4]. The experimental number quoted
by Einsteintf on November 18, 1915, was 45" ± 5 [E48].
In the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, attempts at a theoretical
interpretation of the Mercury anomaly were numerous. Le Verrier's suggestions
of an intramercurial planet^ or planetary ring were reconsidered. Other mecha-
nisms examined were a Mercury moon (again as yet unseen), interplanetary dust,
and a possible oblateness of the sun [O2, F3]. Each idea had its proponents at one
time or another. None was ever generally accepted. All of them had in common
that Newton's 1 /r2 law of gravitation was assumed to be strictly valid. There were
also a number of proposals to explain the anomaly in terms of a deviation from
this law. Recall that Newton himself already knew that small deviations from the
power —2 would lead to secular perturbations of planetary orbits [N2]. Two
kinds of modifications from Newton's law were considered: a slightly different,
purely static law [O3] or a 1/r2 law corrected with velocity-dependent terms [Zl]
(Lorentz's theory of gravitation mentioned in Chapter 13 belongs to this last cat-
egory). These attempts either failed or are uninteresting because they involve
adjustable parameters. Whatever was tried, the anomaly remained puzzling. In
his later years, Newcomb tended 'to prefer provisionally the hypothesis that the
sun's gravitation is not exactly as the inverse square' [N3J.5H
Against this background, Einstein's joy in being able to give an explanation
'without any special hypothesis' becomes all the more understandable. The tech-
*' . .. du a quelque action encore inconnue, "cui theoriae lumen nundum accessed!." '
**See, for example, the table in [W4].
t A detailed list of nineteenth century references is found in [Ol].
f fEinstein took this value from a review by Freundlich [F3]. For his appreciation of Newcomb, see
[E49a].
Uln the 1870s, it was briefly thought that such a planet (it was named Vulcan) had actually been
seen.
51[For a detailed survey of Le Verrier's and Newcomb's work, see [Gl].
THE FIELD EQUATIONS OF GRAVITATION 255
nicalities of his calculation need not be described in detail since they largely coin-
cide with standard textbook treatments. The following comments will suffice.
a) Einstein started from his field equations
r^ = 0 (14.14)
for empty space (cf. Eq. 14.8) and his general condition yg = 1, Eq. 14.12. The
modern treatment starts from R^ = 0 and a choice of coordinate system such that
V£ = 1. Either way, the answers for the effect are, of course, the same, a fact
Einstein became aware of in the course of preparing his paper [E50].
b) On November 18, he did not yet have the g^R/2 term in the field equations.
This term plays no role in the actual calculations he made, as he himself stressed
one week later.
c) The approximation method developed in this paper marks the beginning of
post-Newtonian celestial mechanics. Einstein asked for a static isotropic solution
of the metric (as it is now called [W5]). His answer: g^ = —5^ — ax^Jr3, g^
= 0, £00 = ~1 + <x/r (i,k = 1,2,3), where a is an integration constant. He
expanded in a/r; \/g — 1 is satisfied to first order. It suffices to compute F^ to
first order, T'm to second order. The results are inserted in the geodesic equations
(Eq. 12.28) and the standard bound-orbit caculation is performed. And so, one
week before the general theory of relativity was complete, Einstein obtained for
the precession per revolution: 247T3a2/7"V(l — e2), which yields 43"/century (a
= semimajor axis, T = period of revolution, e = eccentricity; see [W6] for the
relation between this result and modern experiment).
d) Two months later, on January 16, 1916, Einstein read a paper [S4] before
the Prussian Academy on behalf of Karl Schwarzschild, who was in the German
army at the Russian front at that time. The paper contained the exact solution of
the static isotropic gravitational field of a mass point, the first instance of a rigorous
solution of Einstein's full gravitational field equations. On February 24, 1916,
Einstein read another paper by Schwarzschild [S5], this one giving the solution
for a mass point in the gravitational field of an incompressible fluid sphere. It is
there that the Schwarzschild radius is introduced for the first time. On June 29,
1916, Einstein addressed the Prussian Academy [E51] to commemorate
Schwarzschild, who had died on May 11 after a short illness contracted at the
Russian front. He spoke of Schwarzschild's great talents and contributions both
as an experimentalist and a theorist. He also spoke of Schwarzschild's achieve-
ments as director (since 1909) of the astrophysical observatory in Potsdam. He
concluded by expressing his conviction that Schwarzschild's contributions would
continue to play a stimulating role in science. .. .
I return to the November 18 paper. Einstein devoted only half a page to his
second discovery: the bending of light is twice as large as he had found earlier. 'A
light ray passing the sun should suffer a deflection of 1".7 (instead of 0".85).' As
is well known [ W7], this result can be obtained with the help of the same solutions
256 RELATIVITY, THE GENERAL THEORY
for gy, as mentioned above, applied this time to compute unbound orbits.* The
discussion of the momentous consequences of this result will be reserved for Chap-
ter 16.
5. November the Twenty-Fifth \E1\:
The work is done. The conservation laws are satisfied: yg = 1 is no equation of
principle but rather an important guide to the choice of convenient coordinate
systems. The identity Eq. 14.9, thought earlier to have major physical implica-
tions, is replaced by a triviality. The calculations of the week before remain
unaffected:
Any physical theory that obeys special relativity can be incorporated into the
general theory of relativity; the general theory does not provide any criterion
for the admissibility of that physical theory.. . . Finally the general theory of
relativity is closed as a logical structure.[El]
Note that Eq. 14.15 is equivalent to R" - g^R/2 = -K.T".
In Section 12d, I mentioned that Einstein did not know the Bianchi identities
[W8]
when he did his work with Grossmann. He still did not know them on November
25 and therefore did not realize that the energy-momentum conservation laws
follow automatically from Eqs. 14.15 and 14.16. Instead, he used these conser-
vation laws as a constraint on the theory! I paraphrase his argument. Start from
Eq. 14.15 but with the coefficient % replaced by a number a to be determined.
Differentiate Eq. 14.15 covariantly and use Eq. 14.17. Next take the trace of Eq.
14.15, then differentiate. One finds that (R" + a(\ - 4a)-y7?):, = 0 (use
gi** = 0)- Choose coordinates such that \fg = 1. See if there is a solution for a.
One finds a = & Einstein's choice of coordinates is of course admissible, but it
is an unnecessary restriction that prevented him from discovering Eq. 14.16 as a
generally covariant relation. We shall see in Section 15c how the Bianchi identities
finally entered physics.
Einstein's brief belief in Eq. 14.9 may have been a useful mistake, since he had
discovered that funny equation by the same compatibility method. In the case of
Eq. 14.8, the relations are r = — /cTand r£ = 0. The term on the left-hand side
in Eq. 14.9 arose because in the November 4 paper Einstein had redefined his
*Einstein inserted those gf, into gf,dx"dx' = 0 and then applied Huyghens" principle.
THE FIELD EQUATIONS OF GRAVITATION 257
covariant derivatives (cf. Eq. 14.3) in such a way that the conservation laws read
On November 28, Einstein wrote to Sommerfeld that three years earlier he and
Grossmann had considered Eq. 14.15 'without the second term on the right-hand
side,' but had come to the wrong conclusion that it did not contain Newton's
approximation [E42].
On December 10, he wrote to Besso that he was 'zufrieden aber ziemlich
kaputt' [E52].*
On June 20, 1933, Einstein, exiled from Germany, gave a lecture at the Uni-
versity of Glasgow on the origins of the general theory of relativity. In concluding
this address, he said:
The years of searching in the dark for a truth that one feels but cannot express,
the intense desire and the alternations of confidence and misgiving until one
breaks through to clarity and understanding are known only to him who has
himself experienced them. [ E52a]
14d. Einstein and Hilbert**
To repeat, on November 25 Einstein presented his final version (Eq. 14.15) of the
gravitational equations to the Prussian Academy. Five days earlier, David Hilbert
had submitted a paper to the Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften in Goettingen [H4]
which contained the identical equation but with one qualification. Einstein, having
learned the hard way from his mistakes a few weeks earlier, left the structure of
T1" entirely free, except for its transformation and conservation properties. Hil-
bert, on the other hand, was as specific about gravitational as about all other
forces. Correspondingly (and this is the qualification), his T" has a definite
dynamic form:'. . . I believe that [my paper] contains simultaneously the solution
of the problems of Einstein and of Mie.'
In 1912-13, Mie had proposed a field theory of electromagnetism and matter
based on non-gauge-invariant modifications of Maxwell's equations [M4]. It was
meant to be a theory of everything but gravitation.f Mie's ideas attracted attention
in the second decade of this century but are now of historical interest only and of
no relevance to our present subject. Suffice it to say that it was Hilbert's aim to
give not just a theory of gravitation but an axiomatic theory of the world. This
'Content but rather worn out.
"See also [M3j.
f Mie's ideas on gravitation were referred to in Chapter 13. For a comment by Einstein on Mie's
electromagnetic theory, see [E52b]. The reader will find clear synopses of Mie's theory in the texts
by Pauli [P2] and by Weyl [W9].
258 RELATIVITY, THE GENERAL THEORY
lends an exalted quality to his paper, from the title, 'Die Grundlagen der Physik,'
The Foundations of Physics, to the concluding paragraph, in which he expressed
his conviction that his fundamental equations would eventually solve the riddles
of atomic structure. In December 1915, Einstein remarked that Hilbert's com-
mitment to Mie's theory was unnecessary from the point of view of general rela-
tivity [E53]. 'Hilbert's Ansatz for matter seems childish to me,' he wrote some
time later [E54]. Justified though these criticisms are, Hilbert's paper nevertheless
contains a very important and independent contribution to general relativity: the
derivation of Eq. 14.15 from a variational principle.
Hilbert was not the first to apply this principle to gravitation. Lorentz had done
so before him [L3]. So had Einstein, a few weeks earlier [E44]. Hilbert was the
first, however, to state this principle correctly:
for infinitesimal variations g*"(x) —* g"(x) + f>g**(x) such that 8g"" = 0 at the
boundary of the integration domain (R is the Riemann curvature scalar, L the
matter Lagrangian). It is well known that Eq. 14.18 leads to Eq. 14.15, including
the trace term, if L depends on gf" but not on their derivatives.*
Hilbert's paper also contains the statement (but not the proof!!) of the following
theorem. Let / be a scalar function of n fields and let b$J\/~gd*x = 0 for varia-
tions x" —* x" + ^(x) with infinitesimal |". Then there exist four relations
between the n fields. It is now known* that these are the energy-momentum
conservation laws (Eq. 14.17) if /= L and the identities (Eq. 14.16) if /= R,
but in 1915 that was not yet clear. Hilbert misunderstood the meaning of the
theorem as it applied to his theory. Let / correspond to his overall gravitational-
electromagnetic Lagrangian. Then / depends on 10 + 4 fields, the g^, and the
electromagnetic potentials. There are four identities between them. 'As a conse-
quence of... the theorem, the four [electromagnetic] equations may be considered
as a consequence of the [gravitational] equations.... In [this] sense electromag-
netic phenomena are gravitational effects. In this observation I see the simple and
very surprising solution of the problem of Riemann, who was the first to seek
theoretically for the connection between gravitation and light.'** Evidently Hil-
bert did not know the Bianchi identities either!
These and other errors were expurgated in an article Hilbert wrote in 1924
[H5]. It is again entitled 'Die Grundlagen der Physik' and contains a synopsis of
his 1915 paper and a sequel to it [H6], written a year later. Hilbert's collected
works, each volume of which contains a preface by Hilbert himself, do not include
these two early papers, but only the one of 1924 [H7]. In this last article, Hilbert
*Scc the detailed discussion of variational principles in [W10] and [M5]. The tensor T" is defined
by SJL Vgd'x = }i-SV^T"(x)Sgl,(x)dtX.
"Here Hilbert referred to the essay 'Gravitation und Licht' in Riemann's Nachlass [R2].
THE FIELD EQUATIONS OF GRAVITATION 259
credited Amalie Emmy Noether (who was in Goettingen in 1915) with the proof
of the theorem about the four identities; Noether's theorem had meanwhile been
published, in 1918 [N4]. By 1924 Lorentz [L4], Felix Klein [K7], Einstein [E55],
and Weyl [Wll] had also written about the variational methods and the identities
to which they give rise (see further Section 15c).
I must return to Einstein and Hilbert, however. The remarkable near simul-
taneity of their common discovery raises the obvious question of what exchanges
took place between them in 1915. This takes me back to the summer of that year.
As was mentioned earlier, in late June-early July, Einstein had spent about a
week in Goettingen, where he 'got to know and love Hilbert. I gave six two-hour
lectures there' [E9].* The subject was general relativity. 'To my great joy, I suc-
ceeded in convincing Hilbert and Klein completely' [E56]. 'I am enthusiastic about
Hilbert. An important figure . . .,' [E39], he wrote upon his return to Berlin. From
the period in which Einstein lectured, it is clear that his subject was the imperfect
theory described in his paper of October 1914. I have already mentioned that
Einstein made his major advance in October-November 1915. I know much less
about the time it took Hilbert to work out the details of the paper he presented
on November 20. However, we have Felix Klein's word that, as with Einstein,
Hilbert's decisive thoughts came to him also in the fall of 1915—not in Goettingen
but on the island of Rugen in the Baltic [K8].
The most revealing source about the crucial month of November is the corre-
spondence during that period between Einstein and Hilbert. Between November
7 and 25, Einstein, otherwise a prolific letter writer, did not correspond with any-
one—except Hilbert (if the Einstein archive in Princeton is complete in regard to
that period). Let us see what they had to say to each other.
November 7: E. to H. Encloses the proofs of the November 4 paper 'in which
I have derived the gravitational equations after I recognized four weeks ago that
my earlier methods of proof were deceptive.' Alludes to a letter by Sommerfeld
according to which Hilbert had also found objections to his October 1914 paper
[E40]. The whole November correspondence may well have been triggered, it
seems to me, by Einstein's knowledge that he was not the only one to have found
flaws in this earlier work of his.
November 12: E. to H. Communicates the postulate \fg = 1 (the November
II paper). Sends along two copies of the October 1914 paper [E47].
November 14: H. to E. Is excited about his own 'axiomatic solution of your
grand problem. ... As a consequence of a general mathematical theorem, the
(generalized Maxwellian) electrodynamic equations appear as a mathematical
consequence of the gravitational equations so that gravitation and electrodynamics
are not distinct at all.' Invites E. to attend a lecture on the subject, which he plans
to give on November 16 [H8].
*Einstein and Hilbert began corresponding at least as early as October 1912, when Einstein was
still in Zurich.
260 RELATIVITY, THE GENERAL THEORY
November 15: E. to H. 'The indications on your postcards lead to the greatest
expectations.' Apologizes for his inability to attend the lecture, since he is overtired
and bothered by stomach pains. Asks for a copy of the proofs of Hilbert's paper
[E57].
November 18: E. to H. Apparently Einstein has received a copy of Hilbert's
work. 'The system [of equations] given by you agrees—as far as I can see—
exactly with what I found in recent weeks and submitted to the Academy' [E58].
November 19: H. to E. Congratulates him for having mastered the perihelion
problem. 'If I could calculate as quickly as you, then the electron would have to
capitulate in the face of my equations and at the same time the hydrogen atom
would have to offer its excuses for the fact that it does not radiate' [H9]. Here, on
the day before Hilbert submitted his November 20 paper, the known November
correspondence between the two men ends.
Let us come back to Einstein's paper of November 18. It was written at a time
in which (by his own admission) he was beside himself about his perihelion dis-
covery (formally announced that same day), very tired, unwell, and still at work
on the November 25 paper. It seems most implausible to me that he would have
been in a frame of mind to absorb the content of the technically difficult paper
Hilbert had sent him on November 18. More than a year later, Felix Klein wrote
that he found the equations in that paper so complicated that he had not checked
them [K9]. It is true that Hilbert's paper contains the trace term which Einstein
had yet to introduce.* But Einstein's method for doing so was, as mentioned ear-
lier, the adaptation of a trick he had already used in his paper of November 4.
Thus it seems that one should not attach much significance either to Einstein's
agreeing with Hilbert 'as far as I can see' or to Hilbert's agreeing with Einstein
'as it seems to me' [H4]. I rather subscribe to Klein's opinion that the two men
'talked past each other, which is not rare among simultaneously productive math-
ematicians' [K10]. (I leave aside the characterization of Einstein as a mathema-
tician, which he never was nor pretended to be.) I again agree with Klein 'that
there can be no question of priority, since both authors pursued entirely different
trains of thought to such an extent that the compatibility of the results did not at
once seem assured' [Kll]. I do believe that Einstein was the sole creator of the
physical theory of general relativity and that both he and Hilbert should be cred-
ited for the discovery of the fundamental equation (Eq. 14.15).
I am not sure that the two protagonists would have agreed.
Something happened between these two men between November 20 and
December 20, when Einstein wrote to Hilbert, 'There has been a certain pique
between us, the causes of which I do not wish to analyze. I have struggled with
complete success against a feeling of bitterness connected with that. I think of you
once again with untroubled friendliness and ask you to try to do the same regard-
"Hilbert's Tf, has a nonvanishing trace since his L refers to the Mie theory. I find it hard to believe
that Einstein went as far as thinking that Hilbert's Triad to vanish [E59].
THE FIELD EQUATIONS OF GRAVITATION 26l
ing me. It is really a shame if two real fellows who have freed themselves to some
extent from this shabby world should not enjoy each other' [E60]. The full story
may never be known. However, in a reply to a query, E. G. Straus wrote to me,
'Einstein felt that Hilbert had, perhaps unwittingly, plagiarized Einstein's
[largely wrong!] ideas given in a colloquium talk at Goettingen.* The way Ein-
stein told it, Hilbert sent a written apology in which he said that '[this talk] had
completely slipped his mind . . ." [SI]. Whatever happened, Einstein and Hilbert
survived. The tone of their subsequent correspondence is friendly. In May 1916
Einstein gave a colloquium on Hilbert's work in Berlin [E61]. On that occasion
he must have expressed himself critically about Hilbert's approach.** In May
1917 he told a student from Goettingen, 'It is too great an audacity to draw
already now a picture of the world, since there are still so many things which we
cannot yet remotely anticipate' [S6], an obvious reference to Hilbert's hopes for a
unification of gravitation and electromagnetism. Einstein was thirty-eight when
he said that. He was to begin his own program for a picture of the world shortly
thereafter. ...
References
Al. G. Arvidsson, Phys. Zeitschr. 21, 88 (1920).
Bl. S. J. Barnett, Physica 13, 241 (1933); Phys. Zeitschr. 35, 203 (1934); Rev. Mod.
Phys. 7, 129 (1935).
B2. , Phys. Rev. 6, 239 (1915).
B3. N. Bohr, Phil. Mag. 30, 394 (1915).
B4. S. J. Barnett, Phys. Rev. 10, 7 (1917).
B5. E. Beck, AdP 60, 109 (1919).
B6. Cf. W. Braunbeck, Phys. Zeitschr. 23, 307 (1922) and also the discussion at the
end of [Hla].
Cl. J. Chazy, La Theorie de la Relativite et la Mecanique Celeste, Chap. 4. Gauthier-
Villars, Paris, 1928.
Dl. Cf., e.g., Dictionary of Scientific Biography, Vol. 4, pp. 324, 327. Scribner's, New
York, 1971.
El. A. Einstein, PAW, 1915, p. 844.
E2. , letter to J. Laub, July 22, 1913.
E3. , letter to H. A. Lorentz, August 14, 1913.
E4. , letter to P. Ehrenfest, undated, probably winter 1913-14.
E5. —, letter to H. Zangger, March 10, 1914.
E6. , Viertelj. Schr. Naturf. Ges. Zurich 59, 4 (1914).
E7. , letter to M. Besso, early March 1914; EB, p. 52.
*I am forced to assume that this is in reference to the June-July talks, since it is hard to believe
that Einstein visited Goettingen in November 1915.
"Einstein to Ehrenfest: 'I don't like Hilbert's presentation . .. unnecessarily special . .. unneces-
sarily complicated . .. not honest in structure (vision of the Ubermensch by means of camouflaging
the methods) .. .' [E62].
262 RELATIVITY, THE GENERAL THEORY
E7a. , letter to C. Seelig, May 5, 1952.
E8. —, letter to P. Ehrenfest, April 10, 1914.
E9. , letter to H. Zangger, July 7, 1915.
E10. , Die Vossische Zeitung, April 26, 1914.
Ell. —•— in Kultur der Gegenwart (E. Lecher, Ed.), Vol. 3. Teubner, Leipzig, 1915.
E12. , PAW, 1914, p. 739.
E13. , letter to H. Zangger, July 7, 1915.
E14. ——, letter to H. Zangger, undated, probably spring 1915.
E15. , letter to H. A. Lorentz, December 18, 1917.
E16. , PAW, 1914, p. 1030.
E17. — and M. Grossmann, Z. Math. Phys. 62, 225 (1913).
£18. , [E16], p. 1046, Eq. 23b.
E19. , [E16], p. 1083, the second of Eqs. 88.
E20. , [E16], p. 1084.
E21. , [E16], p. 1085.
E22. , [E16], p. 1066.
E23. and M. Grossmann, Z. Math. Phys. 63, 215 (1915).
E24. , [E16], pp. 1075, 1076, especially Eq. 78.
E25. , letter to H. A. Lorentz, January 1, 1916.
E26. , letter to T. Levi-Civita, April 14, 1915.
E27. , letter to P. Straneo, January 7, 1915.
E28. ,/MW, 1915, p. 315.
E29. in Kultur der Gegenwart (E. Lecher, Ed.), Vol. 3. Teubner, Leipzig, 1915.
E30. , AdP47, 879 (1915).
E31. , letter to M. Besso, February 12, 1915; EB, p. 57.
E32. , Naturw. 3, 237 (1915).
E33. and W. de Haas, Verh. Deutsch. Phys. Ges. 17, 152 (1915); correction, 17,
203 (1915).
E34. and W. de Haas, Versl. K. Ak. Amsterdam 23, 1449 (1915).
E35. and W. de Haas, Proc. K. Ak. Amsterdam 18, 696 (1915).
E36. and O. Stern, AdP 40, 551 (1913).
E37. , Verh. Deutsch. Phys. Ges. 18, 173 (1916).
E38. , letter to H. Zangger, July 7, 1915.
E39. , letter to A. Sommerfeld, July 15, 1915. Reprinted in Einstein/Sommerfeld
Briefwechsel (A. Hermann, Ed.), p. 30. Schwabe, Stuttgart, 1968.
E40. , letter to D. Hilbert, November 7, 1915.
E41. —, letter to H. A. Lorentz, October 12, 1915.
E42. , letter to A. Sommerfeld, November 28, 1915. Reprinted in Einstein/Som-
merfeld Briefwechsel, p. 32.
E43. , letter to P. Ehrenfest, December 26, 1915.
E44. , PAW, 1915, p. 778.
E45. , [E44], Eq. 5a.
E46. , PAW, 1915, p. 799.
E47. , letter to D. Hilbert, November 12, 1915.
E48. , PAW, 1915, p. 831.
E49. , letter to P. Ehrenfest, January 17, 1916.
E49a. , Science 69, 248 (1929).
THE FIELD EQUATIONS OF GRAVITATION 263
E50. , [E48], p. 831.
E51. , PAW, 1916, p. 768, footnote 1.
E52. , letter to M. Besso, December 10, 1915; EB, p. 59.
E52a. , The Origins of the General Theory of Relativity. Jackson, Wylie, Glasgow,
1933.
E52b. and J. Grommer, PAW, 1927, p. 3.
E53. , letter to A. Sommerfeld, December 9, 1915. Reprinted in Einstein/Som-
merfeld Briefwechsel, p. 36.
E54. , letter to H. Weyl, November 23, 1916.
E55. , PAW, 1916, p. 1111.
E56. —, letter to W. J. de Haas, undated, probably August 1915.
E57. —-, letter to D. Hilbert, undated, very probably November 15, 1915.
E58. , letter to D. Hilbert, November 18, 1915.
E59. J. Barman and C. Glymour, Arch. Hist. Ex. Set. 19, 291 (1978).
E60. A. Einstein, letter to D. Hilbert, December 20, 1915.
E61. , letter to D. Hilbert, May 25, 1916.
E62. , letter to P. Ehrenfest, May 24, 1916.
Fl. A. D. Fokker, AdP 43, 810 (1914).
F2. , Ned. Tydschr. Natuurk. 21, 125 (1955).
F3. E. Freundlich, Astr. Nachr. 201, 51 (1915).
HI. B. Hoffmann, Proc. Einstein Symposium Jerusalem, 1979.
Hla. W. de Haas in Proceedings of the Third Solvay Conference, April 1921, p. 206.
Gauthier-Villars, Paris, 1923.
Hlb. W. Heisenberg, Z. Phys. 49, 619 (1928).
H2. S. P. Heims and E. T. Jaynes, Rev. Mod. Phys. 34, 143 (1962).
H3. W. Heisenberg, letter to W. Pauli, December 17, 1921. See W. Pauli: Scientific
Correspondence, Vol. 1, p. 48. Springer, New York, 1979.
H4. D. Hilbert, Goett. Nachr., 1915, p. 395.
H5. , Math. Ann. 92, 1 (1924).
H6. , Goett. Nachr., 1917, p. 53.
H7. ——, Gesammelte Abhandlungen, Vol. 3, p. 258. Springer, New York, 1970.
H8. , two postcards to A. Einstein, November 14, 1915.
H9. , letter to A. Einstein, November 19, 1915.
Kl. C. Kirsten and H. J. Treder, Albert Einstein in Berlin, 1913-1933, Vol. I, p. 95.
Akademie Verlag, Berlin, 1979. This volume is referred to below as K.
K2. K, p. 98.
K3. K, p. 101.
K4. K, p. 50.
K5. M. Klein, Paul Ehrenfest, Vol. 1, p. 194. North Holland, Amsterdam, 1970.
K6. K, p. 50.
K7. F. Klein, Gesammelte Mathematische Abhandlungen, Vol. 1, pp. 553, 568, 586.
Springer, New York, 1973.
K8. , letter to W. Pauli, May 8, 1921; Pauli correspondence cited in [H3], p. 31.
K9. , [K7], p. 559.
K10. , letter to W. Pauli, March 8, 1921; Pauli correspondence cited in [H3], p.
27.
Kll. , [K7],p. 566.
264 RELATIVITY, THE GENERAL THEORY
LI. A. Lande, Z. Phys. 7, 398 (1921).
L2. U. J. J. Le Verrier, C. R. Ac. Sci. Paris 49, 379 (1859).
L3. H. A. Lorentz, Proc. K. Ac. Wetensch. Amsterdam 23, 1073 (1915).
L4. , Collected Papers, Vol. 5, p. 246. Nyhoff, the Hague, 1934.
Ml. J. C. Maxwell, Treatise on Electricity and Magnetism (1st edn.), Vol. 2, p. 202.
Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1873.
M2. , ibid., pp. 200-4.
M3. J. Mehra, Einstein, Hilbert and the Theory of Gravitation. D. Reidel, Boston,
1974.
M4. G. Mie, AdP37, 511 (1912); 39, 1 (1912); 40, 1 (1913).
M5. C. Misner, K. Thorne, and J. Wheeler, Gravitation, Chap. 21. Freeman, San
Francisco, 1970.
Nl. O. Nathan and H. Norden, Einstein on Peace, Chap. 1. Schocken, New York,
1968.
Nla. S. Newcomb. Astr. Papers of the Am. Ephemeris 1, 472 (1882).
N2. I. Newton, Principia, liber 1, sectio 9. Best accessible in the University of Cali-
fornia Press edition, 1966 (F. Cajori, Ed.).
N3. S. Newcomb, Encyclopedia Britannica, Vol. 18, p. 155. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, 1911.
N4. E. Noether, Goett. Nachr., 1918, pp. 37, 235.
01. S. Oppenheim, Encyklopadie der Mathematischen Wissenschaften Vol. 6, Chap.
22, p. 94. Teubner, Leipzig, 1922.
02. , [Ol], Chap. 4.
03. , [Ol], Chap. 5.
PI. M. Planck, PAW, 1914, p. 742.
P2. W. Pauli, Relativity Theory, Sec. 64. Pergamon Press, London, 1958.
Rl. O. W. Richardson, Phys. Rev. 26, 248 (1908).
R2. B. Riemann, Gesammelte Mathematische Werke und Wissenschaftlicher Nachlass
(H. Weber, Ed.), p. 496. Teubner, Leipzig, 1876.
51. E. G. Straus, letter to A. Pais, October 1979.
52. G. G. Scott, Rev. Mod. Phys. 34, 102 (1962).
53. J. Q. Stewart, Phys. Rev. 11, 100 (1918).
54. K. Schwarzschild, PAW, 1916, p. 189.
55. , /MW, 1916, p. 424.
56. Se, p. 261.
Tl. R. Tolman and J. Q. Stewart, Phys. Rev. 8, 97 (1916).
Wl. See, e.g., S. Weinberg, Gravitation and Cosmology, p. 16. Wiley, New York, 1972.
This book is quoted as W hereafter.
W2. W, p. 107.
W3. W, p. 163.
W4. W, p. 198.
W5. W, p. 176.
W6. C. M. Will in General Relativity (S. Hawking and W. Israel, Eds.), p. 55. Cam-
bridge University Press, New York, 1979.
W7. W, p. 188.
W8. W, p. 147.
THE FIELD EQUATIONS OF GRAVITATION 265
W9. H. Weyl, Space, Time and Matter, Sec. 28. Dover, New York, 1961.
W10. W, Chap. 12.
Wll. H. Weyl, AdP 54, 117 (1917).
Zl. J. Zenneck, Encyklopadie der Mathematischen Wissenschaften, Vol. 5, Chap. 2,
Part 3. Teubner, Leipzig, 1903.
