9
'The Happiest Thought
of my Life'
Musz es sein? Es musz sein.
The February 17,1921, issue of Nature is almost completely devoted to relativity.
It appeared at a time when 'in two cases predicted [by general relativity] phenom-
ena for which no satisfactory alternative explanation is forthcoming have been
confirmed by observation, and the third is still a subject of inquiry' [LI]. The first
two phenomena are the precession of the perihelion of Mercury and the bending
of light by the sun. Both effects had been calculated by Einstein in 1915. The first
agreed very well indeed with long-known observations. The second had waited
until 1919 for confirmation. The third was the red shift of radiation, the experi-
mental magnitude of which was still under advisement in 1921.
This issue of Nature appeared at a time when Einstein was already recognized
as a world figure, not only by the physics community but by the public at large.
Its opening article is by Einstein and begins, 'There is something attractive in
presenting the evolution of a sequence of ideas in as brief a form as possible . . .'
[El]. There follow papers by Dyson and Crommelin, the astronomers, by Jeans,
Lorentz, Lodge, and Eddington, the physicists, and by Hermann Weyl, the math-
ematician. Also included are the inevitable philosophical contributions. This issue
of the journal had been long in coming. The plan for it was conceived a few weeks
after the historic November 6, 1919, joint meeting of the Royal Society and the
Royal Astronomical Society in London, at which the results of the May 1919
eclipse expeditions had been reported as being in agreement with Einstein's the-
ory. In that same month, Einstein had been approached for a contribution to
Nature [L2]. It was he who by his efforts to be 'as brief as possible' caused much
delay. In January 1920 his article was almost ready 'but has become so long that
I doubt very much whether it can appear in Nature'' [E2]. It did not. His short
paper which eventually did appear [El] is quite different from his original man-
uscript, entitled 'Grundgedanken und Methoden der Relativitatstheorie in ihrer
Entwicklung dargestellt.' That paper was never published but has survived. The
i?7
178 RELATIVITY, THE GENERAL THEORY
original manuscript is now in the Pierpont Morgan Library in New York City
and in what follows is referred to as the Morgan manuscript.
It is a most interesting document. For once Einstein shares with the reader not
only his thoughts but also his feelings. At one point he explains how in 1907 the
preparation of a review article led him to ask in what way the Newtonian theory
of gravitation would have to be modified in order that its laws would fit special
relativity. 'When, in 1907,1 was working on a comprehensive paper on the special
theory of relativity for the Jahrbuch der Radioaktivitdt und Elektronik, I had also
to attempt to modify the Newtonian theory of gravitation in such a way that its
laws would fit in the [special relativity] theory. Attempts in this direction did show
that this could be done, but did not satisfy me because they were based on phys-
ically unfounded hypotheses.' (More on these attempts in Chapter 13.) He goes
on as follows:
Then there occurred to me the 'glucklichste Gedanke meines Lebens,' the hap-
piest thought of my life, in the following form. The gravitational field has* only
a relative existence in a way similar to the electric field generated by magne-
toelectric induction. Because for an observer falling freely from the roof of a
house there exists—at least in his immediate surroundings— no gravitational
field [his italics]. Indeed, if the observer drops some bodies then these remain
relative to him in a state of rest or of uniform motion, independent of their
particular chemical or physical nature (in this consideration the air resistance
is, of course, ignored). The observer therefore has the right to interpret his state
as 'at rest.'
Because of this idea, the uncommonly peculiar experimental law that in the
gravitational field all bodies fall with the same acceleration attained at once a
deep physical meaning. Namely, if there were to exist just one single object that
falls in the gravitational field in a way different from all others, then with its
help the observer could realize that he is in a gravitational field and is falling
in it. If such an object does not exist, however—as experience has shown with
great accuracy—then the observer lacks any objective means of perceiving him-
self as falling in a gravitational field. Rather he has the right to consider his
state as one of rest and his environment as field-free relative to gravitation.
The experimentally known matter independence of the acceleration of fall is
therefore a powerful argument for the fact that the relativity postulate has to
be extended to coordinate systems which, relative to each other, are in non-
uniform motion.
Let us now turn to Section V of Einstein's 1907 review article [E3], received
by the editor on December 4 of that year. It is here that he begins the long road
from the special theory to the general theory of relativity. Let us follow him on
that road, marked by trials, by errors, and by long pauses, until finally, on Novem-
ber 25, 1915, the structure of the general theory as we now know it lay before
him.
*At this point, the original text contains a few words which Einstein clearly had forgotten to delete.
THE HAPPIEST THOUGHT OF MY LIFE' 179
I mentioned in Chapter 7 the contributions Einstein made to special relativity
after the completion of his September 1905 paper on that subject. Some of these
sequels appeared in 1906 and early 1907. In that period he also added to his 1905
work on Brownian motion (Chapter 5). However, his main activities during that
time concerned the quantum theory. In 1906 he gave his own interpretation of
Planck's 1900 work on the quantum theory and completed the fundamental paper
on the quantum theory of the specific heats of solids (Chapters 19 and 20).
His first important paper on relativity theory after 1905 is the 1907 review.
This article was written at the request of Stark, the editor of the Jahrbuch. On
September 25, 1907, Einstein had accepted this invitation [E4]. On November 1,
Einstein further wrote to Stark: 'I am now ready with the first part of the work
for your Jahrbuch; I am working zealously on the second [part] in my unfortu-
nately scarce spare time' [E5]. Since this second part contains the remarks on
gravitation, it seems most probable that Einstein's 'happiest thought' came to him
sometime in November 1907. We certainly know where he was when he had this
idea. In his Kyoto lecture he told the story:
I was sitting in a chair in the patent office at Bern when all of a sudden a
thought occurred to me: 'If a person falls freely he will not feel his own weight.'
I was startled. This simple thought made a deep impression on me. It impelled
me toward a theory of gravitation. [II]
Was Einstein first drawn to gravitation because he wanted to include it in spe-
cial relativity or because he saw that he could extend special relativity with its
help? The way I read the quoted lines from the Morgan manuscript, the answer
would seem to be that, by asking for the inclusion, he at once or almost at once
came upon the extension. That is also Einstein's own recollection, again found in
the Kyoto lecture: 'In 1907, while I was writing a review of the consequences of
special relativity ... I realized that all the natural phenomena could be discussed
in terms of special relativity except for the law of gravitation. I felt a deep desire
to understand the reason behind this. ... It was most unsatisfactory to me that,
although the relation between inertia and energy is so beautifully derived [in spe-
cial relativity], there is no relation between inertia and weight. I suspected that
this relationship was inexplicable by means of special relativity' [II]. The absence
of the equation for the static Newtonian gravitational potential $:
(where p is the matter density and G the Newtonian gravitational constant) in the
1907 review indicates that the generalization of this equation to special relativity
was not his ultimate purpose. Equation 9.1 does not appear in his papers until
February 1912 [E6], but by then he already knew that this equation is not gen-
erally true even in the static case, as we shall see in Chapter 11.
Three main issues are raised in Section V of the Jahrbuch article.
1. The Equivalence Principle. 'Is it conceivable that the principle of relativity
also holds for systems which are accelerated relative to each other?' That is Ein-
l8o RELATIVITY, THE GENERAL THEORY
stein's starting question, 'which must occur to everyone who has followed the
applications of the relativity principle.' Then he gives the standard argument. A
reference frame E, is accelerated in the x direction with a constant acceleration
7. A second frame E2 is at rest in a homogeneous gravitational field which imparts
an acceleration —7 in the x direction to all objects. 'In the present state of expe-
rience, we have no reason to assume that... E, and E2 are distinct in any respect,
and in what follows we shall therefore assume the complete [my italics] physical
equivalence of a gravitational field and the corresponding acceleration of the ref-
erence frame [E,]. This assumption extends the principle of relativity to the case
of uniformly accelerated motion of the reference frame.' Einstein noted that his
review was not the place for a thorough discussion of the questions which now
arose. Nevertheless, he made a beginning by applying his new postulate to the
Maxwell equations, always for uniform acceleration. He did not raise the question
of the further extension to nonuniform acceleration until 1912, the year he first
referred to his hypothesis as the 'equivalence principle' [E7],
2. The Gravitational Red Shift. Many textbooks on relativity ascribe to Ein-
stein the method of calculating the red shift by means of the Doppler effect of light
falling from the top to the bottom of an upwardly accelerating elevator. That is
indeed the derivation he gave in 1911 (Chapter 11). However, he was already
aware of the red shift in 1907. The derivation he gave at that time is less general,
more tortured, and yet, oddly, more sophisticated. It deserves particular mention
because it contains the germ of two ideas that were to become cornerstones of his
final theory: the existence of local Lorentz frames and the constancy of the velocity
of light for infinitesimally small paths. The argument, restricted to small velocities,
small uniform accelerations, and small time intervals, runs as follows.
Consider two coordinate systems S (x,y,z,t) and E (£,i7,f,r) which at one time
are coincident and which both have velocity v = 0 (the symbols in parentheses
denote the respective space-time coordinates). At that one time, synchronize a
network of clocks in S with each other and with a similar network in E. The time
of coincidence of S and E is set at t — r = 0. System S remains at rest, while
E starts moving in the x direction with a constant acceleration 7. Introduce next
a third system S' (x',y',z',tf) which relative to S moves with uniform velocity v
in the x direction in such a way that, for a certain fixed time t, x' = £, y' = 77,
z' = f. Thus, v = yt. Imagine further that at the time of coincidence of S' and
E all clocks in S' are synchronized with those in E.
I. Consider a time interval o after the coincidence of S' and E. This interval is
so small that all effects O(52) are neglected. What is the rate of the clocks in S'
relative to those in E if 7 is so small that all effects 0(y2) can also be neglected?
One easily sees that, given all the assumptions, the influence of relative displace-
ment, relative velocity, and acceleration on the relative rates of the clocks in E and
S' are all of second or higher order. Thus in the infinitesimal interval 5, we can
still use the times of the clocks in the local Lorentz frame S' to describe the rate
of the E clocks. Therefore, 'the principle of the constancy of the light velocity can
be ... used for the definition of simultaneity if one restricts oneself to small light
'THE HAPPIEST THOUGHT OF MY LIFE' l8l
paths.' The trick of using three coordinate systems is ingenious. On the one hand,
S and S' are inertial frames and so one can use special relativity. On the other
hand, during a small time interval the measurements in S' can be identified with
those in E up to higher-order effects.
II. How do clocks in two distinct space points of E run relative to each other?
At t = T = 0, the two E clocks were synchronous with each other and with
clocks in S. The two points in E move in the same way relative to S. Therefore
the two E clocks remain synchronous relative to S. But then (by special relativity)
they are not synchronous relative to S' and thus, by (I), not synchronous relative
to each other. We can now define the time T of E by singling out one clock in
E—say, the one at the origin—and for that clock setting r = t. Next, with the
help of (I) we can define simultaneity in £ by using S': the simultaneity condition
of events 1 and 2 in E is
where, again, v = yt = yr. Let 1 correspond to the origin of E and 2 to a space
point (£,0,0) where the clock reading is called a. Introduce one last approximation:
the time T of S' — E coincidence is also taken small so that O(r2) effects are
negligible. Then x2 — xl = x'2 — x( = |, £, =r, t2 = ff, so that Eq. 9.2 becomes
a formula that is found—albeit derived differently—in modern textbooks.
The application of the equivalence principle to this equation is also familiar. It
says that for a resting frame in a homogeneous gravitational field in the | direction:
where $ is the gravitational potential energy difference between (£,0,0) and the
origin. [Note. Here and in what follows gravitational energy always refers to unit
mass so that $ has the dimension (velocity)2.]
Einstein at once turned to the physics of Eq. 9.4: 'There are "clocks" which are
available at locations with distinct gravitational potential and whose rates can be
controlled very accurately; these are the generators of spectral lines. It follows
from the preceding that light coming from the solar surface . . . has a longer wave-
length than the light generated terrestrially from the same material on earth.' To
this well-known conclusion, he appended a footnote: 'Here one assumes that [Eq.
9.4] also holds for an inhomogeneous gravitational field' [my italics]. This assump-
tion was of cardinal importance for Einstein's further thinking. He would explore
its further consequences in 1911.
3. Maxwell's Equations; Bending of Light; Gravitational Energy = me2.
Indomitably Einstein goes on. He tackles the Maxwell equations next. His tools
are the same as those just described for the red shift. Again he compares the
I own two mementos of Einstein, which I cherish. One is his last pipe. Its head
is made of clay, its stem is a reed. Helen Dukas presented it to me some time in
1955. The other is the galley proof of Appendix II, 'Generalized Theory of Grav-
itation,' which appeared first in the 1950 edition of his The Meaning of Relativity.
On the opening page of the proofs, the following words are written in a slightly
shaky hand: Tauli: nach Einsichtnahme bitte Pais geben. A. E.,' P.: after perusal
please give to P. I was in my thirties when that 1950 book came out. I read it then
and have reread it once every few years, always with the same thought as I turn
the pages. Does the man never stop?
Now I react similarly to the Jahrbuch article, which I first read at a later age.
This review does not have the perfection of the 1905 paper on special relativity.
The approximations are clumsy and mask the generality of the conclusions. Ein-
stein was the first to say so, in 1911. The conclusion about the bending of light is
qualitatively correct, quantitatively wrong—though, in 1907, not yet logically
wrong. Einstein was the first to realize this, in 1915. Despite all that, I admireIn a gravitational field, one must associate with every energy E an additional
position-dependent energy which equals the position-dependent energy of a "pon-
derable" mass of magnitude E/c2. The law [ E = me2] ... therefore holds not
only for inertial but also for gravitational mass.'
As said, the Jahrbuch article was received by the editor on December 4. On
December 24, Einstein wrote to Conrad Habicht:
At this time I am [again] busy with considerations on relativity theory in con-
nection with the law of gravitation.... I hope to clear up the so-far unexplained
secular changes of the perihelion length of Mercury . . . [but] so far it does not
seem to work. [E8]l82 RELATIVITY, THE GENERAL THEORY
description in S with the one in E, using the local inertial frame S' as an inter-
mediary. The steps are straightforward. I omit the details and state only his
results.
Einstein finds, first, that the Maxwell equations in E have the same form as in
S, but with the velocity of light c in S replaced by:
in E. 'It follows from this that the light rays which do not run in the £ direction
are bent by the gravitational field.' Second, he examines the energy conservation
law in E and finds 'a very notable result. An energy E [defined as an energy for
the case of no gravitational field] .. . contributes to the total energy an additional
position dependent amount
'THE HAPPIEST THOUGHT OF MY LIFE' 183
this article at least as much as the perfect relativity paper of 1905, not so much
for its details as for its courage.
Einstein's treatment of simultaneity in 1905 was the result of many years of
thinking that had led him to a new physical interpretation of global Lorentz
invariance. Only two years later, he realized that the extension of the principle of
special relativity demanded a reevaluation of the validity of this most precious tool.
In 1907, he already clearly knew that there was something amiss with this invar-
iance if his equivalence principle was to hold up in all generality. He did not
know then that Lorentz invariance was to return in a new, local version. Others
might have shied away from the equivalence principle in order to retain the global
invariance. Not so Einstein. With a total lack of fear he starts on the new road.
For the next eight years he has no choice. He has to go on. From then on also his
style changes. If the work of 1905 has the quality of Mozart, then the work of
1907-15 is reminiscent of Beethoven. The quotation at the head of this chapter is
the motto of the last movement of Beethoven's opus 135: Must it be? It must be.
References
El. A. Einstein, Nature 106, 782 (1921).
E2. , letter to R. W. Lawson, January 22, 1920.
E3. , Jahrb. Rad. Elektr. 4, 411 (1907).
E4. , letter to J. Stark, September 25, 1907, quoted in [HI].
E5. , letter to J. Stark, November 1, 1907, quoted in [HI].
E6. , AdP38, 355 (1912).
E7. —, [E6], p. 365.
E8. , letter to K. Habicht, December 24, 1907.
HI. A. Hermann, Sudhoff's Archiv. 50, 267 (1966).
II. J. Ishiwara, Einstein Koen-Roku. Tokyo-Tosho, Tokyo, 1977.
LI. R. W. Lawson, Nature 106, 781 (1921).
L2. , letter to A. Einstein, November 26, 1919.
