 Chapter 2  A ONCE COLORED GIRL  Mississippi, historically one of the poorest states in the nation, has made more racially based political news than most other states in the South. Despite its role as an important focal point of the civil rights move-ment in the 20th century, it did not move as quickly or as well into ac-ceptance of black and white integration. In Mississippi, there was strong resistance to many of the changes in race relations and laws.  Only a few years ago, political battles were still being fought over is-sues that had long been settled in other parts of the country. Some leading politicians appeared nostalgic for a preintegration world of sepa-rate restaurants, toilets, and seating on trains and buses. In fact, when a Mississippian, a prominent U.S. senator now retired and a member of a lobbyist ﬁ  rm, voiced sentiments unacceptable to many citizens of the modern South, he was considered a hero among his constituents. Jour-nalists have written that the now former senator had associations with ultra conservative groups, racists, and extreme rightists. A great irony is that Barack Obama, a biracial man, became a candidate for president of the United States during that period. In the Mississippi primary, which Obama won, several newspapers described the contest as “racially po-larized” and the state as having “a striking racial divide.” In the deeply 26 OPRAH WINFREYRepublican state, election history reveals that no Democratic candi-date for president since Jimmy Carter had won Mississippi.  Mississippi is also the birthplace of Oprah Winfrey, perhaps the most famous black entertainer ever, known throughout the world for her work in television as well as her philanthropic, educational, and social efforts. In the aftermath of Hurricane Katrina in New Orleans, many people hastened to the aid of those who had suffered in the storm, but, where only a few of the volunteers received publicity for their efforts, Oprah’s assistance was written about in papers everywhere. Not only did she give $10 million for hurricane relief on the Gulf Coast, but she also gave gifts of stock to volunteers who helped after the disaster. News reports told of her call to celebrity friends to help her bring at-tention to the desperate plight of those she described as abandoned or mistreated by the government. Angered by what she saw, she used her show, which was broadcast in the devastated city, to apologize in the name of the American people for the suffering and deaths that had taken place.  When she asked viewers to donate money through her Angel Net-work after the devastation of Hurricanes Katrina and Rita, the appeal raised $15.6 million, and more than 300 new homes were built or re-stored with the money. The project took place in eight communities in Oprah’s home state of Mississippi as well as Texas, Louisiana, and Alabama. Additionally, the Angel Network and First Book’s Book Relief program provided new books to thousands of children who had lost their books along with all their other possessions.  Because of Oprah’s longtime commitment to improving the lives of children, her foundation established Oprah Winfrey Boys and Girls Clubs, one of which is located in the small Mississippi city of Kosciusko, Oprah’s birthplace. And, undoubtedly because of her fame, the maga-zine  Southern Living  featured an article showing members of the club cooking with Art Smith. Formerly Oprah’s chef for 10 years as well as author of a cookbook, Smith is owner of the Chicago restaurant Table 52 and a newer restaurant in Washington, DC, called Art and Soul. He ed-its an article each month on Oprah’s Web site and frequently contrib-utes to her magazine. Smith’s latest restaurant is on Capitol Hill, in the Liaison Hotel, where a postinaugural 2008 live television Oprah show was ﬁ  lmed as part of the election week festivities. (Rumors beforehand,  A ONCE COLORED GIRL 27resembling those in Colorado, placed Oprah’s whereabouts in multiple parts of the city; the most intriguing detail generally is the cost of ho-tels and amenities for Oprah—in this case, $15,000 per night.)  Staff on  Southern Living  learned about Smith’s work with children, which focuses on some of the same interests as the magazine: nutrition and physical well-being. Because of the mutual concerns, photographs of the children appeared in the July 2008 issue of the magazine and in the local paper, the  Star-Herald  of Kosciusko. The pieces, which featured interviews with the children and described their experiences, provided publicity, which made the group feel like celebrities. Chef Art Smith is a philanthropist who gives time and money to help educate children about their health. In his attempt to practice what he preaches, he has been changing his eating habits toward achieving a healthy life-style. Like First Lady Michelle Obama, he is committed to reducing what has been called the childhood obesity epidemic in the United States. Oprah, on Smith’s 50th birthday, donated $250,000 to his non-proﬁ  t charity Common Threads. His undertaking runs 20 after-school programs in various parts of the country, and the chef himself lost 90 pounds following his own teaching about healthy eating.  Mississippi also was the early home of another idol of the entertain-ment world, music legend Elvis Presley. Elvis was so newsworthy that everything he did seemed to be recorded, and there are people who look at Oprah through a lens similar to Elvis’s, though she is very much alive and constantly in the news. Furthermore, Oprah believes she is related to Elvis’s daughter, Lisa Marie Presley. Because she has referred to Lisa Marie as “my cousin,” a Fox columnist, Roger Friedman, criti-cized Oprah for her statement, even though a search of her roots and DNA found a link. 1   Although not well known for its cultural life, Mississippi is the birthplace of three of the United States’ great literary ﬁ  gures: William Faulkner, Eudora Welty, and Richard Wright. Both Faulkner and Welty lived most of their lives in the state. Wright, though, went north, fol-lowing the path of numerous black people who sought what they hoped would be friendlier, more hospitable surroundings. But changes took place, albeit slowly, after World War II, with some segments of the South-ern population returning to their home territory. For most of the 20th cen-tury, other Southern states—Georgia, Louisiana, Tennessee, Alabama, 28 OPRAH WINFREYand Virginia—provided more fertile ground than Mississippi did for writers, novelists, and essayist. Oprah often speaks of the books that af-fected her most in growing up, and, in an issue of her now-defunct  O At Home  magazine, she reminisced about them. (In 2009,  O At Home   suspended publication.) Many of her favorites came from the literary list of Southern writers, traditional and contemporary poets, literary critics, novelists, playwrights, and essayists.  Of particular interest in the cultural study of these writers is the great cultural chasm between the races but the many similarities within each racial group. Black writers inform us of their suffering and oppres-sion caused by white people in addition to portraying the wretched-ness and despair of family life. Certainly, white Southern writers also explore the tragedies of black people and their families as well as their own dysfunctional family relationships, but different from the writing of white Southern writers is an additional common, sometimes biographi-cal, thread running through the work of many black authors: illegiti-macy, desertion, abandonment, promiscuity, and sexual abuse. When, in adulthood, Oprah and some of her friends have spoken of these mat-ters, their words reﬂ  ect the books, poems, and stories that are part of the United States’ literary and cultural heritage. Oprah and various friends have lived these stories. In many ways, her life reads like one of those stories, but the outcome of hers is more like a fairy tale.  The work of Southern writers remains an integral part of many cur-ricula in U.S. universities. The lives of the authors have an ongoing ef-fect on current writers and continue to provoke interest.  The small towns, the wooden churches, the music, and the food all seem to be part of the blood of most Southerners—evident in their thinking, their attitudes, and their accents. The South is famous as the birthplace of several kinds of music, the most familiar being jazz and country. Mississippi, early in the 20th century, had famed jazz players about whom books now are being published. But when people speak of New Orleans, the most renowned Southern area of the musical past, they evoke reminders of the many musicians, piano players, saxophon-ists, clarinetists, and drummers who created jazz. Yet, because most of the musicians were black and lived during the years of segregation in the South, most of their names have been lost to history. Whether the musical tradition of New Orleans will be revived in the aftermath of  A ONCE COLORED GIRL 29Katrina is questionable. A large piece of the cultural past would be lost should that happen; according to musicologists, black musical history goes back to the early days of slavery, when a unique kind of music evolved.  The South is not only the birthplace of jazz and country music but also of gospel singing. The sounds of gospel were early forerunners to mountain music and jazz. Country ballads familiar to many Americans are derived from gospel singing. Although both gospel and country mu-sic had been sung and played throughout the South, these forms of music tend to be associated with Nashville, Tennessee, the city to which numerous aspiring artists later gravitated. Worldwide, any men-tion of Nashville conjures up images of certain singers, special types of music, song, and instruments that are the inheritors of mountain cul-ture and gospel music, although those are not the exclusive property of Nashville.  Universally heard in the small towns of the South, gospel music has only a few names tied to it, whereas jazz and country composers and sing-ers are much better known. Nevertheless, gospel music is as much a part of Southern culture as ham and grits, biscuits and gravy, fried chicken, and catﬁ  sh. Children brought up in the small towns of the Bible Belt seemed almost to inhale gospel music along with the weekly church-going and rituals. The inﬂ  uence is embedded in their lives, even when they leave the region. Oprah—as well as Elvis—is a prime example of that effect. Because of her early conditioning, her preferences in music, years after her moves elsewhere, reﬂ  ect what she regards as the heal-ing effect of religion and music. Oprah recently learned she is a distant cousin of a famous gospel music singer, Mavis Staples. For Oprah, gos-pel songs are related to faith and hope and healing, and, when unhappy, perhaps terrible things occur, she tells us she turns to gospel music. One such time came after the tragedies of September 11, 2001.  When we turn away from the instant recognition of famous ﬁ  gures from the musical or literary world—after all, their faces often appear on postage stamps—most of us probably would ﬁ  nd it difﬁ  cult to come up with more than a few names of entertainers associated with the South; it is not usually the area we link with entertainers, other than country, blues, and jazz musicians, despite the fact that a great many composers, musicians, singers, and dancers were born there. Yet, cultural history 30 OPRAH WINFREYnotes they had to head north or west, where they gained fame and sometimes—but not always—fortune.  For most Americans, entertainment is connected to the glitter of New York, Hollywood, and Las Vegas—not Mississippi. However, Oprah Winfrey, one of the most famous celebrities in the world, was born in a little-known area of Mississippi. With the rather unlikely and unfamiliar name of Kosciusko, the city was named after the Polish general Thaddeus/Tadeusz Kosciusko. Known as the “Hero of T wo Worlds,” he fought for the independence of the colonies in the Amer-ican Revolution as well as for the independence of his home country. Much admired for his abilities, he also served with the Continental Congress, which appointed him an engineer with the rank of colo-nel. Outside of history books and biographies, like many other valor-ous ﬁ  gures, General Kosciusko has been largely forgotten, except for the naming of the town that honored his role in 18th-century United States. Few people know of his legacy and his historic actions to help liberate the slaves.  Kosciusko is only 70 miles north of the capital city, Jackson, but there is almost no resemblance between the two places. Little distinguishes Kosciusko from other small farming areas of the state, yet during the nation’s early years, it was an important segment of the frontier route to Nashville. Although people used the Mississippi River whenever pos-sible to transport goods, that method often was difﬁ  cult for primitive navigation. The alternative was a land route called the Natchez Trace that connected Natchez, Mississippi, to Nashville. Kosciusko still cel-ebrates that early period of its history with a Natchez Trace festival every April, even though, unlike other cities along the route, it failed to develop in any signiﬁ  cant way. Those other cities became famous as well as heavily populated, but that was not the case for Kosciusko.  The city is located in a region of rivers and frequent rain, with hot and humid weather and pines and ﬂ  owering trees. In the middle of the 20th century, when Oprah was born, there was scarcely more variety of work than there had been a hundred or two hundred years earlier. Small farms provided the major source of income. Although Kosciusko today has a highway called Veterans Memorial Boulevard, which leads into the Natchez Trace Parkway, more than half of Mississippi remains rural. Its 36 percent African American population is larger than that of any  A ONCE COLORED GIRL 31other state in the country—a statistic that generated strong interest during the presidential campaign and election of 2008, when the black population was ardently courted.  When we listen to her accent and words and consider her attitudes, we associate few Southern characteristics with Oprah, although she lived in two Southern states, Mississippi and Tennessee. She spent a few damaging childhood and teenage years in Milwaukee, Wisconsin, and in her 20s moved to Maryland, another Southern state. Ultimately, Chicago became her primary home. Psychologists and psychiatrists have stated that the ﬁ  rst ﬁ ve years determine much of who and what we are, and if we accept that thesis, we must apply it to Oprah, even though in most ways she does not appear to ﬁ  t the Southern image. She did at-tend high school and college in Tennessee, but she claims she felt little association with her early surroundings—although with the passage of time she has become reconciled to the past, speaking more and more frequently of her Mississippi grandmother. Yet she never thought of any Southern town or city longingly as home. Once she left the South of her youth, she has returned only occasionally and never lived there again, although she has relatives in the region.  At the time of Oprah’s birth in 1954, what little industry had ex-isted was almost gone; jobs were scarce, and young people—particularly young blacks, who continued to be victims of prejudice and poverty—left if they could, in search of a livelihood. During the time of Oprah’s slave ancestors, and during her grandparents’ lives, her mother’s life, and her own early years, Mississippi was (and remains) close to the bot-tom of the economic ladder despite its association with some of the great names in U.S. culture.  Unhappy childhood memories have turned many Southern artists to other places, but they either maintained homes in the South or returned frequently to keep the connection. Mississippian writer Welty settled in her childhood home after a short foray in the life of New York. Even novelist Truman Capote, who declared himself a New Yorker because he’d spent only part of his early years in Alabama, frequently felt the pull of Monroeville and New Orleans. Most of his work is Southern to the core, created in large measure by a childhood that Oprah’s close friend Maya Angelou and others have described as appalling and tragic. Nevertheless, he often felt the need to revisit the South. And Angelou, 32 OPRAH WINFREYwho is always identiﬁ  ed as a Southerner, lived in many parts of the country and elsewhere but ﬁ  nally settled in North Carolina. In con-trast, Oprah, who spent more years in the South than either Capote or Angelou, turned her back on it, saying at various times throughout the years that she knew when she moved to Chicago at 30 that she had found her home.  We must accept her statement, but, when we look carefully at the per-son she is, we can’t help but recognize the Southern roots that are part and parcel of her character and personality: the inﬂ  uence of and love of gospel music; the strong spiritual side of her nature; her deep affection for Southern novels; even her love of Southern food and cooking.  Although Oprah always credits two members of her family—her ma-ternal grandmother, Hattie Mae Lee, and her father, Vernon Winfrey—with the qualities that have led to her success, her memories of child-hood and early years are ﬁ  lled with more pain and sadness than joy. At times, she claims to have overcome the effects of the past, yet she speaks so frequently of a particular time in her childhood that it seems to be a still-open wound. Those hardships, reﬂ  ected in many of her interests and activities, are recognizable to all Oprah watchers, some of whom share similar experiences.  A series of accidents are part of Oprah’s heritage; she was born ille-gitimate, the child of two very young people. Her mother, Vernita Lee, at age 18 claimed that a 20-year-old man named Vernon Winfrey on leave for two weeks from the army had made her pregnant. At times she changed her mind, saying she was uncertain who was responsible. In an interview in a tabloid newspaper, Vernon Winfrey “confessed” he could not have fathered Oprah because he was on army duty at the time. Service people do go on leave, however, and it’s been reported again and again that Winfrey was on leave during that period. Vernita re-cently modiﬁ  ed her story once again, insisting that Vernon is the only person who could be Oprah’s father. Winfrey was a soldier stationed at Camp Rucker in Alabama. Apparently with typical carelessness, Vernita Lee didn’t notify him about the pregnancy until the child was born. Then, she sent a newspaper announcement along with a request that he mail clothes for the newborn baby.  Like the pregnancy, the name that has become a household word, Oprah, was also an accident. The family had chosen the biblical name  A ONCE COLORED GIRL 33Orpah from the book of Ruth. Although the name is recorded on the ofﬁ  cial birth certiﬁ  cate as Orpah, people tended to transpose the  r  and the  p.  The name Orpah isn’t used anywhere else, and the spelling of Oprah’s name became the one we know today.  Some time after her baby’s birth at home on the farm, Vernita left the infant with her mother, Hattie Mae. Oprah’s grandfather, Earless Lee, had little to do with the child. Much is made of the fact that Oprah spent her early years with her grandmother, yet she is only one of a number of famous people who had the same experience, among them former President Bill Clinton, Tipper Gore, and Supreme Court Justice Clarence Thomas. Oprah remained until she was six on the little farm that Grandmother Lee owned in the Mississippi Delta region. Then she went to live with her mother in Milwaukee, Wisconsin. Different sto-ries are told about the reasons for Oprah’s move. One version is that Vernita sent for her; another is that her grandmother found her too dif-ﬁ cult to look after, and yet another is that Hattie Mae had become ill.  Whatever brought about the child’s departure from Mississippi, friends and relatives have talked of Hattie Mae’s love for her ﬁ  rst grand-child, who was regarded as unique because of her precocity.  Life on the farm was basic. The grandmother boiled clothes on the screened-in back porch, using a large iron pot since the family had no washing machine. Water had to be drawn from a well. The tiny farm-house lacked indoor plumbing, so an outhouse was the substitute for an indoor toilet, and one of Oprah’s daily chores was emptying the slop jars each morning. In remembering details from her childhood, Oprah has half humorously and half seriously referred to the use of the Sears catalogue in the outhouse. From early on she also had to help with the cows, pigs, and chickens. Because she had no room of her own, she slept with her grandmother in a feather bed, often lying awake terriﬁ  ed that her grandfather would come in during the night and commit a mur-derous act against both her and her grandmother. An incident did occur one night when Oprah was about four years old. An uncontrol-lable Earless Lee came into the bedroom, and Oprah’s grandmother had to rush out into the darkness to scream for help from a neighbor. Al-though the neighbor was old and blind, Oprah remembers him as a res-cuer. In the daytime, Grandfather Lee also was a fearsome presence, threatening the child with his cane or throwing various objects at her. 34 OPRAH WINFREY Much like life on the farm, her grandmother was rigid and harsh, meting out punishment for any infringement of rules, even for happen-ings over which the girl had little or no control. Whippings were part of Oprah’s upbringing, in accordance with the old credo “spare the rod and spoil the child.” Strongly religious, Hattie Mae Lee spent most of her free time at the nearby Faith-United Mississippi Baptist Church, where she also took Oprah from her earliest days. Because her grandmoth-er’s other preoccupation after religion was reading, even in babyhood Oprah was taught how to read and to memorize passages of the Bible, activities that gained renown for her when she was only a toddler. With the strong discipline at home, only at the local Baptist church was she given the opportunities to express herself. As a result of her ability to recite pieces from the Bible, she was called on to do Easter selections. Oprah still remembers some of the recitations, one of which was “Jesus rose on Easter Day, Hallelujah, Hallelujah, all the angels did proclaim.” While fanning themselves against the heat of the season and listening to the toddler’s recitations, the women of the church would praise the little girl to her grandmother, calling her a gifted child. Oprah has said that her ﬁ  rst Easter speech was probably made at the Kosciusko Baptist church when she was about three and a half. Only a few years later, she was able to recite the entire series of the seven sermons of poet James Weldon Johnson from “ The Creation” to “ The Judgment.”  In recalling her early years, Oprah has reﬂ  ected that, at various times, she spoke at all the churches in Nashville. When interviewed by evening talk show host Larry King, she told him she’d been a keynote speaker in many different kinds of places from age 13 on. Although once she became famous admirers often pointed to her many years of experi-ence in broadcasting as a part of preparation for ﬁ  lm work, her entire life actually prepared her for that. So many elements came together ul-timately in her career. Her religious fervor in childhood, however, was a mixed blessing, because the hostility of other youngsters to her tal-ents earned her the nicknames “The Preacher” and “Miss Jesus.” A more hurtful name that other children bestowed on her was “the sack girl,” because her grandmother made some of her overalls from potato sacks. During the early period that she lived with her mother, Vernita, she became known in Milwaukee as “Little Speaker” because of her pious zeal. Not only did she recite sermons and biblical passages, but,  A ONCE COLORED GIRL 35by age seven, she was declaiming, with full gestures, inspirational po-ems such as William Ernest Henley’s “Invictus” without understanding a word of any of them.  On the Lee farm, Oprah was lonely, isolated, and friendless. One of her cousins, Alice Cooper, from the same small town, has told of the solitude children felt in those days because the farms were so far from each other that relatives found it difﬁ  cult to visit back and forth. Oprah envied children who had easier lives, particularly white children, whose families owned television sets and washing machines; children who had store-bought clothing and who could go to movies; and children who were not punished for every little misdeed, knowing or unknowing. Even though the whippings she endured were common in her nar-row world and time, she has observed that white children rarely were beaten; however, she has remarked, if white girls had to be punished, they got “spanked,” whereas black children got “whupped.” Without indoor plumbing, the wash tub was also used for bathing, which took place once a week, on Saturdays, in preparation for the Sabbath. Every garment the family wore was made at home, and shoes were worn ex-clusively for Sunday churchgoing. The rest of the time, the child went barefoot. Food consisted of what they grew or raised on the farm, with Grandmother Hattie Mae selling eggs to earn some cash, as did many a poor Southern farm woman for decades, if not centuries. Yet, despite the fact that some writers have called Oprah’s life one of extreme or grinding poverty, because her grandmother owned a farm, she was able to feed and clothe her family, and they never went hungry. (One of Oprah’s relatives claims that Oprah had exaggerated the matter.)  Visitors to Grandmother Lee’s house were adults who expected chil-dren to be not only well behaved but silent as well. As a result, Oprah’s sole companions were the pigs she helped take care of. Away from the little house, she could read, talk, and tell stories to them; her restrictive grandmother and her friends believed that Oprah talked too much. Al-though they praised the child’s articulateness and cleverness in church activities, they did not extend that kind of openness to other places. It is no wonder that, by the time she was six, she looked forward to living with her mother in Milwaukee.  Her expectations of a different kind of existence were fulﬁ  lled, but not in the ways she anticipated. Only in adulthood did she recognize 36 OPRAH WINFREYhow fortunate she had been to live with her grandmother for the ﬁ  rst six years of her life; only then could she sort out the love that existed beneath her fear. It took maturity for Oprah to understand that her grandmother had shaped her character, that it was Grandmother Lee who taught her to be strong, to be spiritual, a believer in God. That spiritual quality has never left her, and, during agonizing national times such as the days after September 11, 2001, she shared that spirituality by offering public prayers on her television programs. She developed not only the devotional part of her character from her grandmother but also her ability to reason and gain her sense of self that was shaken but never lost; the knowledge that she had a place in the world; and, with her later success, a feeling of obligation to help others.  Oprah has said she expects to be spiritual in the ways her grand-mother was, to be someone who ﬁ  ts into the amen corner. Oprah’s mother, Vernita, seems to have lacked the qualities of her own mother that Oprah admires and cherishes. In fact, Oprah’s stepmother, Zelma, who died in 1996, enforced the strict rules and discipline that made her resemble Grandmother Lee more than Vernita did.  Vernita had no room in her apartment for another person, so six-year-old Oprah had to sleep in the foyer. Vernita was a poor woman who lived on a combination of welfare money and earnings as a maid who cleaned houses, although she denies it nowadays. In retrospect, she doesn’t appear to be someone who could or would take on the burden of raising another child. While Oprah lived on the Mississippi farm, a second illegitimate daughter had been born to Vernita, who also had a third illegitimate child when Oprah was about nine years old. In Verni-ta’s household, Oprah felt unloved and unwanted, a burden and an out-cast, inferior to a half-sister she thought prettier because her skin was lighter. In Vernita’s home, the younger girl was always praised for her looks, whereas Oprah, the more clever one, was never complimented for her intelligence. The owner of the house in which they lived, a Mrs. Miller, preferred the younger child to Oprah, who was convinced it was because the younger girl was light-skinned.  Even though Oprah credits her grandmother for her spiritual inspira-tion and introduction to public speaking when she was only a little girl, Vernita told an interviewer that she “likes to think” that she was the person responsible for Oprah’s “love of God and . . . talent for public  A ONCE COLORED GIRL 37speaking.” In the same interview, Vernita Lee’s memories of herself when Oprah lived with her bear no resemblance to those of Oprah, nor of the writers who have interviewed the family. The youngest of seven children, after she left her baby with Hattie Mae, Vernita chose Milwaukee over Chicago, where her brothers had settled. In reminis-cences about her life, Vernita has spoken of having been a salesperson at a clothing store when her children were young and later a kitchen worker and then a supervisor in a Milwaukee hospital. As she describes her struggles, she tells of taking classes at a local community college, of having to pay $100 per month to rent a three-bedroom apartment, and of a life that involved no partying, no hanging around the streets, but one “mostly of work and going to church.” Today, she saves copies of  O  magazine because she thinks they might someday be important, but she also has been annoyed by people who would refer to her as Oprah’s mother. 2   From an early age, like many African Americans, Oprah has been conscious of color—not only in terms of race but of what differences in color mean in people’s lives. When she was a small girl, she envied white children for what she perceived as their easier and more pampered ex-istence. It also seemed to her that white children were more beauti-ful than she was; she envied not just skin color but also noses, lips, and hair. Oprah’s longings were neither unique nor limited to blacks. Mexican American writer and television critic Richard Rodriguez has written of “wanting to be white: that is to the extent of wanting to be colorless,” of wanting to have the feeling of “complete freedom of movement.” Being white in America for Rodriguez, for Oprah, and for other minorities of color meant being free of color. In time, Rodriguez writes, he achieved self-assurance. 3  The same is true of Oprah, who believes today that all things are possible.  As Oprah grew up, her color awareness was not limited to observa-tions about whites. She became conscious, particularly in the all-black college she attended, of subtle and unsubtle patterns among those who had varying shades of blackness. She has said she picked one black col-lege over another, even though she didn’t want to be at a school with a student population composed entirely of black students. Never one to accept the idea of black power—particularly the uncompromising form practiced in the 1970s, when militancy was common—she felt out of 38 OPRAH WINFREYplace in an atmosphere that was frequently hostile. But aside from the political aspects, the color issue troubled her deeply. The cultural history of race in the United States has revealed that favoritism of many kinds had always been shown to the lighter-skinned person of color. During the time of slavery, light-skinned men and women were more likely to become house servants with easier lives than those with darker skin, who were put to work as ﬁ  eld hands. As a dark-skinned African Amer-ican who had some experience of prejudice once she left Mississippi, Oprah has been outspoken on many occasions in her views of racial snobbery that exists even among blacks.  When she got into college, Oprah felt cynical, if not bitter, about the kinds of color discrimination practiced not only on the outside but also within the black community. It was a type of racism she claims she never experienced as a little girl in Kosciusko, which somehow avoided the problems of most Southern communities—at least until the 1960s, when segregationists fought against the new laws that had been passed. However, during Oprah’s girlhood in Milwaukee and Nashville, she learned of color issues she’d not confronted before. Long after her col-lege years were behind her, she continued to speak of blacks as being “fudge brownies,” the color she identiﬁ  es with herself; “gingerbreads,” black people who have the eye coloring and features of whites; and the group many regard as the most desirable in color, the “vanilla creams,” or black people who can pass as whites.  Oprah’s undeniable interest in black history in the last two decades has taken many forms in books, movies, and artifacts. Her preferred books tend to focus on racial issues: slavery; segregation, both overt and covert; violence against blacks—rape, lynching, and other forms of murder; injustice and the legal system; and discrimination in all its va-rieties. Many of the novels she has chosen to read over the years are ei-ther by black writers (often women) such as Zora Neale Hurston, Alice Walker, and Toni Morrison, for example, or they are about black char-acters, and some of the books have been made into ﬁ  lms. Oprah’s read-ing and acting interests meshed when Quincy Jones asked her in 1985 to take the role of Soﬁ  a in a movie about African Americans, Alice Walker’s  The Color Purple,  which became a controversial but ﬁ  nancial and popular success. The picture brought her renown, but she had no role in the production. That would change within a few years with  A ONCE COLORED GIRL 39Oprah’s fame and wealth and the opportunities they brought. She was able to produce and act in ﬁ  lms of her choice, and she brought shows to the stage, such as the 2005 coproduction with Jones of a musical based on  The Color Purple.  The show won or was nominated for many awards, including a Tony and a Grammy and awards from organizations such as the Outer Critics Circle, the Drama League, and Theater World.  Not all critics had universally praised the book and the play. In his review of the show, writer Richard Corliss noted that there had been something of a simplistic message: “Men bad; Women good.” The play, he writes, emphasizes that point with a statement of Soﬁ  a’s friend Celie: “God just another man.” But he ﬁ  nds a different message in the second act: God is really a woman, “decent [and] caring . . . who ministers to the least of the world’s children.” In effect, says Carliss, that woman is Oprah. 4   In a lengthy review,  New York Times  writer Ben Brantley found the play sumptuous as well as less harrowing and bleak than the book. His generally positive evaluation of the show drops, however, when he speaks of the too-rapid progression of the play, comparing it to the type of “inspirational ﬁ  ction” written by Barbara Taylor Bradford and Danielle Steel. 5   One novel that had haunted Oprah for a long time after reading it, Toni Morrison’s  Beloved,  was a work Oprah felt she had to turn into a ﬁ  lm because of its historic corrections about ancestry and its human-izing of slavery: living ﬂ  esh-and-blood people whose days were uncer-tain and agonizing. Oprah played a major role in the movie, having prepared fully to capture the feelings of an 18th-century slave. Dressing as a ﬁ  eld hand in a replica of the clothing and wearing a blindfold, she walked down a country lane to a plantation house. At another time, in order to grasp the sensations of runaway slaves, she walked through wooded areas as they did in attempts to escape. The ﬁ  lm, which took 10 years to make, was released in 1998. However, despite Oprah’s dedi-cation to the story; her acting, money, and publicity; and famed director Jonathan Demme, it was a signiﬁ  cant failure at the box ofﬁ  ce and was rejected by black audiences and critics, who found it too long and com-plex. Turning novels into ﬁ  lms is an enterprise that fails frequently. Even with the outpouring of praise for Oprah’s performance and Disney’s enormous efforts to market the picture, nothing could save it. The 40 OPRAH WINFREYﬁ nancial return of approximately $22.5 million was about a third of the cost of production. The loss was more than monetary to a disheartened Oprah, who had a tremendous emotional commitment to the work and its author. So strong are her ties to  Beloved  that at the top of a marble stair-case in her studios hangs a huge painting of herself from the ﬁ  lm. In 2008, Morrison wrote another book,  A Mercy,  which was an Oprah’s Book Club selection.  Because of the interest that had been stirred by  The Color Purple,   Oprah had high expectations for her later ﬁ  lms, several of which pre-ceded  Beloved.  A year after her triumph in  The Color Purple,  she fol-lowed it with another African American movie,  Native Son.  However, that picture, based on the acclaimed autobiography of Richard Wright, turned out to be a loser both with critics and audiences. Rita Kempley, formerly with the  Washington Post,  reﬂ  ected the critiques of others, calling the ﬁ  lm “morally medicinal,” talky, and “preachy”; a work that is weighed down by “a sense of its own nobility.” Despite the ﬂ  op, the acting bug never left Oprah, and she has continued to perform in and ﬁ nance movies for television and theater, and she has experienced both success and failure.  The next work she produced and starred in was a 1989–1990 televi-sion series,  The Women of Brewster Place.  The series was dropped when a poll showed audience disinterest. Portrayal of black men was and is a sensitive topic. Although few women viewers considered the work judgmental, the National Association for the Advancement of Col-ored People called the program’s portrayal of black men antagonistic. Whereas white writers were critical of the garrulousness of the charac-ters, some African American columnists found the programs offensive, reﬂ  ecting views reminiscent of those that had been voiced with the showing of Oprah’s ﬁ  rst movie. Dorothy Gilliam, who was then a staff writer for the  Washington Post,  damned the series as “one of the most stereotype-ridden polemics against black men,” and she angrily found the hackneyed portraits of the women comparable to the thinking of extreme racists. 6   Nevertheless, when the movie  Waiting to Exhale  was released in Janu-ary 1996, Gilliam liked it so much she saw it twice. However, Gregory Kane, writing for Baltimore’s  Sun Sentinel,  found it as offensive as Gilliam had the Brewster Place series. His hostile column depicted Oprah as  A ONCE COLORED GIRL 41the “I used cocaine but the man made me do it” host on her program fea-turing a group of women stars from the movie, and in bristling language speaks of her and her guests as “cackl[ing] about how black men do black women wrong in relationships.” 7   Nothing was controversial in  Listen Up: The Lives of Quincy Jones,  a movie about Oprah’s dear friend, another ﬁ  lm she produced in 1997. Jones is one of the most famous musical ﬁ  gures in the United States. In addition to being a trumpeter, he has done almost everything in the musical world one might think of. He is a composer, conductor, arranger, and record producer. Nominated for a huge number of Grammy Awards, he has received 27 of them, including the Grammy Legend Award. One of his most famous productions was the charity song “We Are the World,” which he also conducted. Among the most notable forms of recognition, he was awarded the prestigious French Legion of Honor Medal; inducted into the California Hall of Fame, and awarded hon-orary doctorate degrees from Princeton University and Washington University. His is a career of ﬁ  rsts, often in the category of “ﬁ  rst African American. . . .” He is the founder of the Quincy Jones Listen Up Foun-dation, a charity that introduces young people to music, other forms of culture, and technology. There is also a building program through which 100 homes were built in South Africa and an intercultural exchange program between underprivileged girls and boys from South Africa and Los Angeles. With support from the World Bank, some United Nations agencies, and others, in 2004, Jones established a project, We Are the Future, to help poor children in troubled areas. An endowed chair for African American music in Harvard University’s African and African American studies made Jones professor of African American music. Like his friend Oprah, Jones is someone who uses his celebrity to help children. Before Oprah began a search for her roots with Henry Louis Gates, friend to both Oprah and Jones, Jones led the way. A search of Jones’s roots revealed that he is related to both George Washington and Senator John McCain (but Jones supported Hillary Clinton in the 2008 primaries).  Although the movie  Before Women Had Wings— which Oprah’s Harpo Productions made for the ABC network in 1997—was one of her more successful ﬁ  lm ventures, some movie critics found it to be too much of a tearjerker. (Similar criticism has been leveled about the choices for her 42 OPRAH WINFREYhighly successful book club.) A year later, as one of Harpo Productions, she made a four-hour miniseries called  The Wedding,  starring Halle Berry, who later would win an Oscar at the 2002 Academy Awards.  Dorothy West, who died in 1998, was the author of the novel  The Wedding,  a work inspired by the wedding of her niece, Abigail McGrath. McGrath lives in the house next door to the one West had owned, and she has humorous reminiscences of her aunt. Apparently, West felt a kinship to Oprah, because she had her number on speed dial and didn’t hesitate to use it, as she did one day to complain to Oprah that someone had parked illegally in front of her house. Unfortunately, we don’t know what Oprah’s response was.  Although there is a street named Dorothy West Avenue in Oak Bluffs (also known as the Highlands) on Martha’s Vineyard (Massachusetts), West’s cottage is on Myrtle Street. In West’s youth, the poet Langston Hughes referred to her as “the Kid,” because she was the youngest mem-ber of the Harlem Renaissance, a famous group of writers. West was also the last survivor of the group. In the 1930s, during the presidency of Franklin Roosevelt, she had worked for the Works Progress Admin-istration Federal Writers’ Project. After the 1948 publication of her ﬁ rst book,  The Living Is Easy,  almost 40 years passed before she wrote a second one.  The Wedding  was edited by Jackie Kennedy in 1995 when West was 88. Despite the fact that West wrote only two books, she has played such an important role in literary history that her house has been dedicated as a site on the African American Heritage Trail of Martha’s Vineyard.  Another much-loved book of Oprah’s,  Their Eyes Were Watching God,  was made into a ﬁ  lm in 2005. Even though the author, Zora Neale Hurston, died when Oprah was just six, for her and others, the book became part of the must-read novels of contemporary literature. Only after Hurston’s death did national recognition come to her work. Turn-ing the book into a movie became an important project when Oprah sought more public awareness of Hurston, who had died in poverty, almost forgotten. Like many of Oprah’s choices of more recent novels, it focuses on a woman who rebels against societal rules to live the life she chooses. Once again, Oprah selected Halle Berry to play the lead.  Oprah’s most popular television movie, also under the label Oprah Winfrey Presents, was made in 1999 from Mitch Albom’s phenomenally  A ONCE COLORED GIRL 43successful book  Tuesdays with Morrie.  The ﬁ  lm drew 22.5 million view-ers, unmatched in numbers by any other television show for the entire week. The leading television critic for the  Washington Post,  Tom Shales, who doesn’t offer praise lightly, describes Oprah as someone who “doesn’t mess around . . . is no slouch at presenting” or “at anything [else]” she undertakes. Furthermore, as others have done, he jokes that she is “not even a slouch at slouching.”  Another ﬁ  rst for Oprah was her role in an animated ﬁ  lm titled  The Princess and the Frog,  a cartoon from Pixar Studios and Walt Disney. Al-though she isn’t seen, she is the voice of the character Eudora, the mother of the main character, Princess Tiana.  Oprah’s absorption in the historic life of slaves has led her, like a number of other famous and well-to-do African Americans, such as writer and professor Henry Louis Gates, Jr., to collecting artifacts of their past. Her purchases of bills of sale from the days of slave auctions made the news about the time that Oprah’s production failure of  Beloved  was reported. Clearly, Oprah has not been the ﬁ  rst person to discuss the favored treatment of light- and lighter-skinned Americans. History and literature have recorded the situation. Essays, plays, novels, and poetry have documented the stories of lives shattered by the issues of race. William Faulkner’s  Absalom, Absalom!,  perhaps the greatest American novel to record the tragedies of race in the poetic, moving, and terrify-ing description of the destruction of a dynasty, creates a symbolic way to understand the tragedy of a nation.  Another work about that same period was written in 2008 by histo-rian and Harvard University president Drew Gilpin Faust.  This Republic of Suffering,  a comprehensive account of the Civil War, includes ex-plicit descriptions of the harsh treatment of black soldiers who fought on both the Union and Confederate sides. Even in death, they were treated as lesser beings, in unmarked graves, unworthy of care or rec-ognition. Other historians have described the work as “wise, informed, [and] troubling,” a book that goes beyond statistics, revealing “what it was to live amid such loss and pain.”  Oprah’s interest in the life of slaves and her search for her own roots in the writings from the troubled era of earlier centuries have become part of her persona. Secretary of state in the Bush administration, Con-doleezza Rice, wrote a brief essay about Oprah for  Time  magazine in 2007 44 OPRAH WINFREYin which she identiﬁ  es Oprah’s life as the story of America: the South-ern girl who lived in poverty, whose childhood years were spent in a home that had neither electricity nor running water; a girl who later used her education, her work, and her fortune to better the lives of many people in her own country and abroad.  Oprah, in matters of family, color, and other issues, came to under-stand and forgive much that embittered her in earlier years. Time helped to distance her from bitterness toward Vernita, whom she saw as an angry, hostile parent, a woman with no love to spare for Oprah. The problems Vernita faced as a single mother bringing up three il-legitimate children on a minimal income, in tiny quarters, seem over-whelming to any onlooker. Yet she took much pride in her appearance, and even during the periods when the family was on welfare, she saw to it that the children, like herself, were nicely dressed. Although some black women were able to improve their lives before the civil rights movement of the 1960s, Vernita, with no training or education, could expect nothing more or better than she had, and survival was a con-stant struggle.  Oprah’s success as an entertainer and her generosity years later im-proved Vernita’s life. The less-favored child has given money to her siblings and her mother and has given homes to her mother, sister, and father. Vernita Lee has come a long way since her days as a domestic worker. She now lives in a luxury high-rise apartment, paid for by her daughter. Oprah’s father, by far the better parent, asked for almost nothing. Oprah has recounted in interviews that her half-sister, Patricia Lloyd, was never satisﬁ  ed by anything Oprah gave her and that she betrayed Oprah’s intimate secrets to the newspapers and contradicted much that Oprah had previously said. It took several years for Oprah to forgive her. They were never close, and Oprah has said that she feels little affection or obligation to any other family member except her father, Vernon Winfrey. Yet she continued to give money to the family. After failed attempts to get Jeffrey, her brother, to change his life and take responsibility for his actions, Oprah refused to help him ﬁ  nancially—although without his knowing it, she provided extra money for him through Vernita. Filled with envy and bitterness, he accused her of ignoring him while helping an associate of hers, Billy Rizzo, who was dying from AIDS, the same illness from which Jeffrey died at age 29  A ONCE COLORED GIRL 45in January 1989. Like Jeffrey, Patricia had a drug addiction, and her co-caine habit killed her at the age of 43 in February 2003.  Some of Oprah’s anger toward family members after she’d achieved fame and fortune resulted from the expectations of relatives and their friends that she would help them monetarily, combined with the fact that they, like her sister and brother, did nothing to help themselves. Relatives still expect or ask for gifts of various kinds. One relative, how-ever, praises her aunt Oprah for setting an example.  The woman, a niece of Oprah’s who lives in Milwaukee, was inter-viewed by a reporter about the business she and her husband run and the volunteer work they do for the program Discovering Our Destiny. The function of the group is to teach leadership skills to African Amer-ican girls. In talking about herself and her famous aunt, Alisha Hayes tells a story of earlier years when she’d asked Oprah for a new car; after her aunt refused, the young woman accepted the idea that she would have to provide it for herself. Oprah has repeatedly stressed the impor-tance of self-help and responsibility, and, although she has said little about her siblings’ lack of initiative for changing their lives, she has little pity for such weakness. Oprah has been generous to her nieces in many ways. To give them strong educational and social backgrounds, she sent them to prestigious (and predominantly white) schools.  Some biographers have claimed that Oprah holds back nothing about her life, but writer Barbara Grizzutti Harrison notes that Oprah does skirt issues having to do with her family. Even though the press re-ports whatever news there is about her parents, Oprah is reticent about their doings. 8   The ghetto world of her mother offered few examples of betterment. Although Vernita had started out as a boarder and eventually had a two-bedroom apartment, her three children shared one of the bedrooms. Thus, the living conditions were much worse for Oprah than they had been on Grandmother Lee’s farm. Vernita’s hopes for marriages brought disappointments in her personal life that were and are not uncommon, something Oprah learned to understand but which were beyond her comprehension when she was a child. Men came and went, even though Vernita had a relationship for several years with the man who fathered her son. She wanted and expected her children to follow rules about sexual behavior, yet she was no exemplar of what she advocated. 46 OPRAH WINFREY Experience in the larger world brought the mature Oprah into con-tact with many poor young black women whose lives resemble Vernita’s. If Oprah had remained with her mother, the direction of her own life might well have been similar to Vernita’s. For a time, it seemed as though her future would be as bleak as that of many young ghetto black girls and women. Oprah’s huge success and wealth opened doors for Vernita that she never could have achieved on her own.  Vernita has moved into a different world as a result of her daughter’s help. Her elegant apartment overlooks a lake in Milwaukee. Because of Oprah’s fame and fortune, Vernita’s life resembles that of many a rich person. Merchants report that she is a woman with numerous social engagements and a full calendar. She is on a preferred-client lists in some shops and gets special treatment such as private showings, early notices of events and sales in certain high-end shops, and delivery ser-vice. However, Vernita has run up debts that have led to embarrassing newspaper accounts of lawsuits. One elegant shop that sells designer clothing sued her for nonpayment of a large bill. Lee ﬁ  rst told the man-agers she didn’t believe she owed any money, then blamed them for advancing her credit, and later brought suit against the company. The stories continued to run. An account in the entertainment section of the Milwaukee  Journal Sentinel  in September 2008 led a story with the heading, “Oprah’s mom is accused of being a deadbeat.” After many months of that type of publicity, Oprah settled her mother’s debt. Al-though Oprah continues to support her mother and is concerned about her welfare, their relationship is far from close.  When Oprah was eight and had reached the end of her ﬁ  rst term in the Milwaukee schools, Vernita, who was struggling ﬁ  nancially, sent her to her father and stepmother in Nashville, to an environment com-pletely opposite from the one Oprah had been living in. Her father, an industrious, hardworking man with a regular income, owned (and still does own) a barber shop and a small adjacent grocery store. The grocery store was where Oprah ﬁ  rst had a job, though it was a job she has said she despised. An upstanding person, Vernon Winfrey later in life became a member of the city council. By any measurement, he could provide a better milieu than Vernita could for their daughter. The Winfreys, Zelma and Vernon, at that time, had a home in an established black, middle-class community, totally different from the poor, rundown  A ONCE COLORED GIRL 47Milwaukee area where Vernita lived. Today, Vernon and his second wife, Barbara, own a home in a beautiful Nashville suburb. Because Vernon and Zelma had no children of their own, they wanted to raise Oprah themselves. Strongly religious, Vernon Winfrey was a deacon and was very active in his church, Faith United, and he saw to it, as Grandmother Lee had, that Oprah attended all services and youth-oriented activities. The Winfrey home was rigorously run, a place where learning for a child was central, and Zelma, known as a strict discipli-narian, required Oprah to read a certain number of books on a regular basis, write, learn math, and develop a strong vocabulary.  After Zelma died, Vernon remained a widower for several years until he met the woman who became his second wife. Barbara Winfrey was a 59-year-old retired educator, the oldest child in a family of eight, as well as the ﬁ  rst of the family to graduate from college. Her life story is the kind of achievement that Oprah believes is possible for girls who aim high. Born to a father who had only a third-grade education but who brought books home and a mother who left school after the eighth grade yet tried to discourage her daughter from pursuing an education, Barbara was determined to ﬁ  nd a way to go to school. She did cafeteria work, washed dishes, and served food “so she could get lunch every day.” In college she was a waitress, a cashier, a unit clerk in a hospital, and the ﬁ  rst black secretary for an insurance company.  Barbara Winfrey has degrees in business education, a master of sci-ence degree in psychology, a master of arts degree in education, and a doctorate in administration. As poor as she was, it took 10 years of de-termination for her to earn her ﬁ  rst degree. When she received her second master’s degree, she began to teach at an inner-city school in Tennessee; her last 6 of more than 31 working years were spent as an administrator in a high school. She retired on the sixth anniversary of her marriage to Oprah’s father, whom she had met because of his generosity to her students—that is, troubled teens. Much impressed by his work as local council member and his community involvement, Barbara was the person who lobbied to have Vernon Winfrey Avenue named in his honor. Even though Barbara is retired, Vernon Winfrey has no plans to do so himself. Nonetheless, his wife says that he is now will-ing to take “advantage of the opportunities that his daughter” has given him, that his life is no longer exclusively the barber shop. However, 48 OPRAH WINFREYshe also plans to get involved in some way in furthering education for others. In 2007, it was reported that the Winfreys were working on hav-ing a retail and residential development built not far from Vernon’s barber shop in Nashville.  When Oprah ﬁ  rst went to live with Vernon and Zelma, they sent her to East Wharton Elementary School in Nashville. Encouraged by a fourth-grade teacher named Mrs. Duncan, whom she still remembers with deep affection, the child ﬂ  ourished. Over the years, Oprah has spoken of how Duncan inspired her so much that for a time she wanted to become a teacher also. In middle age, Oprah achieved that particu-lar ambition, teaching a graduate credit course called The Dynamics of Leadership with her boyfriend, Stedman Graham, at Northwest-ern University’s J. L. Kellogg School of Management. In 2001, an un-dergraduate course about Oprah was offered. Its description in the catalogue refers to its subject matter as “Oprah the Tycoon.” This was a graduate history course of one semester offered at the Urbana-Champaign campus of the University of Illinois.  The memory of her early teacher always had a favored place in Oprah’s heart. Because of Duncan, Oprah has said that she believes strongly in the inﬂ  uence of teachers on the lives of children. No doubt, people like Duncan were an unconscious part of Oprah’s decision in later years to play an active role in providing schools for poor but clever girls. However, despite Duncan’s affection for Oprah, the other children in her class were hostile, much as the children had been when she lived with her grandmother because she preached to them. They disliked her and thought she was crazy. Nevertheless, inﬂ  uenced by strong faith and the moral atmosphere of Vernon Winfrey’s home, Oprah decided she’d become a missionary when she grew up, and she even collected money for the poor of Costa Rica. Although she did not become a missionary, the desire to help others became part of her ethical ﬁ  ber.  All of the future promise of the Winfrey household seemed to dissipate for Oprah when she was nine; in the summer of 1963, Oprah’s mother, expecting to be married and hoping to have a real family life, insisted on her return to Wisconsin. Vernon Winfrey wasn’t happy about having his daughter go back to the environment of Vernita’s household. Oprah experienced regression in the overcrowded, unsupervised, undisciplined life she’d led before, only worse. She soon became the frequent object  A ONCE COLORED GIRL 49of sexual abuse. After being raped by a cousin at an uncle’s house when she was nine, over the next ﬁ  ve years she experienced molestation that she has described as unending and persistent until she went to live again in her father’s home. She was abused by numerous men, among them other relatives and her mother’s boyfriends. When she was ﬁ  rst raped by her cousin, she says, she didn’t understand what had happened, particu-larly when the cousin convinced her not to tell by bribing her with an ice cream cone and a trip to the local zoo.  Although she kept the violations a “big, looming, dark secret” for more than 12 years, Oprah has said that she always believed that her mother knew about them and had failed to protect her. Also, like many rape victims and abused children, she blamed herself for the terrible things that had happened to her, and she maintained her silence. She has said she thought of herself as a bad girl, and only when she reached her 30s and 40s did she give up the belief that the sexual abuses had been her fault. When, at the age of 24, she ﬁ  nally told her mother and other members of the family about the abuse, nobody would accept what she said. Her father also strongly denied her statement that a brother of his had been one of the perpetrators.  Her mother’s refusal to discuss the matter was so traumatic that Oprah never brought it up again with her. Nevertheless, the matter of her abuse became a public confession years later for Oprah on her televi-sion program when a woman, Trudy Chase, who appeared on the show, spoke of the suffering she had experienced as a child as a result of sexual abuse. The identiﬁ  cation for Oprah was so intense that all her efforts at concealment over the years slipped away in the shared moments of suffering with her guest. But she says that it has taken her a very long time to understand the anger and rebellion that came about from the destructive assaults she suffered. She needed and wanted affection that she couldn’t get at home from her mother and siblings, and her feelings made her vulnerable to sexual predators. This pattern would repeat itself even after many years, something other women in similar circum-stances have endured.  Almost three decades after the abuse ﬁ  rst occurred, when Oprah had become an internationally famous entertainer on television and in ﬁ  lm, she chose to use her celebrity as a means of speaking out against the terrors of child abuse and the secrecy that surrounds it. In 1992, she 50 OPRAH WINFREYintroduced a documentary titled  Scared Silent,  describing her harsh child-hood experiences of rape and molestation by male relatives, among them an uncle, and family friends. Urging both children and adults to watch the documentary, to talk about the issues, and to seek help, she ap-peared on a number of morning television programs, including the  Today Show, This Morning,  and  Good Morning America.  Abuse, she stressed, on those programs and elsewhere, is not limited to any one class, race, or economic level.  Her concern for other problems in the lives of children was expanded professionally the following year, 1993, in several ways. Her distress about the tragic results to children from the availability of handguns became the source of several child alert programs.  There Are No Children Here  is a combination ﬁ  ction and documentary, referred to as “a true-life drama.” In the picture, Oprah plays a black everywoman. Although the ﬁ lm speciﬁ  cally focuses on blacks, when Oprah uses the term  everywoman  to deﬁ  ne herself, in life, as she presents her talk show and speaks with interviewees, she does not limit her scope to one race or color. She says that she believes a great many of her experiences to be the same as those of  every woman.   In the ﬁ  lm, her role is that of an African Ameri-can mother attempting, in the midst of dire poverty and social ills, to raise her family and keep them together. The family, in addition to the central ﬁ  gure of the mother, consists of a grandmother played by Oprah’s friend Maya Angelou, an undependable husband/father, and three sons: one already lost to the prison system, one “in the undecided column,” and the youngest, for whom there is still hope. The setting was the Henry Horner public housing project in Chicago, a place that had caught Oprah’s attention for a long period of time as she drove past it on her way to work.  Talking about her experience of ﬁ  lming the project, Oprah said that she gained knowledge and insight into not only people’s needs but also the longings and dreams for their lives that everyone harbors; she came to understand that everyone goes through some basic human circum-stances. Living in a housing project doesn’t alter such emotions as joy, sorrow, and disappointment. But poverty and deprivation can shape existence. Over the years, as her income grew, she attempted to help children with ﬁ  nancial assistance and motivation. Her philosophy of personal responsibility and self-help, as well as her belief in the vital role  A ONCE COLORED GIRL 51of education, is played out in practical ways again and again in all kinds of situations: in talks, interviews, on her television show, and in  O, The Oprah Magazine,  which she started in 2000 with the partnership of the Hearst Corporation, she emphasizes the possibility of change. She once wanted to keep most experiences private, but now she appears more open—although some interviewers have said that she is carefully selective. But Oprah herself asserts that sharing the truth with others is freeing and uplifting. No one should allow the past to deﬁ  ne him or her, and she points to her own life as validation of that view.  Her early years taught her much of this philosophy, even though she could not have had any idea of the direction her life would take. In a lengthy interview she gave to  Newsweek  reporter Lynette Clemetson, she insists that the efforts and rewards of her life were never calculated. 9  But she has also said that all the different experiences of her childhood and youth have given her greater understanding of the problems oth-ers must deal with. When she lived with her mother for the second time, despite ﬁ  nding herself in more and more emotional and physical trouble, she did very well at the Lincoln Middle School, located in the poor inner city of Milwaukee. Clever and talented, a good student as well as an ardent reader even then, Oprah was able, with help from a teacher, to change to Nicolet, a newly integrated Milwaukee high school. Because she lived 20 miles from the school, she had to take three buses to get there, often riding with her mother and the other maids on their way to work.  Each trip brought a change of landscape, taking her from the dilapi-dated, rundown area that was her home to a neighborhood of houses surrounded by greenery, lawns, trees, and ﬂ  owers. It was an entrance into another world, and she was an outsider, a penniless black child, spending days with rich white children who often invited her to their homes after school. She longed for everything these girls had: normal families, elegant clothing, spending money, pets. In their houses, the children would introduce her to their black maids as if all black people should know each other, and they made the same assumption about Oprah’s supposed familiarity with black entertainers. For Oprah, these memories linger. With a certain wry humor on her television show, she points out that some white people imagine many untrue things about blacks. 52 OPRAH WINFREY The year that Oprah attended Nicolet High is also a time that will long be remembered in history. In 1968, both Martin Luther King, Jr., and Robert Kennedy were assassinated. From the period of Oprah’s birth through the decade of the 1960s, upheaval was prevalent. The year she was born, 1954, the U.S. Supreme Court ruled that segregation in public schools was unconstitutional, although Mississippi did not integrate its public schools until 1964. Violence was part of life in Mis-sissippi, an extremism that “entered the national awareness in the sum-mer of 1955,” the year after Oprah’s birth. That summer in Mississippi, white men murdered a 14-year-old black boy named Emmett Till, who allegedly had whistled at a white woman.  Till’s murder became civil rights legend, along with the refusal by Rosa Parks, a poor seamstress in Montgomery, Alabama, to give up her seat on a bus to a white person. (In an article about the last of the Pull-man porters, Jennifer Lee, a writer for the  New York Times,  told of an action generally not noted in stories about Parks: it was a Pullman por-ter, E. D. Nixon, who’d chosen Parks to take the steps for what became the Montgomery bus boycott. Nixon also recruited the young minister, Martin Luther King, Jr., as the leader of the protest. 10  Parks’s behavior landed her in jail, an act that brought about the Montgomery boycott of bus transportation and led to more legal changes.) Parks’s name has long been associated with the Supreme Court’s ruling against segrega-tion in transportation. At the time of the incident, however, she was ﬁ  ned for violating the law. A protest followed, when black people in Montgomery boycotted buses for more than a year. Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr., then, a 26-year-old new pastor at a church in Montgomery, later wrote in one of his books that the arrest of Parks was the “precipi-tating factor” in the protest that followed her arrest. 11     Historians note that Parks’s actions made her a founding symbol of the civil rights movement. Though Parks had been a very private woman, she became active in helping to bring about change even to the end of her life. Memorably, Reverend Jesse Jackson said of her: “She sat down in order that we might stand up. . . . her imprisonment opened the doors for our long journey to freedom.” 12  Throughout the years, many people paid homage to Parks, as did Oprah when she in-cluded the frail, elderly woman as an honored guest at a screening of  Beloved,  held at Marianne Williamson’s Unity Church.  A ONCE COLORED GIRL 53 Parks was not the ﬁ  rst black woman who attempted to alter U.S. laws and bring about civil rights. But her fame has grown over the years. A forerunner of Parks was Ida B. Wells, born a slave in 1862, in Oprah’s home state of Mississippi. Like the later Parks, Wells refused to be seg-regated. While aboard a train, she was told to exchange her seat in a women’s railroad car for a seat in a car set aside for black people. When she would not comply, she was removed from the train. Wells brought and won a suit against the railroad, but the decision was later reversed by the Supreme Court of Tennessee. Her win was surprising even in the post–Civil War South, but the reversal was not. Undaunted by defeat, Wells spent much of her life trying, usually unsuccessfully, to improve the lot of black people. After becoming a part owner and writer for a Memphis newspaper, she was determined to leave the South after the newspaper ofﬁ  ce was destroyed by white men in retaliation for her anti-lynching columns. Alienated from the South but not from the cause of civil rights, she moved to Chicago, where she founded the ﬁ  rst African American civic group for women and became the ﬁ  rst president of the Negro Fellowship League and chairman of the Equal Rights League  Oprah Winfrey takes the stage to speak during the groundbreaking ceremony for the Martin Luther King, Jr., Memorial on the National Mall in Washington, DC, on November 13, 2006. Former President Bill Clinton applauds in the background. (AP Photo/Lawrence Jackson) 54 OPRAH WINFREYof Chicago. Her greatest and most lasting accomplishment came in 1909, when she helped found the oldest and probably the best-known national civil rights organization in the United States—the one that eventually became the National Association for the Advancement of Colored people. It took almost a century for a biography of Wells to be written, but in the 21st century Paula J. Giddings wrote about her in  Ida: A Sword Against Lions; Ida B. Wells and the Campaign against Lynching.    Oprah is captivated by the history and powerful heritage left by a few black women. Former PBS reporter Charlayne Hunter-Gault was the ﬁ rst African American woman—along with Hamilton Holmes, also an African American student—to be admitted to the University of Geor-gia. The year was 1961: 40 years later, the academic building where the two registered was renamed after both of them, and, in 2005, the Myers Hall, in which that ﬁ  rst African American woman student had been housed, had a memorial dedicated to her. Hunter-Gault today is the CNN bureau chief for South Africa. The year Oprah reached the age of six (1962) and moved from Mississippi to Milwaukee was the historic time that another black student, James Meredith, also from Kosciusko (as was Oprah), had to be enrolled by force at the University of Missis-sippi in Oxford.  Of course, Oprah holds no individual knowledge of any of the political events that happened during the early years of her child-hood or half a century before her birth, and she was only a small child when the ﬁ  rst civil rights bills for blacks since Reconstruction in the 19th century were passed. For a number of years, unrest was prevalent with sit-ins, riots, civil rights marches, and even murders that led to the frequent calling up of federal troops. This period of momentous changes occurred during Oprah’s adolescence, and she was more concerned with her familiar world than the political situation around her.  It isn’t surprising that Oprah, who was not even a teenager in the 1960s, had no concern about politics in her home state and elsewhere. In adulthood, she has stated that she is neither someone to carry a ban-ner with a message or declaration nor dress like a woman from Africa. She has her own original concept of ways to change society, change that is central to her belief in individual responsibility. For many years, Oprah maintained a neutral stance about politics. Her one and only foray into the political arena has been for the Democrat candidate for president, Barack Obama.  A ONCE COLORED GIRL 55 Oprah’s early home, Mississippi, has a history of electing Democratic governors and Republican senators. Every governor since 1874, except for two, has been a Democrat, but state senators have been Republicans: The ﬁ  rst black mayor of Fayette since Reconstruction, Charles Evers, was elected in 1969.  Oprah has attempted to remain neutral about politics on her tele-vision show. She has interviewed Democratic and Republican presi-dents and their ﬁ  rst ladies and has appeared with them on occasions that involved matters of national interest. One exception to her usual stance came when she invited her friends Maria Shriver and Arnold Schwarzenegger, then a candidate for governor in California, to join her on a television program. Her long and close friendship with Shriver obviously had more to do with her assistance to the campaign than a desire to see a Republican elected as governor of California.  Nevertheless, she continues to be independent enough to turn down requests to appear with heads of state. In 2002, she refused an invitation from President George W . Bush to join a group of ofﬁ  cials on a trip to tour Afghanistan schools; Oprah responded that she was too much in-volved with earlier commitments. That unguarded statement provided media with the chance for some Oprah bashing by people who regarded her response as a political snub of the administration. Even though she is very much a feminist without labeling herself as such, she did not choose to support the ﬁ  rst woman candidate for the presidency, Hillary Clinton. Her views and actions supported the person she believed could more readily bring about changes in the United States.  Throughout her adult years, Oprah’s concern has not been for politi-cal movements but for the rights of all women everywhere, as well as other individuals whose lives she celebrates. Furthermore, apart from politics, she has shown a lifelong desire to help those in need and those who are overlooked or discriminated against. Part of her outlook mir-rors activist Jesse Jackson’s: excellence is the best barrier to both sexism and racism. Responsibility for our lives belongs to each of us; further-more, both Jackson and Oprah have said that the path to freedom is through education. Above all else, education alters everything, and Oprah is passionate about that. With heartfelt admiration for Oprah, Jackson has spoken of the enormity of her contribution in transforming the social structure, an observation echoed hyperbolically in a  Vanity Fair  magazine article characterizing her inﬂ  uence as greater than almost 56 OPRAH WINFREYanyone on the planet except for the Pope. Other publications describe her as one of the 20th century’s most inﬂ  uential people.  Jesse Jackson describes Oprah in the same way she depicts her cher-ished friend Quincy Jones—as a person who lights up the dark places. Year after year, in addition to categorizing her as a prominent ﬁ  gure, polls have listed her as one of the most admired women in the United States, along with ﬁ  rst ladies, a former ﬁ  rst lady and senator (Hillary Rodham Clinton), and a former British prime minister (Margaret Thatcher). Oprah’s style of participation in the lives of the underprivileged and Af-rican Americans, however, in the main does not resemble Jackson’s. While Oprah’s beneﬁ  cence may be directed primarily toward blacks, it isn’t closed to others. After all, most of her television audience at home and abroad, much of her staff, and many of her friends are white. Thus, when Jackson, in March 1996, protested the Academy Awards because of the lack of black nominees—only 1 black person among 166 nominees—it isn’t surprising that Oprah, Whoopi Goldberg, and Quincy Jones criticized his action: Jones, incidentally, was the producer of that awards show.  Oprah’s belief in individual accountability is much more pronounced in her advocacy for broader, societal changes, though the exceptions are her calls for stricter gun laws, punishment for those who commit sex crimes against children, and the need for education. This emphasis on the individual has at various times led to critics calling her conser-vative and capitalistic. However, her great commitment to the life-transforming value of education is neither conservative nor capitalistic, although her hands-on individualistic approach might be considered one or both. Her personal principles became evident in, for example, the 10 ongoing scholarships she established in her father’s name at her alma mater, Tennessee State University, soon after she became a televi-sion star. She continues to give major sums of money to colleges and universities, large and small. She has helped to raise money for scholar-ships and to help with matching gifts, in recognition of the importance of her own spiritual and educational beginnings. Her extremely gener-ous gifts of millions to the black Morehouse College makes her the school’s top donor. She has been very liberal in her donations to many other schools and colleges. Some people have criticized her choices and actions in giving money to foreign countries, because she hasn’t lim- A ONCE COLORED GIRL 57ited her educational concerns to the United States. She plays an active philanthropic role in providing funds for international schools. In fact, when she is asked about her plans for the time after she leaves her show, she mentions, among other activities, her wish to become more involved with education in Africa, something she has been doing in recent years. In building schools for girls, she has spoken of her desire to be a constructive force in the lives of those who need it. However, despite regarding herself as a nurturer, she has said again and again—most recently on one of her television shows in October 2008—that she never felt the desire for motherhood. When asked, as she frequently is, whether she ever wanted to be a mother, she answers in the nega-tive, making the point that she never had a role model for motherhood in Vernita.  However, when she established her academy for girls in South Af-rica, she considered herself their mother. An admiring world forgets or doesn’t know the damaged, rebellious girl she was, light years away from the exquisitely coiffed and dressed woman she became. At 14, Oprah’s personal problems caught up with her. One sexual episode fol-lowed another, including an instance with her father’s brother, Trent—another abusive situation she never spoke about until years later, and even then her father found the knowledge almost impossible to accept. Today, she tells girls and women that they must not keep such things to themselves, that the burden of sexual assault cannot be tolerated. She teaches that, in order to become responsible for one’s own life, one has to tell the truth about an abusive situation again and again until someone listens. This lesson results from something she did not do as a child herself.  Oprah kept secret from her mother the frequent, ongoing attacks by men who came and went in their home. Vernita, ﬁ  nding it impossible to control her daughter, tried various avenues unsuccessfully, including an attempt to place the girl in a home for wayward children. Finally, Vernon agreed to take Oprah back to live with him and Zelma. Neither he nor Vernita knew at the time that the teenage girl was pregnant, because, like her mother 14 years earlier, she was extremely successful at concealing her condition. Only when she was in her seventh month did she tell her father the truth. Today she recognizes him as an honor-able man, the person who saved her life—that is, the one who saw to it 58 OPRAH WINFREYthat she became more than an unwed mother. Without the inﬂ  uence of Vernon Winfrey throughout her adolescent years, she could not have achieved her later success. Oprah recalls his strength as he considered the choices that existed in her situation and then reached the decision to allow her to have the baby. However, two weeks after the premature birth, the infant boy died. What the 14-year-old Oprah’s feelings were at the time may not be precisely what the middle-aged woman describes as an “opportunity” rather than a loss; the opportunity was a choice for her future. Yet there is no question that the path she would have had to take would bear no resemblance to the one she had been on. She freely admits she has no idea of what her life might have been or what sort of mother she would have become. There are many examples of teen-agers whose futures have been deﬁ  ned by the boundaries of motherhood, and in 1968 a pregnant black girl of 14 would have had few prospects and little hope. Freed of the oppressions of life in Vernita’s home and of teenage motherhood, Oprah began to show signs of promise, although surely nobody in those days could have predicted her later accomplish-ments. She has said that she remembers telling her father when she was still a youngster that one day she’d be famous. After moving in with the Winfreys once more, she had to follow their strict rules. Vernon Win-frey was uncompromising about grades, demanding she earn As. Cs, he told his daughter, were not acceptable for one who has the capac-ity to excel. Further, he didn’t agree that she should be rewarded for achievements, even with an ice cream cone, because he simply ex-pected her to be the best. Zelma, his wife, also required Oprah to do all the things necessary to become an outstanding student.  Surprisingly, reports that Vernon was writing a “shocking” book about Oprah’s childhood, in which he described her as “disobedient” and “out of hand,” seem completely at odds with Oprah’s recollections, but it is likely that the sources of the stories probably conﬂ  ated her earlier years at home with Vernita.  When she was about 15, Oprah began to keep a journal, and she has continued to write in it ever since then. Now when she rereads its en-tries from her teen years, she sees page after page ﬁ  lled with typical kinds of entries: problems with boys; trivial complaints about her father’s dos and don’ts—the same complaints as those of most teenage girls. None-theless, after entering Nashville’s East High School, she became very  A ONCE COLORED GIRL 59active; soon she was chosen as vice president of her class and president of the student council, drama club, and National Forensics League. Voted most popular girl in her senior year, at the same time she also was chosen for membership in the National Forensic League. In 1971, during the Nixon administration, when two students from each state and from foreign countries were chosen to attend a White House Conference on Youth, Oprah was one of Tennessee’s representatives. Shortly after that, she was interviewed at a small Nashville radio sta-tion, WVOL, an event that led to her later career. The station, white- owned but black-operated and with a primarily black audience, wanted somebody to represent it in the contest of Miss Fire Prevention. Oprah was recommended by John Heidelberg, who, all these years later, still recalls how much he was impressed by both her articulateness and ease before a camera. He was the person who had interviewed her when she searched for supporters for a March of Dimes Walkathon. The Miss Fire Prevention competition was a beauty contest in which every girl except Oprah was white, and she has said, with characteristic humor, that all of the girls were redheads. Relaxed, because she was certain she had no chance at winning, but proud and delighted with her new evening gown, she answered the two test questions with her characteristic light-heartedness. First asked what she’d do with the money if she won, she told the judges she’d be a “spending fool.” And when asked about her wishes for a future career, she chose something out of the ordinary for that time. She said she wanted to be a journalist in the broadcasting industry. Other contestants had given expected, typical answers, so Oprah won, becoming the ﬁ  rst black girl to be named Miss Fire Preven-tion. Following her unanticipated success, she became the ﬁ  rst Miss Black Nashville in a pageant; later, in another pageant, she was named Miss Black Tennessee; and following that, she won a trip to Hollywood, where she participated in, though she didn’t win, a Miss Black America Contest. Those were only the beginning of honors that were to come her way throughout the decades.  In 1971, after graduating from high school, she went on to Tennessee State University with a scholarship from an Elks lodge where she had won a contest. She majored in speech and language arts, although she was uncertain about her future plans. Yet, a career path was opening up. The interview she’d had during her senior year in high school after she 60 OPRAH WINFREYwas chosen as Miss Fire Prevention led to a job reading the news on ra-dio station WVOL. The station, and particularly John Heidelberg, re-membered Oprah’s outgoing personality from that interview; just for fun, she had read some news copy while she was at the station. She had made a favorable impression with her voice and poise, and when the station needed someone to read the news, they offered the job to Oprah. Naive and somewhat unworldly, she knew little about media. Of course, reading the news would pave the way to a future career and international fame. She was going to turn down Heidelberg’s offer, fear-ful the job might interfere with school work, but her father encouraged her to take it. Although he hadn’t been too enthusiastic about her choice of a major, he was pleased by the opportunities that were com-ing her way. Reading the weekend news, and, later, making occasional broadcasts during the week, she worked her way up from no pay to $100 a week, a large sum of money at the time.  Later, while in college, she was offered a more prestigious opportunity with a larger radio station, WLAC, and, not long after that, at the age of 19, she moved to its television channel, WLAC-TV , where she be-came a reporter and co-anchorperson, the ﬁ  rst woman as well as the ﬁ  rst black person to hold that position. Though still reluctant about accepting such an offer, she was persuaded to do so by William Cox, a professor who oversaw her major courses. He pointed out that the job was in the area of work for which she had been preparing. Furthermore, her father, who supervised almost everything she did, agreed with Cox. In later years, when questioned whether she’d seen herself as a token for the job, she has made light of it; yet at another time, she also said point-edly that she was a paid token. Oprah has never shown any regrets, surely not publicly, about accepting opportunities of that sort. The 1970s were a changing period in the United States, when doors previ-ously closed to women and people of color were slowly opening as a result of civil rights laws.  Oprah’s world was expanding, not only with a job but also through opportunities to do some acting in college and sing with Sweet Honey in the Rock, an all-women’s a capella group in Nashville. The group describes itself as singing of “struggle, perseverance, and triumph,” cel-ebrating life “deeply rooted in the African American experience.” Nat-urally, Oprah was attracted to the group, and it was quite popular with  A ONCE COLORED GIRL 61audiences—in fact, three decades later, the group still sings in many parts of the South. But after a time, the restrictions of life at home—with her stern father’s rules, which included a curfew, as well as the difﬁ  cul-ties of meshing college studies and work—led to a life-altering decision. She left college without her degree and moved on to another job in the media, becoming a reporter and co-anchor of evening news at a Baltimore, Maryland, station. Although some books state that Oprah graduated from college in 1976, the fact is that she did not, and the sit-uation is cloudy. One version is that she received an honorary degree years later. Another is that Tennessee State University awarded her a bachelor of arts degree in 1987. Still another is that she was asked by the university in 1987 to give the commencement address, but she re-fused to do it until she had ﬁ  nished her courses for credit and obtained her degree.  Whatever the actual facts are, she does have a degree from Tennes-see State. Furthermore, Princeton University in 2002 awarded an hon-orary doctorate of ﬁ  ne arts to Oprah. At the same ceremony, another talk show host, Terry Gross, of the National Public Radio show  Fresh Air,  was granted an honorary doctor of humanities degree. Since that time, Oprah has received many more honorary degrees.     Not long after, another recognition came to Oprah when she received the sixth Marian Anderson Award. Recipients generally donate the prize of $100,000 to a favorite charity. Many who remember the opera star’s soul-stirring contralto voice forget that she lived in a period when seg-regation kept her from many of the venues open to famous singers today. After a board’s scandalous recall of an invitation to her to sing at Con-stitution Hall, Anderson was invited to the White House, where she be-came the ﬁ  rst black singer to perform there. Because Anderson, a native of Philadelphia, broke through one of the most important barriers in Jim Crowism, her home state pays homage to her memory, for that and other signiﬁ  cant actions. Every year the award is given to mark the im-portance of the arts; recipients are those who have used their talents to help better society. Although most people would probably agree that Oprah ﬁ  ts in that category, there are some who question the choice. An unidentiﬁ  ed writer in  Philebrity: Philly Media, Gossip, Nightlife & Poli-tics  puts her in a group of “those who have arguably done more harm than good, culturally speaking:  Oprah Winfrey,  anyone?” (emphasis in 62 OPRAH WINFREYoriginal). The harshness of the columnist’s criticism seems to ﬁ  nd her irredeemable. (For good measure the writer includes the names of a few other stars whose work he or she doesn’t like. Among them is Oprah’s close friend, Maya Angelou, whom he calls “quite possibly the worst pub-lished poet of the 20th century . . . a Living God to all who serve in Oprah’s Kingdom of Lowered Expectations.”)  As much as Oprah is a target for all kinds of criticism (much of it humorous and even when she is using her celebrity for admirable causes), she is also, of course, the subject of much adulation. When Philadelphia Mayor John Street, in speaking of the 2003 choice of Oprah for the Mar-ian Anderson Award, took note of Oprah’s work in many social pro-grams as well as her generosity to schools at home and in South Africa,  Oprah Winfrey cheers with the crowd at the commencement ceremony for Howard University, a historically black college in Washington, DC, on May 12, 2007. The media mogul was awarded with an honorary doctor of humanities, prompting tears from Winfrey, before delivering a speech to the audience. (AP Photo/Jacquelyn Martin)  A ONCE COLORED GIRL 63he also pointed to the importance of her television shows that focus on individual self-help. Oprah, said the mayor, serves as “a national men-tor.” Following the mayor’s announcement, the next speaker was Pamela Crowley, chair of the award’s board of directors and vice president for a Philadelphia bank. She called attention to the similarities in Oprah’s and Marian Anderson’s characters; both women, she emphasized, achieved their place in the world through their own abilities and efforts. Several years earlier, Oprah had received the Horatio Alger Award from the association that annually honors those who have triumphed over adversity with their considerable achievements. Almost everyone who mentions Oprah speaks with awe of her astonishing rise from annihilat-ing poverty to her place on the world’s stage.  Many experiences in Oprah’s younger years were similar to those of other black women of her age. She recalls an event when she was cho-sen to participate in a black college contest in Chicago. Housed in a rundown motel in a high-crime area on the South Side, the young col-lege participants were outraged by the conditions they found. However, in what was to become typical of the future star, Oprah disregarded the adverse circumstances, becoming one of the winners in the contest with her reading of a passage from Ntozake Shange’s  For Colored Girls Who Have Contemplated Suicide When the Rainbow Is Enuf,  a play as-signed in many English classes throughout the country.  Could anyone knowing her early life have imagined the heights to which she would rise: recipient of the most notable honor in broadcast-ing, the George Foster Peabody Individual Achievement Award and the ﬁ rst person to be given the Bob Hope Humanitarian Award? Decades earlier, when Oprah left Nashville to try her wings elsewhere, she was 22, young and unsophisticated in various ways, only at the beginning of the road that would eventually take her to stardom. Going from rela-tively small Nashville to Baltimore, the 10th-largest city in the country, was not an easy transition for a young woman. It took years for her to become the equal of the assured, self-conﬁ  dent person she praises in Maya Angelou’s poem “Phenomenal Woman”; years to learn the secret of being herself—neither cute nor slim as a model but someone both cool and ﬁ  ery, ﬁ  lled with the joy of life and being a woman. Starting out, she didn’t do well in her new job as the anchor of the six o’clock evening news on Baltimore’s station, WJZ-TV , the largest station in the 64 OPRAH WINFREYcity. She was ill at ease, and her unworldly background led to embar-rassing gaffes. It became apparent very quickly that Oprah wasn’t meant to be a newswoman. Her strength then, as now, was her rapport with people, not her ability to cover the news. Far too emotional to be a re-porter, she would get carried away and react to the human aspects of all situations. Although she freely admits her lack of qualiﬁ  cations for jour-nalism, years later—in 2000—she joined the ranks of magazine owners and writers when her highly successful magazine was launched.  When her career was in its infancy, though, both her reportorial mode and her appearance troubled the producers. In an attempt to alter her looks, they sent her to New York for a makeover. A special hair treat-ment and permanent caused most of her hair to fall out, with the result that she lost her job as well as her hair. It is a great irony that now she is regarded as one of the most elegant women in the entertainment indus-try. In Baltimore, however, she was not seen as a potential star. She was demoted from her evening anchor position, but a new station manager who liked Oprah’s style found a slot for her with co-host Richard Sher on a morning program called  People Are Talking.   Even though the show was quite popular, Oprah didn’t particularly like working with another host. Nonetheless, because she enjoyed doing a talk show, something she always has described as being as natural as breathing, she stayed with the job for several years.  Surprisingly, with the large black population of Baltimore and com-fortable numbers of viewers in that city, the program had a smaller view-ing audience there than it did in 12 other cities. Her program did, however, have a higher rating in Baltimore than the leading national talk show,  Donahue,   a statistic that was to help her ﬁ  nd another job. Restless and unhappy in her personal life and tired of what she’d been doing for six years, she began to look elsewhere for work. With the help of a resume expert and an ambitious producer friend, in 1984, at the age of 30, Oprah relocated to Chicago, a city that has the third largest tele-vision market in the country and which she has referred to as a “more polished New York.” She remained in Chicago for more than 25 years before moving to California.  When she ﬁ  rst became a talk show host, the show she took over was low in the ratings. Nervous about the competition she faced, she voiced her feelings to station manager Dennis Swanson, whose response was to be herself since there was no way she could be Phil Donahue. Within  A ONCE COLORED GIRL 65months, the program she hosted,  AM Chicago,  was the most popular talk show on the air. With a starting salary of $225,000, she considered herself unbelievably rich.  Only two years after her move to Chicago, her show was syndicated, and, in a sense, a star was born—the star of  The Oprah Winfrey Show.   When the show went national in 1986, 32-year-old Oprah celebrated Thanksgiving with Vernon and Zelma Winfrey; the three of them took a triumphal trip back to Mississippi, where they revisited family and friends and old haunts from Oprah’s childhood. Today, Grandmother Lee’s house is gone, but the street alongside the property is known as Oprah Winfrey Road. In Kosciusko, Oprah’s celebrity is as great as—or perhaps greater than—it is in other parts of the country. Nashville, somewhat later, also paid tribute to Oprah and her father’s role in her life by naming the street on which Vernon Winfrey’s Beauty and Barber shop is located Vernon Winfrey Avenue, an action in which his wife Barbara had a role.  The year following that vacation, in 1987, Oprah received an Emmy Award for daytime television, the ﬁ  rst of more than 30 that would fol-low over the years. She eventually received a lifetime award, after which she no longer was a competitor for the Emmy. The syndication of her show was the most signiﬁ  cant step to stardom, because it made her a national—and soon thereafter an international—ﬁ  gure.  Renaming the program  The Oprah Winfrey Show  was the act of the King Brothers Corporation, a company owned by two well-known dis-tributors who had purchased the show in September 1986. Frequently referred to as “the boys,” the King brothers, Roger and Michael, were white, middle-aged men, part of a family of six brothers who had inher-ited a struggling syndicate business from their father, Charlie King. Be-cause Roger and Michael were super salesmen, they were able to turn the marginal business into a multimillion-dollar company that, in turn, made huge amounts of money for the television programs they repre-sented. They became the powerhouse dealers of television programs. Although most of their clients were very successful game shows, Oprah was the star in their crown, with a show that brought in many millions for the Kings as well as for Oprah.  They soon saw to it that the program was on 137 stations nationwide. Roger, who is now deceased, was known as a high ﬂ  yer and big spender and the more daring and ﬂ  amboyant of the brothers. He predicted 66 OPRAH WINFREYaccurately that syndication would make Oprah rich. However, Oprah has said that the phenomenal success of the program came about from it being on the air at the same time throughout the country. Although the program is shown during the daytime, she considers it to be, as do some critics, a prime-time show. Always giving credit to the Kings for the major role they’ve played in her career, she has said that without them she wouldn’t have achieved her enormous following. Roger King had been a CBS and King World Productions executive when he died of a stroke in December 2007 at the age of 63. King World Productions had merged with CBS in 2000, but Oprah owns and controls her show through Harpo. With Roger King’s death, Oprah not only praised his in-ﬂ  uence on the television industry but also paid tribute to his role in her career.  Despite his extraordinary ﬁ  nancial acumen, Roger King was a rather surprising person to have business dealings with Oprah. Yet, without the Kings, Oprah might never have achieved the exposure she has on television nor the vast sums of money she’s earned. The Kings, as part of their business style, were known to woo clients with gifts and trips and lavish spending. Oprah, like the other entertainers with whom the Kings dealt, has been the recipient of some of their largesse. When does someone like Oprah become “a once colored girl”? It seems to be a natural occurrence as the woman becomes comfortable with herself and her career, as described by Patrice Gaines, former reporter for the  Washington Post  and author of  Laughing in the Dark.  Gaines was inter-viewed on Oprah’s show about her book, whose subtitle was  From Col-ored Girl to Woman of Color.   As Oprah gained fame and fortune, she developed an interest in the lives of slaves, and with that came her decision to learn about her own African heritage. She became one of the increasing numbers of black Americans to seek information about family origins. Fortunately, mod-ern technology has provided tools to retrace much, though not all, of the history of African forebears. A modern pioneer in that research, Henry Louis Gates, Jr., for several years has promoted the heritage search for black Americans, and, through such searches, many have been learning about their African ancestry. Oprah, who wanted to trace her own roots, turned to Gates for guidance. Chairman of African and Af-rican American Studies at Harvard University, Gates is also director of  A ONCE COLORED GIRL 67the W .E.B. Du Bois Institute of Afro-American Research. He has been working on tracing the roots of popular celebrities, including Quincy Jones (a close friend of Oprah’s), Whoopi Goldberg, Chris Tucker, and Oprah Winfrey. Working with him to unravel the past have been a min-ister, an astronaut, a neurosurgeon, and other professionals. Through census and estate records of slaveholders, land deeds, newspapers, maps, oral histories, inscriptions on tombstones, and now DNA technology, the Gates group has been able to establish family trees for a consider-able number of people.  The search for Oprah’s roots revealed information going back to her matrilineal ancestors in Africa, who were of the Kpelle tribe of Liberia, on the west African coast, which also includes Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Sierra Leone, and the Ivory Coast. Members of the Kpelles also live in Guinea, as well as neighboring Guerze, which is a part of the Republic of Guinea. The Kpelle language, which is broadcast in Liberia, is part of the southwestern branch of Mande, Niger-Congo. A further search of Oprah’s maternal ancestors revealed that her great-grandmother, Amanda Winters, had been actively involved in education, and Oprah was understandably delighted. Her DNA test suggests her background is 89 percent sub-Saharan African, 8 percent Native American, and 3 percent East Asian.  More details were found about the paternal side of the family. Oprah’s great-great American grandfather, Constantine Winfrey, in the early part of the 19th century, had been a slave for a white family called Winfrey. Freed by his owner after the Civil War, he negotiated for some adjacent land held by the former slaveholder. In time, Constantine Winfrey learned to read and write and increased his holdings to 80 acres through sales of his farm products. Concerned about the education of black children, he had the entire building housing the Spring Hill Colored School moved onto his land. Oprah now has the deed to the property.  In a reminder of the harsh and troubled period in which her ances-tors lived, Oprah was shown two ancient cemeteries: one, a manicured, well-maintained site where the white Winfrey family was buried and the other, overgrown and neglected, sunken grave sites of the blacks where names on tombstones are indecipherable, the conditions the same as those described in Drew Faust’s  This Republic of Suffering.  68 OPRAH WINFREY Not all black scholars—in fact, not all black Americans—are in-terested in pursuing the course set by Gates. Charles Johnson of the University of Washington (Seattle), who holds the title of Wilson and Pollack Professor of Excellence, stands at the opposite end of the spec-trum from Gates. In the  American Scholar,  13  Johnson has written “The End of the Black American Narrative” in which he faults Gates for scholarship based on “beliefs and prejudices” as well as distortion of facts. Believing that three decades of afﬁ  rmative action have “led to the creation of a true black middle class” and that it is time to move beyond the past, he lists the professions in which black Americans have risen to the top of the ladder and mentions Oprah, “the most prominent talk show host.” Objecting to the views of prominent deniers such as Louis Farrakhan, who claims that “successful people like Oprah Winfrey . . . give black Americans a false impression of progress,” and Reverend Jer-emiah Wright for his “paranoid and irresponsible statements” ( Johnson calls them “rants”), he notes that the future is here and that all of us should follow the famous statement of Martin Luther King, Jr.: Judge people not by the color of their skin but by the content of their char-acter.  A cover story by Matt Blai in the August 10, 2008, edition of the  New York Times Magazine  asks, “Is Obama the End of Black Politics?” Although it is not about roots but politics, Blai’s article leads to an af-ﬁ rmative answer, one that appears to support the position of Johnson—that this generation does not see everything as revolving around race. Thus, roots, one might argue, while important, are not central nor even primary. In Blai’s view, here is a reordering of black politics, a new black politics far different from the politics of the fathers. A pollster, Cornell Belcher, whom Blai interviewed, stated that the two worlds are different; the younger generation sees it not through the history of their fathers but “through post–civil rights eyes.” An example of these differences, Blai points out, may be understood by the exchanges that took place be-tween the Reverend Jesse Jackson and his son, Jesse Jackson, Jr., a young congressman from Illinois. Jackson, Jr., reminded his father of his “most famous words,” which were to “Keep hope alive.” Blai sees the differ-ences between father and son as “a basic generational divide” about the meaning of black leadership. Changes over the years, Blai writes, have brought about a “newly emerging class of black politicians.”  A ONCE COLORED GIRL 69 In her youth, Oprah was inspired by several people, and meeting and talking with them helped her to get her ﬁ  rst talk show. When Oprah took on her Chicago program, Phil Donahue was the leader in the talk show business and people spoke of him as the owner of daytime televi-sion. He’d had a 29-year run, 26 of those in syndication, the longest continuous syndicated talk show in the history of television. But Oprah toppled him. Despite having learned what to do by watching tapes of his shows (in addition to those of Barbara Walters) and of being grate-ful to him for paving the way, Oprah’s was a different kind of approach. Donahue, who is just as gracious about Oprah as she is about him, praises her ability to connect with her audience, pointing with admiration to the speed with which she gained huge markets: what took him a decade to do she accomplished in a single year, he tells interviewers, compar-ing her ascent to a skyrocket. Where Donahue was intense, Oprah was easy. Audiences and guests responded to her style, forming a loyal fol-lowing that continues into the 21st century.  Within a few years of her move to Chicago, the illegitimate daugh-ter of Vernita Lee and Vernon Winfrey became a millionaire and, ac-cording to various reports, among the richest entertainers in the world; additionally,  Forbes  magazine listed her as being one of the wealthiest people in the United States and began to tabulate her wealth, which soon exceeded that of producer Steven Spielberg (who had given her the ﬁ  rst of her movie roles) and Bill Cosby, comedian, television actor, and venerated friend of Oprah. Years later, when  Forbes  ranked the 100 richest people in the world, Oprah made the list as the ﬁ  rst black U.S. billionaire. Her fortune continues to grow as she expands her undertak-ings, and journalists continue to speak of Oprah’s enormous wealth.  By 1986, Oprah had earned enough money to buy what most Chi-cagoans dream of—a penthouse condominium on the lakefront with a view from the 57th ﬂ  oor of the lake and the city. The apartment has everything anyone could desire: crystal chandeliers—even in the walk-in closets that house elegant designer clothing by Valentino, Un-garo, and Krizia. As “a luxury queen,” she enjoys spending on anything and everything that catches her eye, like expensive imported cloth-ing. She gives generously to people who work with her—once giving UGG boots to 200 people on her staff—and gives large amounts of money to friends and staff members. Gossip columnists write of the 70 OPRAH WINFREY“fabulous ofﬁ  ce amenities” available to people who work for Harpo: a café and a workout facility known as Club Harpo, which includes a spa—all of which led one reporter to proclaim, “We wanna work with Oprah!!!!!!” Most of her staff seems dedicated. Oprah is known to be careful about schedules, conscious of attending planned meetings, and she has told journalists that her success with employees comes from her consideration for them: no yelling or mistreatment and no talking down to people.  The amenities at work are echoed in her Chicago apartment, which holds a wine cellar; a marble tub with spigots made to resemble gold dolphins; a tub in which Oprah, known for her love of bubble baths, can soak. After the bath, Oprah, who modestly calls herself “a home-body,” has a huge selection of elegant pajamas—dozens and dozens, she says—from which to choose. Her enjoyment of luxury also runs to pricey BMW cars.  Today she owns several homes: a 160-acre farm with a 40-acre meadow designed by Washington landscape architect James van Sweden; a $2 million house in Rolling Prairie, Indiana; a home in Ha-waii; another in Colorado; and an estate in California, which is often shown in photos. Oprah, who loves dogs and owns several (including the much-publicized but now deceased Sophie and Gracie), has a heated house for them. When the 13-year-old cocker spaniel, Sophie, died of kidney failure, it was reported that Oprah had a breakdown during the taping of her show after she’d seen a memorial video of the dog. Sophie was her “once-in-a-lifetime” dog. In May 2008, an exhibit in Manhattan was dedicated to the memory of Sophie and Gracie, Oprah’s golden Labrador, who died at the age of two after choking on a ball. The sculpture, created by Daniel Edwards and described by colum-nist Debra Tone as “controversial,” shows the two dogs joined together at the hip, sharing a common tail, on top of Oprah’s golden-maned head. Codirector John Leo, of the Leo Kesting Gallery, explains that the sculpture is intended to show “how the dogs’ deaths may be weigh-ing heavily” on Oprah. A third dog, Solomon, died in October 2008. He, too, was a cocker spaniel and died, as did Sophie, of kidney disease. Oprah’s boyfriend, Stedman Graham, had given Solomon to Oprah as a Christmas present in 1994. In memory of Sophie, Oprah donated a room to the animal shelter that Sophie had come from.  A ONCE COLORED GIRL 71 A few months after the death and memorial display of the dogs, a billboard purchased by the Main Line Animal Rescue appeared four blocks from Oprah’s Harpo studio. It read “OPRAH—please do a show on puppy mills; the dogs need you!” Puppy mills are large facilities that have pure breeds of dogs; they are thought of as breeding machines with interest only in proﬁ  t from the sale of the animals housed in small cages. The females are bred to have numerous litters until they can breed no more. Usually the litters are sold to pet stores or advertised on the Internet. The mills are not like reputable dog breeders, who are concerned with the health and quality of the animals they raise. Oprah and her staff decided to follow the suggestion of the rescue organiza-tion: producers of the Oprah show, along with people from the shelter, through the use of hidden cameras, began an investigation of puppy mills and pet shops. Lisa Ling, the investigative reporter for the show, was in charge of the enterprise. Ling, who began working as a reporter and anchor as a teenager, is also a special correspondent for the show, and she has reported stories from Asia, Africa, the Middle East, and the United States. Her subjects range from bride burning to gang rapes, to child trafﬁ  cking, to armed resistance in an African country, and a mas-sacre at a Virginia university.  Not long after the Oprah show began to expose the activities of the mills, some pet stores began to lose business; various humane socie-ties became involved in reporting violations of laws; some puppy mills were closed; licenses of numerous breeders were revoked; some breed-ers retired; large numbers of dogs were rescued from mills; and, in some states, laws were passed that require mills to enlarge the cages of dogs and provide veterinary care for the animals. In December 2008, People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals named Oprah as Person of the Year.  So enamored is Oprah with animals that, according to one news re-port, she recommends Bow-Lingual, a wireless device that is attached to a dog’s collar to register everything the animal does. Furthermore, it has been reported that Sophie, Oprah’s much-loved, deceased dog, had her name on the deed of a penthouse in New York. Apparently, Sophie was a real estate investor as well, inasmuch as her name also appeared as owner of a company and ﬁ  nancier of house purchases. The Sophie house, worth $7 million, became the property of Gayle King when the 72 OPRAH WINFREYdeed was transferred to her. Thus far, the name of the company still appears to be Sophie.  In the midst of the devastating ﬁ  re that spread through southern California in November 2008, Oprah, who was not at her newest home in Montecito at that time, said that her ﬁ  rst concern was for her dogs. Next to that worry, her concern was the safe removal of the ashes of Sophie.  Oprah’s love of dogs led to a further purchase and loss. In March 2009, another blonde cocker spaniel named Sadie became part of the Win-frey household. Graham helped in the selection, and Oprah, who re-ferred to Sadie as her “new baby,” adopted her at 10 weeks, in addition to Ivan, one of Sadie’s litter mates. Both dogs soon came down with a deadly canine virus. Ivan died, and Sadie was reported to be struggling for life. (Newspapers confused the names, so for a time it was unclear which dog had died.) Apparently, the shelter, PA WS, from which the animals had been purchased, was affected by the virus. Chicago news-papers printed several stories about the shelter, as well as information about the highly contagious disease that affects young dogs before they have been fully vaccinated. A spokesperson for PA WS issued a state-ment of condolence to Oprah, citing the shelter’s excellent record in controlling the disease and offering advice to prospective owners of young puppies.  During a show in March 2009, on which Sadie and her veterinar-ian, Dr. Newman, were the focus, Sadie’s illness was described in de-tail, and her diet was discussed as well. Oprah’s love of dogs seems never ending. For her 56th birthday, she gave herself two new puppies: 14-week-old sibling Springer spaniels, Sunny and Lauren, bought from the same shelter, PA WS, from which she had adopted her beloved cocker spaniel, Sadie, a year earlier. Introduced to Oprah’s studio audience as her “new babies,” they were dressed in crystal pink collars in celebration of Oprah’s birthday.  In addition to her dogs, Oprah keeps thoroughbred horses on her farm. An additional feature is a helicopter pad. Another famed archi-tect, Bruce Gregg, designed the villa for her 85-acre ranch outside of Telluride, a Colorado ski area. During the 1990s, Oprah owned a con-dominium on Fisher Island in Florida. The apartment of 1,828 square feet, with two bedrooms and two baths, cost $660,000 when Oprah  A ONCE COLORED GIRL 73purchased it in 1996, but the resale asking price was $2.09 million. Both the size and price of that abode differed considerably from Oprah’s more recent homes. Today, she owns a 42-acre, $50 million estate with a 23,000-square-foot mansion in Montecito, California. (Rumor has it that Oprah paid for the home with a personal check.) She has named the estate the Promised Land. Her magazine,  O At Home,  featured some of the areas of the estate, including its gorgeous gardens and pri-vate retreat. Although Oprah is selective about many details of her private life, parts of the California estate were the focus of photos and narratives about her rose garden and teahouse in the August 2008 issue of  O At Home.  The teahouse has an arched door framed by wisteria, and the gravel path near it is bordered by roses. There is also an English garden planted with a large variety of annuals and perennials just be-yond another arched door, and a semicircle of lavender is at the end of the teahouse garden. A cobblestone path lined with thousands of white hydrangeas ﬁ  ttingly is named Halleluh Lane. Planted as “a liv-ing, blooming homage to her grandmother,” the path runs through the property. Multiple types of gardens, not only ﬂ  owers, have been culti-vated around the estate, which Oprah considers “a gift.” A vegetable garden has artichokes, peppers, and heirloom tomatoes, and a grassy meadow is close to an avocado orchard. All of these projects are the work of a famous gardener, Dan Bifano.  In addition to these property holdings, she owns several beachfront lots on the island of Maui in Hawaii, and not long ago newspapers re-ported that Oprah had purchased some property on Hana, a somewhat remote area of East Maui. (The road to Hana, long, winding, and chal-lenging, follows the spectacular coastline. Tourists often buy T-shirts proclaiming their daring in driving the road to Hana.) To get from one home to another and to other places easily, Oprah bought a jet plane. Every detail about her life makes the news; thus, it is no surprise to see many, many newspapers writing that Oprah was house hunting in the Washington, DC, area in time for the Obama inaugural events. Some printed photos of stunning, multimillion-dollar houses that Oprah sup-posedly looked at. Despite the denials of intent by Oprah’s staff, the story was widely circulated. So too were reports that Oprah was plan-ning a fabulous party after the inauguration. Almost daily rumors about her supposed plans found their way into papers and magazines. Among 74 OPRAH WINFREYthem, the most concrete was the decision to produce her television show during the celebrations from the Kennedy Center in Washington.  Oprah’s growing wealth permitted her to make an even more im-portant purchase a number of years ago. At the same time she joined the ranks of the most famous broadcasters—Walter Cronkite, David Brinkley, Barbara Walters, Ted Koppel, and others—as Broadcaster of the Year, she acquired ownership and control of  The Oprah Winfrey Show  from the Chicago ABC television afﬁ  liate WLS and formed the company Harpo. (She will not allow the company to go public.) To house her new business she bought an old building that had been a hockey rink. Taking great pleasure in the renovation, she turned it into multiple ofﬁ  ces and production areas and added a spa and a gym where she works out. She personally selected almost everything, from the large—carpets and tile—to the small—doorknobs and doodads that went into remodeling. Many years ago, the land on which the studio now sits was a “makeshift morgue,” a cold storage warehouse, brieﬂ  y used for the victims of a capsized steamer,  SS Eastland . The facility covers 88,000 square feet.  Students are sometimes given tours of the studios, but not as frequently as in the past. The terrorist attacks of 9/11 made the staff more security conscious. Special tour guides show the visitors around, and young peo-ple learn about internships offered to juniors and seniors in college.  Oprah is the ﬁ  rst black woman to have her own studio and produc-tion company. Only two other American women have achieved that, and both were white: Mary Pickford and Lucille Ball. She is chair and chief executive ofﬁ  cer of the Harpo Entertainment Group that oper-ates her show; develops various types of ﬁ  lms, prime-time television specials, children’s specials, and home videos. By 2002, Harpo, Inc. was estimated by  Fortune  magazine to be worth $575 million, with Oprah as owner of 90 percent of the stock. In 2007 alone, the company grossed $345 million. Estimates of the company’s wealth vary. However, it has grown from the original ﬁ  ve persons to a multimedia organization of 430 employees. In recognition of Oprah’s leadership role in U.S. busi-ness,  Black Enterprise  chose Harpo for its 2008 Black Enterprise 100s Company of the Year.  A former entertainment lawyer, Jeff Jacobs, helped her originally set up the company and became president of Harpo a few years later as well  A ONCE COLORED GIRL 75as owner of 10 percent of its stock. Tim Bennett, a former television station executive who served as the chief operating ofﬁ  cer of the com-pany, has succeeded Jacobs as Harpo’s president. With the huge growth of the company, it became necessary to have more administrators, in addition to Bennett. A newly created position of executive vice presi-dent was given to Eric Logan, whose job is to oversee various divisions within Harpo; he had been executive vice president for programming and broadcast operations for XM Satellite Radio before joining Harpo. In 2009, although it touted its 24-hour daily programming, Sirius XM Satellite, the company that featured Oprah, Martha Stewart, and How-ard Stern, had to ﬁ  le for bankruptcy. Numerous subscribers to Sirius became unhappy with its failure to provide the promised programs. It is now operational again, though in the ﬁ  rst quarter of 2009 it was reported that Sirius had lost 400,000 subscribers. It is not surprising that Logan was added to the company, where his work includes Harpo Radio, Harpo Print, Harpo Music, and Harpo Retail.  A large percentage of Harpo employees are women who are involved in the television, radio, or various publishing aspects of the ﬁ  rm; some personnel are employed in more than a single endeavor. Harpo not only produces Oprah’s show but also has the responsibility for creating the television programs of prime time, syndication, and cable.  Dr. Phil ,  The Rachel Ray Show,  and  The Dr. Oz Show  are part of Harpo Produc-tions. The company also is responsible for Oprah’s Web site.  Harpo Print includes all the Oprah publications. Further, Harpo Films produces feature ﬁ  lms and teleﬁ  lms; Harpo Radio previously pro-duced what seemed a certain winner,  Oprah and Friends,  and a show titled  Soul Series  on Sirius XM Satellite Radio. The programs of the company, which has a number of studios throughout the country, were available only through subscription and were commercial free, with a large number of choices for listeners, including a program hosted by Oprah’s friend Gayle King. A daily national self-help radio show hosted by Shmuley Boteach, who writes for the  Jerusalem Post,  also appeared on  Oprah and Friends.  However, on March 4, 2009, the station’s name was changed to Oprah Radio. The station announced it would run 24 hours daily, a somewhat misleading statement, inasmuch as the pro-grams soon became reruns of earlier shows. The plans were to feature familiar Oprah picks, such as her close friends Gayle King and poet 76 OPRAH WINFREYMaya Angelou; designer Nate Berkus, who has been featured in Oprah’s magazines and television shows; Dr. Mehmet Oz, the medical advisor who became a favorite on her television show and soon had his own program; Bob Greene, the ﬁ  tness trainer and author of how-to exercise books; sex therapist Laura Berman, a popular and outspoken guest on Oprah’s television show (said to be hosting the program  Better in Bed  ) and author of  The Book of Love ; ﬁ  nancial expert Jean Chatsky; and other guests from multiple ﬁ  elds.  O ,  The Oprah Magazine  was to have a role in the new program on occasion, and spiritual discussions, poetry, and home matters would be among the subjects. The announced goal of the revised program is a familiar one to Oprah watchers, which is to live your best life. When little of this materialized, angry subscribers and bloggers informed the public of what they considered a betrayal of their trust, and that seems to account for the huge drop in subscrip-tions.  Harpo Retail manages The Oprah Store and Web site. Periodically, Oprah’s own clothing is sold at the store, and the money from those sales is donated to Oprah’s charitable causes. Another store, a “mi-crosalon,” is opening at a different location, Water Tower Place, on Michigan Avenue, across from the Harpo Studios. Some of the items sold will be the same as those in the ﬁ  rst, larger shop, but some new products will be added—memorabilia, collectibles, and pieces of South African crafts and jewelry.  The Harpo Company, Inc., along with Discovery Communication had planned to launch the new Oprah Winfrey Network—OWN—in 2009, under a 50–50 partnership agreement between OWN and Dis-covery. That is, Oprah has 50 percent of the stock in the joint venture with the company that would be replacing the Discovery Health Net-work. (Subscription fees from cable and satellite TV providers are ex-pected to rise once Oprah moves over from broadcast networks after 2011.) However, despite all the hoopla about the relationship of Oprah and Discovery Communications, the early agreement hit several snags. After a lengthy period of negotiation over the plans for presentation, the decision was made to postpone the launch. Problems had devel-oped in ﬁ  nding and keeping executives for the new channel. However, the content of the new network replacing the Discovery Health Chan-nel was arrived at. There will be three themes: Best Life All Stars,  A ONCE COLORED GIRL 77Experiences, and Inspiration. Currently, it isn’t known how much of a presence Oprah will have on the programs.  It took a year to hire as chief executive Christina Norman, who had been with MTV . However, shortly after that hire, the programming head, Robin Schwartz, left. She had been named president in 2008 but resigned. T wo other programmers, Maria Grasso and Nina Wass, subse-quently resigned. Under Norman, Allan Singer was appointed as vice president of distribution and strategy. Lisa Erspamer, who had worked at Harpo for 15 years, came into the new organization as chief creative ofﬁ  cer. (The  Los Angeles Times,  in reporting the story, wrote that Er-spamer had worked “directly for the demanding Winfrey” previously, and the story emphasized the word  demanding  by pointing out that sev-eral other people had worked only brieﬂ  y for the new enterprise before leaving.) Rod Aissa as well as Michele Dix, holding senior vice presi-dent titles, will be working on prime-time matters, and a third senior vice president, Drew Tappon, will be working on daytime programs. All of them have had a number of years of experience with various other networks. At the beginning of 2009, Harpo announced its plan to work with HBO on original ﬁ  lm projects in a three-year arrangement to make movies, documentaries, and television series. Not surprisingly, given all the publicity about the coming venture and Oprah’s star power, the paper trade named Oprah the most powerful woman of 2008 in the world of entertainment.   Oprah’s desire to give back to others something of what had been given to her led to her creation of another kind of network. She launched the Angel Network in 1998 to encourage philanthropy and volunteer-ism by people who have the means and energy to help those in need. However, after 12 years, Oprah is closing it as soon as the remaining funds have been spent. Her two major charities—the Oprah Winfrey Foundation and the Oprah Winfrey Leadership Academy Foundation—are not affected. Much of what motivates Oprah is her desire to do good and, like the missionary she once dreamed of becoming, to bring a mes-sage of goodness to others. But one person alone, even one very wealthy person, cannot help multitudes in material ways. Thus, the impulse be-hind the formation of the Angel Network was to inspire the fortunate to return something to society through good deeds and/or money. From the beginning, participants in the Angel Network, with another famous 78 OPRAH WINFREYcharitable group, Habitat for Humanity, have provided homes to thou-sands of families and have funded college scholarships that allow needy and meritorious students to seek higher education. The network has given extremely large awards to people whose lives have been used in the service of others. The two earliest Angel programs are well known: the Build an Oprah House, a joint effort with the Habitat for Human-ity construction group, and The World’s Largest Piggy Bank, an appeal to collect money for underprivileged children. When Oprah has a sale of items in her Chicago shop, money from Oprah’s Closet has been do-nated to her Angel network.  In 1999, Oprah undertook still another business venture; as a co-founder with Geraldine Laybourne and Marcy Carsey, she bought 8 per-cent of a new cable company called Oxygen Media. One reason for the purchase, she said, is always to have a voice—that is, a vehicle to ex-press herself in a way that is different from network programming. It was oriented toward women and topics that concern them, though on occasion the program subject matter had been directed to a wider au-dience. Despite 24/7 programming, the network did not achieve the hoped-for success. No matter that it added a new chat program called  Oprah After the Show  with working women in mind, the cable channel was faltering, in part because it was available only to a limited number of people, fewer than half of the homes in the United States. Also, poll-sters have said that the majority of women viewers preferred to watch the Lifetime channel, known as the “Television for Women” channel. Oprah has now changed the focus of her broadcasting and gone in an-other direction.  Nevertheless, Oprah could be a poster ﬁ  gure for the advertisement “You’ve come a long way, baby.” No matter the barricades and hard-ships along the way, even as a very young child of four or ﬁ  ve in the segre-gated state of Mississippi, where her grandparents had almost nothing, she had a sense that her life would be different even though she could not articulate her feelings. Four decades later, a middle-aged Oprah, remembering those childhood days and longings, talked to the spring 1997 graduating Wellesley College senior class about the journey they would take into the future. Telling the young women about herself, she reminded them that life itself is a journey, and she listed a series of things that have been important to her. As she spoke of what she’d  A ONCE COLORED GIRL 79learned from her own pilgrimage, she exhorted the graduates to follow certain guidelines that have served her well along the way. She had to discover who she was and who she was not, and she reminded each of them of the need to gain that kind of knowledge from their own expe-riences.  It took Oprah a long time and many lessons to discover we can only be ourselves, not somebody else, no matter how admirable that some-body might be. When reminiscing about her beginnings, she made fun of her own early pretenses, her attempts to emulate celebrities she admires. To pretend to be someone other than who we are leads to disas-ter, she has told numerous young people. Crediting Maya Angelou for helping her understand the principle of leading from truth, she urged a young Wellesley audience and others to do the same from the begin-ning, not after multiple disappointments. Living that way, Oprah main-tains, is central to one’s survival. So, too, is acceptance of our mistakes, but not acceptance alone; it is using all experiences to become wise, to grow beyond failures and move ahead.  In rereading the same journal she has kept for decades, she told her Wellesley listeners she is able to trace her own personal growth from the days of adolescent silliness and immaturity to adult understanding of how to live each moment. She importunes the Wellesley graduating class, as she has exhorted viewers of her television show and readers of her magazines, to emulate her experience of keeping a journal, but not just an ordinary journal. It should be “a grateful journal,” the kind of re-cord that matters, because that type of narrative leads to focusing on plenitude rather than on lack. The grateful journal enriches life. Belief in possibility, in the abundance of the universe, becomes belief in what our individual lives can be.  Several years later, Oprah agreed to be the speaker at the Duke Uni-versity commencement of her godson, Will Bumpus. Will is the son of Gayle King, Oprah’s closest friend. A year earlier, she had done the same for his sister, Kirby Bumpus, at Stanford. In an interview, goddaughter Kirby told a student writer for the  Duke Chronicle,  “Oprah doesn’t really do commencements” unless she has a special connection to the person who asks her. Obviously, students at Duke beneﬁ  ted from the Oprah con-nection; the majority at Duke, when the news was announced, appeared to be struck by Winfrey’s star power. That star power was evident as she 80 OPRAH WINFREYreturned to Duke to fulﬁ  ll her promise; she arrived to cheers and cries of love from the students. After asking the mothers in the audience to rise and congratulate her godson, she joked about her relationship to William, who is reticent about knowing her. In the serious part of her speech, she returned to one of her most important messages: enhancing one’s own life by enhancing the lives of others; and she mentioned some of the people who had inspired her to do good.  Duke administrators noted their delight in Oprah’s acceptance of the invitation, following it up via e-mail with the notice that Oprah will receive “an honorary doctor of humane letters degree” at the ceremony. The degree, as described in the e-mail, is in recognition of Oprah’s use of her celebrity to further education and literacy and other “important causes.” Because Oprah usually declines such awards, the vice president for public affairs and government relations (without mentioning Oprah’s “special connection”) considers her acceptance as “a testament to [her] great esteem and respect” for Duke. However, another student writing for the paper a few days later expressed a different take on the entire event. He begins his column with a variation of lines of an early poem: “I sing of thee, Oprah Winfrey. You are a shining beacon of daytime tele-vision and a selﬂ  ess philanthropist—you gave Dr. Phil his own show.” Mocking the enterprise, he asks, “Could it be that Duke University had actually secured a speaker with an IQ score higher than 12?”  An unfortunate incident later marred the impression of Oprah’s rela-tionship with her godchildren, but brieﬂ  y. Protective as she is of them, she could not keep newspapers from reporting in October 2009 that Kirby played a role in the ﬁ  ring of two members of the staff of Oprah’s private plane. The accusation was that they had sexual encounters while aboard the plane; thus the ﬁ  ring. But the accused man brought suit against Oprah, and various stories then surfaced, only to disappear from the papers shortly afterward, as do many cases in which Oprah is in-volved.  From the time Oprah realized she’d been given a second chance in life by her father, she has worked unceasingly not only on her career but also to build an image outside the world of entertainment. Among the many important roles she has played, one of the most meaningful took place after the catastrophic events of September 2001, when, as master of ceremonies, Oprah led an interfaith ceremony at Yankee Stadium  A ONCE COLORED GIRL 81in New York. Through talks, music, and writing, Oprah has addressed the speciﬁ  city of loss and despair as well as other wrenching issues of life, probing the dark places and the light of possibility. In her maga-zine, in column after column titled “What I Know for Sure,” she writes of sadness and joy, of deprivation and fulﬁ  llment, of ordinariness and miracles, of soup and sunsets. All of these, she declares, are part of life’s journey, and surely of hers. But every life creates its own path, although everything along the way happens for a reason and can add up to whole-ness if we will it. Oprah’s counsel about following our individual path tells us we are responsible for our own happiness: we must give love ﬁ  rst to ourselves and then to others.  Still, as she points to her own life as an example of possibility, she knows, even as she gives her inspirational talks, that few people will ever come near the eminence she has reached.  NOTES     1 . Roger Friedman on Fox News, as reported by columnist Liz Smith in the  Baltimore Sun  in July 2008.    2 .      MKE online, 19 May 2005.    3 .    Richard Rodriguez,  Hunger of Memory: The Education of Richard Rodriguez  (Boston, 1982).    4 . Richard Corliss, review of  The Color Purple ,  Time,  20 Apr. 2009.    5 . Ben Brantley, review of  The Color Purple, New York Times,   2 Dec. 2005.    6 . Dorothy Gilliam, “Black Men Ill-Served by Brewster Place,”  Washington Post,  23 Mar. 1989.    7 .     Gregory Kane, “Black Male Bashing Industry Grows,”  Sun Sen-tinel,  12 Jan. 1996.    8 .   Barbara Grizzutti Harrison, “The Importance of Being Oprah,”  New York Times Magazine,  11 June 1989.    9 .    “  ‘It Is Constant Work’: Oprah on Staying Centered, Ambition, Letting Go—and Pajamas,” interview by Lynette Clemetson,  Newsweek,   8 Jan. 2001.   10 .    Jennifer Lee, “The Last Pullman Porters Are Sought for a Trib-ute,”  New York Times,  3, 4, and 17 Apr. 2009. 82 OPRAH WINFREY  11 . Martin Luther King, Jr.,  Stride Toward Freedom: The Montgomery Story  (1958; New York: Harper Collins, 1987).   12 . Jesse Jackson quoted in E. R. Shipp, “Rosa Parks, 92, Founding Symbol of Civil Rights Movement Dies,”  New York Times,  25 Oct. 2005.   13 . Charles Johnson, “The End of the Black American Narrative,”  American Scholar  77, no. 3 (Summer 2008): 84.    