  Chapter 1  THIS POWERFUL CELEBRITY  For decades, she has been so well known that few people use her last name. It seems unnecessary. Undoubtedly, someday not far into the future, there will be girls named Oprah. A few years ago, actress Meg Ryan thought of naming her baby girl Oprah Winfrey Ryan. How-ever, as of now, the world seems to know of only one Oprah. Further-more, according to a television news writer, the noun will soon be used as a verb. 1   Simple references to Oprah do not have to be explained. Her huge fortune makes her the wealthiest celebrity in the United States: with an income of several million dollars per year just from television, she is the highest paid television personality. Talk shows are public favor-ites, and in the Harris poll for ﬁ  ve years in a row, Oprah was chosen as the public’s favorite television star. Only in the sixth year did she lose ground, to Ellen DeGeneres, according to that poll. Her yearly viewer-ship average is 7.3 million. Despite numerous rivals, her daily televi-sion show has remained on or near the top of daytime programs. Sufﬁ  ce to say, many people polled by the  Guardian  on May 27, 2008, found her personally number one and have called her daytime television’s un-disputed queen. In another poll, some admirers picked former Senator 2 OPRAH WINFREYHillary Clinton as their favorite woman, but a Fox News Opinion poll showed Oprah to be more powerful than Clinton.  Another type of poll taken in 2008 at Sacred Heart University found one reason for Oprah’s decline in popularity: more than half of the respondents objected to celebrities’ involvement with public policy. Because of Oprah’s huge following, many polls tracked the ef-fect of her involvement in the presidential race of 2008, and speciﬁ  -cally her support of the Obama campaign. This was a ﬁ  rst for Oprah, who had attempted to be impartial in previous campaigns. When interviewed at the 2008 Democratic National Convention, Oprah’s closest friend, Gayle King, stated that she and Oprah think of politics differently. Oprah generally has little interest in politics, but Gayle is completely immersed in everything political and describes herself as someone who “eat[s], sleep[s] and breathe[s] politics.” For Oprah, Obama made the difference. By endorsing her longtime friend, Oprah thought her personal participation was more valuable than money; Obama’s popularity went up, but her involvement affected her own ratings adversely.  From the time she ﬁ  rst announced her political partisanship, there was a steady drop in the numbers of people who would be likely to vote for an Oprah choice. It wasn’t clear what brought on the decline. Some reporters claimed that white women were angry at Obama but not at Oprah; it also has been attributed to women who had great hopes to see a woman (Hillary Clinton) elected. The matter remained controversial until after the election, when suddenly opinions changed and Oprah’s involvement in Obama’s campaign was seen as a large inducement to vote for the candidate.    A number of political experts question the value of celebrity sup-port. 2  Ross Baker, a political science professor at Rutgers University, has said there are people who “resent being told how to vote.” Media expert Ellis Cashmore claims that there is a tendency to suspect en-tertainers who give us advice of a political, scientiﬁ  c, medical, or re-ligious nature. And Daniel Drezner of Tufts University suggested that celebrities should choose a safer road to impress the public by conﬁ  n-ing themselves to “charities and other ‘do-good’ works.” He pointed to the changes that took place in opinions toward actor Angelina Jolie when she began to use much time and money for philanthropy.  THIS POWERFUL CELEBRITY 3 Many writers, from professional journalists to bloggers, seemed to take a certain amount of satisfaction in Oprah’s drop in the ratings. One headline captured this sentiment with “Oprah’s talk show crown slipping.” Another, an eye-catching headline on May 29, 2008, in the tabloid  Star Magazine  questioned: “Has Oprah passed her expiration date?” Comedian Roseanne Barr went further in her blog than most liberals in her attack on Oprah (as well as aiming a verbal barrage at a number of other well-known Democrats, whom she accused of wanting to lose the election by nominating Barack Obama). Her most hostile, and somewhat hysterical, language, however, was directed at Oprah. Barr stated, Oprah “always gets her republican friends elected!” Ad-ditionally, Barr wrote that Oprah succeeded in splitting the women’s vote and destabilizing the entire Democratic Party. 3  Yet only a few years earlier, Roseanne had lavished praise on Oprah.  The friendliest advice Oprah might have followed was given by a  Los Angeles Times  writer after Obama failed to gain more votes than Hillary Clinton in Indiana: “Her [Oprah’s] estimated fortune of Democratic presidential hopeful, Senator Barack Obama, D-Ill., his wife Michelle, right, and Oprah Winfrey wave to the crowd at a rally in Manchester, New Hampshire, on December 9, 2007. (AP Photo/Elise Amendola)4 OPRAH WINFREYbillions might have enabled her to purchase an entire state, such as Indiana.” 4   Because of Oprah’s announced partisanship, an angry group, the Florida Federation of Republican Women, denounced her because she decided not to have the Republican vice presidential candidate, Sarah Palin, on her show. Even though Oprah’s spokesperson announced that Oprah didn’t want her show to be used as a platform for a candidate, the statement did not soothe the Florida Federation spokesperson, who called upon “Republican sisters” to boycott Oprah’s shows. Ironically, in the election, Florida voters chose the Democratic candidate.  Earlier,  Time  magazine, in its May 2008 issue, listed Oprah as one of its 100 most signiﬁ  cant people of the year, with Michelle Obama as the author of the accompanying piece. Like other brief biographies of people chosen for the issue, this one is ﬁ  lled with praise for Oprah and her accomplishments. Obama also refers to their long friendship. T wo of the editors of the magazine, when questioned about their reasons for picking Oprah, noted her important inﬂ  uence on U.S. culture. A line that appears periodically in tabloids suggests that the two women, Michelle Obama and Oprah, don’t like each other, and some hint at antipathy on Oprah’s part. After the election, an article in the  Na-tional Enquirer  added to the ﬁ  re by writing that Mrs. Obama was angry at Oprah’s assumption that she could enter the White House at will and that she does not believe Oprah had any signiﬁ  cant role in Obama’s election. No other writers, however, have made such a declaration. In fact, mediatakeout.com has listed on its Web site re-puted leaks from various sources that Michelle Obama and Oprah have become very close (although some tabloids keep repeating that they don’t like each other), and Gayle King is said to be the person having problems with Mrs. Obama. Oprah makes her own decisions about friendships and allegiances. King has become more and more visible in Oprah’s world, and the differences between them seem the product of a publicist’s activities. Reporters generally use whatever information they think will capture readers’ attention, even publish-ing the fact that the name of President Obama’s school in Hawaii was Punahoe, that his sister’s name is Maya Soetoro-NG, and her husband is Konrad NG.  THIS POWERFUL CELEBRITY 5 Frank Rich, in a  New York Times  Sunday Opinion, wrote a column titled “Latter-Day Republicans vs. the Church of Oprah,” in which he labeled Oprah’s endorsement of Obama a “faith-based political show,” an “Oprahpalooza.” Although Rich agrees that Oprah is a “megaceleb-rity,” he pointed out that “selling presidents is not the same as pushing  Anna Karenina. ” Despite her effect on “the cultural market,” he noted that a Times–CBS News poll found a tiny number—1 percent—of vot-ers would follow Oprah’s choice of candidates. People in various pro-fessions usually disagree on the value of endorsements. Calling the political alliance between Obama and Oprah an ecumenical movement, Rich stated, “It preaches a bit of heaven on earth in the form of a uni-ﬁ ed, live-and-let-live democracy.” Rich quoted a laudatory description of Oprah from Billy Graham’s evangelical journal,  Christianity T oday:  She is “an icon of church-free spirituality,” and her beliefs “cannot simply be dismissed as superﬁ  cial civil religion or so much New Age psychobabble.” In contrast, a group of evangelical Christians, labeling Oprah “the queen of the new age gurus,” places her among those “who are sucking millions of people into false doctrines.” 5   Rich also derided some pundits’ uncomplimentary views of people who might have been inclined to vote for Oprah’s choice. He painted such savants as negative conservatives hostile to Obama’s large white constituency. For them, Rich wrote, all those Obama voters are a “Chardonnay-sipping, NPR-addicted bicoastal hipster crowd.” On the contrary, he pointed out, Oprah’s television audience is as many as 80 percent white, blue-collar people; half are estimated to have yearly incomes under $40,000, and they are mostly women aged 50 or older.  Rich is only one of many journalists who have written about the Oprah–Obama connection. An article titled “Oprah Slips in the Polls,” by Anthony Randazzo for  World  on the Web, stated, “Oprah is stand-ing for change with Obama, but thus far the biggest change she’s seen is in her approval ratings.” Such statistics are considered signiﬁ  cant by a number of entertainment reviewers, for whom ratings are bread-and-butter issues.  While some black writers, professional and otherwise, praised Oprah for her support of Obama, there are those who argued that all blacks love Obama, but not all would vote for him. Gender might be a factor 6 OPRAH WINFREYin such decisions; some, voicing the feelings of many women, criticized Oprah for failing to stand up for women, particularly for overlooking Hillary Clinton, the wife of the man whom Oprah’s closest friends have called “the ﬁ  rst black president.”  Oprah’s form of politics reﬂ  ects her beliefs. In her book  Reading Oprah,  Cecilia Farr invokes the views of conservative political columnist David Brooks, who tells readers there are varying paths to salvation, as there are “varieties of happiness, distinct moralities and different ways to virtue.” Farr’s conclusion is the complete opposite of the one expressed by writer Ed Pilkington. Where Pilkington frowns upon Oprah’s inﬂ  uence as a false guru, Farr labels her “the perfect guru for [our] democratic age,” one who insists we each have our own power and control in making choices.  Few journalists have actually analyzed the reason or reasons for Oprah’s declining popularity, a fall that may be only temporary given the fact that almost everything she touches seems to succeed. Tim Bennett, president of Harpo Productions, disagrees with those who claim that the fall in Oprah’s ratings is related to her political choices and points to an across-the-board drop in television viewing. All of this analysis, however, may have played a signiﬁ  cant role in Oprah’s decision to make major changes in her career.  People supposedly in the know—the pundits who state that celeb-rities don’t inﬂ  uence votes—seem to have underestimated Oprah’s persuasiveness. Yet, regardless of the polls about Oprah’s television rat-ings, it seems her support of Obama provided an important inﬂ  uence on more than a million voters. Ted Johnson, writing in the August 8, 2008, edition of  Variety,  listed several surveys that saw a positive effect of Oprah’s participation, particularly in the study of two graduate stu-dents of economics, Craig Garthwaite and Tim More, at the University of Maryland. The two doctoral candidates did a mathematical study of Oprah’s role, which resulted in a 58-page report. It was happenstance that led to their work, as they speculated whether Oprah’s effect on consumers might also create the same results among voters. They found that more than a million people cast votes for Obama in the prima-ries as a result of Oprah’s endorsement, which Johnson labeled “Oprah Winfrey’s million-voter march” (a play on the name of an event of sev-eral years earlier.)  THIS POWERFUL CELEBRITY 7 Writer Shankar Vedantam, in   the  Washington Post,  devoted an en-tire six-page column to “The Oprah Effect,” on geographic areas where she is most popular. Not only did pro-Obama votes spike in those places but so did campaign contributions. In that same Labor Day issue of the  Post , in “The Reliable Source” (in the Style section), the report-ers noted that ticket lines for the Winfrey program featuring medalists from the 2008 Olympics began to form at 6:00  a.m. , and by noon the line covered six blocks. Although the program featuring Olympic win-ners was expected to be a great draw, the reporters speculated that Oprah’s “accomplishments will resonate long after the athletes’ suc-cesses are forgotten.” Such views appear to negate statements of nay-sayers about her inﬂ  uence on the election.  When Obama gained the nomination, Oprah described herself to  Entertainment Today  as “ecstatic,” “euphoric,” “doing the happy dance,” and declared she’d cried her eyelashes off. Joining the huge celebration in Chicago’s Grant Park after the election of Senator Obama, Oprah emotionally expressed her joy, calling the outcome of the election “the right thing” for America, something unexpected “in our lifetime.” The feeling, she said, is “like hope won.”  Multiple reports that previously were doubtful or negative about Oprah’s inﬂ  uence in the campaign soon reversed, ﬁ  nding that she had given a huge boost to Obama; famed longtime reporter, David Broder, writing during the campaign in Iowa, told of the enormous crowds never before seen in the history of Iowa caucuses. Other writers said the same and, like Broder, began to call the events “the Oprah-Obama show.” After the election, many stories surfaced about Oprah’s selec-tion of a dress for the Inauguration Day festivities. Several rumors were ﬂ  oated about Oprah’s plan for a post-inaugural celebration, but some reporters disputed the story. As it turned out, Oprah had several events planned. T wo were part of her TV show: one for the day before the big event and one for the day after. The Monday program was held at the Opera House of the Kennedy Center, with stars from the entertain-ment world and an equally impressive audience. A nontelevised affair took place when Oprah hosted a party at the White House the night of the inauguration. The following day, she moved her show brieﬂ  y to a new Washington restaurant called Art and Soul, owned by her former chef Art Smith. The somewhat informal program was a recap 8 OPRAH WINFREYof the historical implications of the election. Among the guests was Doris Kearns Goodwin, the historian who, among her other books, has written about the two presidents—Abraham Lincoln and Lyndon Johnson—whose efforts for civil rights ultimately led to the election of the United States’ ﬁ  rst black president.  All of Oprah’s activities continue to interest the world at large. Not a day passes without our seeing or hearing some reference to Oprah, whether it is important or minuscule. Oprah’s rental of a house in Denver for the period of the Democratic National Convention be-came the subject of many television and newspaper stories. The report about the reputed price of $50,000 for a week’s stay was probably what brought out a large number of angry and negative blogs in the Colo-rado papers that were anti-Oprah, anti-Democrat, and anti-celebrity. Many newspapers, including some in Europe, made much of a publi-cist’s spokesperson’s announcement that Oprah would be in Denver’s Invesco Field football stadium for the nomination of Barack Obama; they also quoted Gayle King’s statements that Oprah would not address the crowds. None of this coverage is particularly surprising; there are almost daily stories, blogs, and reports about Oprah on the Internet. One blogger even elevated her to the status of “THE Oprah.”  Harsh attacks against Oprah began once her support for Obama was announced and continued after the Republican convention. Further-more, many feminists felt betrayed because she’d chosen Obama over Hillary Clinton. During a heated discussion, at one point, Oprah had to remind some people that she was “a free black woman.” However, the anger became even more intense when Republicans angrily denounced her for refusing to showcase another woman, the Republican choice of Sarah Palin for vice president. Even Fox network, completely ignoring Oprah’s policy of not having any political ﬁ  gure on her show, used its program  Fox and Friends  to denounce Oprah for her decision not to in-terview Palin before the election. Oprah counter-charged the statement, denying the claim on  The Drudge Report  that there had been a large divi-sion among her staff about the Palin matter. It wasn’t helpful that her executive producer, who would not comment about the matter, is said to have contributed a large amount of money to the Obama campaign.  Although there may be nothing of consequence in a story , every men-tion of the star is good business, for it captures many a viewer’s eye and  THIS POWERFUL CELEBRITY 9interest. An example may be found in the  Washington Post  gossip col-umn “The Reliable Source.” 6  Alongside a photo of Oprah riding in a snowmobile driven by Tom Cruise in Telluride, Colorado, is a typically earthy humorous comment of hers: “There’s something about being scooched up to his butt that makes you want to sing.”  Such stories, reports, and the hundreds of advertisements in all the Oprah publications and shows attest to her inﬂ  uence on followers. Oprah’s photos on the cover of any magazine attract shoppers in large numbers, particularly if a current issue is placed strategically near a checkout counter. Products touted by Oprah, no matter how limited their previous sales have been, when advertised on the Internet ﬁ  nd a much larger audience than most of Oprah’s own publications. Millions of television viewers provide similar types of sales. Anything Oprah eats, drinks, or wears reaps much beneﬁ  t from the Oprah connection. Green tea, a particular diet, and a special type of brassiere, when touted by Oprah, become instant best-sellers. On one of her shows, Oprah fea-tured Susan Nethero, chief ﬁ  t stylist and founder of a group of lingerie shops. Members of Oprah’s staff, and Oprah herself, were ﬁ  tted with bras. At the end of the show, Oprah proclaimed she ﬁ  nally got the right size. The featured company gained publicity that has led to the opening of more shops. Sales of products featured on the show, which caters to a mostly female audience, become astronomical.  Thanks to a television appearance on Oprah’s television show in 2004 by a second-grade teacher who proclaimed the efﬁ  cacy of a par-ticular cold remedy, the product became an important item to purchase by the frequent-ﬂ  ying public. Sales skyrocketed from $21.4 million to more than $100 million a year after the teacher’s appearance. Shortly thereafter, in the public interest, a class-action lawsuit for decep-tive advertising was ﬁ  led by the Federal Trade Commission’s Bureau of Consumer Protection against the company, which claimed that its product protected people from the common cold. Although Oprah and her show ﬁ  red up customers, in 2008, the Federal Trade Commis-sion ﬁ  ned the company $30 million for “perpetuating misconceptions” about the product. (The company remains in business and continues to advertise.)  Whether a business is large or small, the magic of Oprah’s name in-creases revenues. A company called Spotlight Tribute, which features 10 OPRAH WINFREYtrading cards, noted that “the Oprah Winfrey trading card is an item that Oprah’s fans have made a valued collectible in its group of 72 cards of the World’s Biggest Stars.”  Even though women around the world are enthralled by her pro-gram, men are generally not Oprah watchers. The camera, panning an audience in her television studio, picks up few male faces. Although many men admire her, just as many seem to be in the same group as columnist Daniel Kline, who wrote in the  Swampscott Reporter  (his column appears weekly in 100 papers) that he is unimpressed by Oprah. With a headline “Perhaps Oprah’s appeal [is] lost on men,” Kline ex-plains his indifference, calling her “a fairly tepid talk show host” who is “unremarkable” and “unfunny,” a person who “has no special talent as an interviewer” and engages in “unnecessary ﬁ  ts of hysteria.” His re-marks suggest she is grossly overpaid, and so is her closest friend, Gayle King, who has become rich simply from “knowing Oprah.”  Yet, despite critics such as Kline, Oprah’s programs are viewed by Europeans, Asians, and South African women, black and white, in a country where the white population is only 8 percent of the total. An estimate of worldwide viewers is more than 20 million each day. (The stated numbers of people watching the show vary widely. For instance, a writer for the  Shreveport Times  estimates that there are 49 million viewers just in the United States.) Oprah’s appeal crosses racial lines, even though the studio audiences for her live television shows in the United States and her nationwide tours are predominantly white. However, reruns of her shows on an Arab satellite channel draw huge numbers of women viewers.  Obviously, Oprah’s celebrity, inﬂ  uence, star power, and following do not mesh with the views of all journalists, television critics, and reli-gious ﬁ  gures, whose writings frequently provide ironic or harsh contrast to the ﬂ  attering language of her followers. Ever since the Internet be-came popular and widely available, many people have joined in the conversations about Oprah. They are the bloggers who have become participants in online discussions about her; they run the gamut from devoted followers to detractors, although the latter are fewer in num-ber. If there is any hint of disparagement of the star, it will probably appear in a blog or tabloid rather than in a seriously considered article. Yet the bloggers have found that there is little to keep them from vent- THIS POWERFUL CELEBRITY 11ing feelings about every imaginable topic: religion; bloggers’ families, including their pets; requests for personal assistance and donations for charities (even from far-off Malaysia); warnings about the coming end of the world as well as the readiness of all to meet their maker. But more common, as might be expected, is exuberant praise for the writer’s idol—Oprah. Bloggers exist in many areas of the world, and compli-mentary statements have come from such unexpected European coun-tries as Portugal and Belgium.  Bloggers may have their own Web sites, or, when invited, attach friendly or unfriendly comments to others’ Web sites.   The  Chicago Sun-Times  has an Oprah-dedicated blogger, Mark Bieganski, who calls his blog “It’s all about Oprah. All the Time.” Bieganski is described as someone who “follows the Oprah phenomenon like it’s a religion.”  Computer expert Phil Wainewright, a commentator and strate gist in the software industry, describes the effect of an Oprah program on the Internet as a tsunami “that assails consumer web sites when they get ‘Oprah’d.’” As few as eight million viewers in the United States alone could overwhelm Web sites if the providers are not prepared for the onslaught, says Wainwright. That onslaught occurred when Oprah invited viewers to join an online class discussion of a book,  The New Earth,  she had chosen for her club. Sales were also tremendous.  The outpouring of affectionate interest of fans and bloggers in most Oprah activities sharply contrasts with Swampscott reporter Daniel Kline’s harsh evaluation. Yet he is considerably milder than the angry and inﬂ  ammatory blogger’s remarks of April 8, 2008, in  Politico ’s “Join the Conversation.” In one blog, the writer, who calls herself Mayme, quotes some mocking dialogue, she states she heard, between Oprah and her closest friend, Gayle King, on XM satellite radio, during which they laughed at the ways of “white folks.” Making fun of white women who treat their help like underlings, Oprah “yells” she wishes her grandmother could see her now, with “WHITE FOLKS WORKING FOR ME.” (Caps are from the blog. Also, most readers are aware that many blogs are unreliable, and this particular one seems at odds with Oprah’s public persona.)  Then there are the mixed blogs. In one instance, a blog from British Columbia uses offensive language yet continues with kudos for Oprah’s opposition to wars. Nonetheless, it is not all the wars of history against 12 OPRAH WINFREYwhich Oprah has spoken out, and Oprah does not take a paciﬁ  st’s po-sition on every military action. A trip to Israel, she stated, “changed the trajectory” of her life. In a speech during a visit to the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum in Washington, DC, Oprah told the audience about her trip with author Elie Wiesel to Auschwitz, the concentration camp. That and her stay in Israel helped her to under-stand the impact of Hitler. Both became a path to understanding that a single individual had such immensity of power as to bring about the deaths of six million Jews. These enlightening experiences created a deeper-than-ever awareness of the responsibility and moral obligation each person has “to serve somebody other than ourselves.” With each passing year, that view has become stronger. In recognition of her sig-niﬁ cant international activities, she was awarded the Elie Wiesel Hu-manitarian Award in May 2007.  Humanitarian issues generally need some form of publicity. When  New York Times  columnist Nicholas Kristof wrote about a little-known physician who had been performing ﬁ  stula surgery for three decades on young Ethiopian women, Oprah’s show brought the subject to the at-tention of millions of viewers; the program was also shown in the Addis Ababa clinic, and millions of dollars in donations were raised to help the cause. Once her employees had convinced Oprah how important the cause was, she made it her own. She traveled 7,000 miles to the Fistula Hospital to learn ﬁ  rsthand about the work and the doctor who saves the lives of young girls.  Oprah has long held the conviction that every life has a purpose. As  New York Times  writer Alexandra Stanley has said of Oprah, she has “never concealed her messianic sense of purpose.” For her, events have led to a life-changing question: what could a “once colored woman” accomplish with a talk show? Stanley calls Oprah “her own version of a United Nations educational and cultural organization: “O”-nesco. In her 2005  New York Times  article about Oprah’s 20 years as a talk show host, Stanley both criticizes and praises Oprah’s activities. With her “frilly pulpit,” she is “crass” as well as extremely generous; “maud-lin” as well as “mesmerizing.” Describing the star’s 50th birthday party as a “fawning tribute worthy of an Ottoman potentate,” Stanley lists the multiple saccharin details that were part of the event. Yet she also writes admiringly of Oprah’s worldwide inﬂ  uence and embrace of wor-thy causes and help to the needy.  THIS POWERFUL CELEBRITY 13 Oprah’s involvement exists not only in causes but even in small ges-tures. A brief news report tells of an encounter she had with a woman in Chicago who was trying to enter a polling station to vote, but she was not admitted until Oprah came along to help her. One small ges-ture took place, but it created a difference in one person’s life.  The importance of the smallest gestures is emphasized in an inter-view for an article titled “Little Things Matter.” 7  Telling Jeanne Wolf, the interviewer, of her memories of a fourth-grade teacher who always praised her, Oprah recalls the words of that teacher, who told her she “was just the smartest little girl [the teacher] had ever seen.” That memory, a “shiny moment,” has led her to attempt to do the same for any little girl she meets. In saying, “I always try to have a shiny mo-ment,” Oprah means it to be an expression of her basic philosophy, a “sharing” that is “self-fulﬁ  lling” and also provides for others “validation and appreciation.” Such small gestures combined with Oprah’s human-itarian work have led some admirers to propose she be nominated for the Nobel Peace Prize.  An “aha” moment, the kind she writes about monthly in  O, The Oprah Magazine,  came to Oprah not only through such experiences as her trip to Israel. When she fully understood political power and the force of the media, Oprah decided to expand her activities: to become more involved in education, reach out to more people in need, and help bring about national awareness through a political campaign she could believe in. Although a number of people have maintained that Oprah’s political support, like that of other celebrities, did little to change votes, the media has photographed every sighting of her in every town she appeared with a candidate.  Possibly the composition of future live audiences might change since Oprah became actively involved in politics, drawing huge crowds of black voters wherever she spoke. Her political appearances, however, might be just a testing of the water after the multiple contradictory evaluations of her effectiveness. When Oprah arrives in any town, for any reason, the excitement is palpable, be it for one of her Live Your Best Life tours or for rallying voters for a candidate, where there is hope that the thousands who ﬁ  ll the seats will turn into donors, campaign organizers, and other workers, as well as voters for Oprah’s choice.  In earlier years, when she was not yet the phenomenon she has become, the press—particularly the tabloid press—ﬁ  xated on her 14 OPRAH WINFREYimperfections, watching her every move and photo, even to the extent of making personal and cruel remarks, such as comparisons of Oprah to famous overweight entertainers of the past: the hefty late singer Sophie Tucker and the late, overly large black actress Hattie McDaniel, who played the simpering maid to Vivian Leigh’s Scarlet O’Hara in the ﬁ lm  Gone with the Wind.  Oprah’s weight problems were a constant topic from her ﬁ  rst days on television; although now they are still spoken of, the belittling language of most writers has changed. In fairness to the press, it should be noted that, formerly, Oprah herself made the topic of her weight central. However, the days of mea culpa are over. She no longer speaks of food binging and lack of exercise as the source of her weight. (In fact, she coolly voices her dislike of exercise, as her trainer Bob Greene also mentions, but admits her love of comfort food.) Oprah, the public, and, recently , writers all spoke of her struggle with weight as a difﬁ  cult thyroid problem. The January 2009 cover of her magazine featured two Oprahs: one exquisitely thin and one matronly, overweight, and unhappy looking. The topic—and the struggle—go on and on.   New York Times  correspondent Ted Pandeva Zagar found Oprah’s weight problems linked to astrology; Oprah’s birth at 4:30  p.m.  on Janu-ary 29, 1954, is related to her thyroid condition and is caused by a “sun-venus conjunction,” he wrote. Pandeva Zagar, “a pioneer in Wellness Astrology,” sees her difﬁ  culties with variations in weight as a reﬂ  ection of the “union of the sun to the thyroid planet in the thyroid house.” 8  Oprah herself has not blamed the conjunction of the planets for her difﬁ  culties. However, in a somewhat abrupt shift in her effort to control her burgeoning ﬁ  gure, at one point she announced she was changing her food habits, and, furthermore, three members of her staff were join-ing her in the effort.  Assessing the reasons for the ongoing interest and generally greater respect among people who write about her can’t be limited to any one explanation. Oprah has become queen of all she surveys, a powerhouse player in every form of media: radio, the Internet, and women’s publi-cations— O, The Oprah Magazine; O At Home  (now suspended); and  The O Magazine Cookbook.   Most importantly for reaching a wider audience, there are television ventures. Even when one of her new shows,  The Big Give,  was ini- THIS POWERFUL CELEBRITY 15tially disparaged, the public, schools, individuals, businesses, and mul-tiple organizations ﬂ  ooded her company with contributions and offers of assistance. The program was the ﬁ  rst prime-time series developed by Oprah’s company Harpo Productions. Despite its critics, the show appeared to be an instant success, as, from week to week, the ratings increased. Gifts of every type were made. One of many examples was a large sum of money donated for smoke alarms to a ﬁ  rehouse in Fresno, California. In another example, a contestant from the show was in-spired to write a book about his experience; hoping to motivate others, the author, who grew up in Nigeria, describes his and his father’s efforts to improve the lives of those in need. Despite poor reviews,  The Big Give  appealed to a large audience. Clearly, no matter what critics wrote about the program, Oprah and company had assessed correctly the U.S. psyche and generosity to those in need.  Still, there were complaints of various kinds. One person ﬁ  led a copyright infringement lawsuit, claiming  The Big Give  had used a clip from the television showing of  Grease  without his permission and had not paid him a residual fee. After discussions among all the involved parties, Harpo announced a settlement had been reached. Another suit, also a copyright infringement claim, was ﬁ  led in Boston’s U.S. District Court against Oprah, the show, Harpo Productions, and ABC Television by a Massachusetts woman who maintained that the idea for  The Big Give  had been stolen from her. Her plan, describing a real-ity show titled  The Philanthropist,  was rejected by Oprah’s company after some time had passed; yet the focus of the complaint was about the plan Oprah’s company had for a series that was “eerily similar” to the concept of  The Philanthropist.  Although the case was dismissed, an appeal was ﬁ  led, and the appeal has yet to be ruled on. The outcome may never be known because of the tight control of information by Oprah’s company.  Meanwhile, however, Oprah reacted to the unfavorable reviews of  The Big Give  and the loss of a third of her audience within a few weeks. She did not renew her contract, although the chairman of ABC claimed he’d urged her to continue. Perhaps Oprah pays more atten-tion to critics than she claims.  In the political ﬁ  eld and elsewhere, signiﬁ  cant changes have been taking place. There appears to be a growing respect in recent years 16 OPRAH WINFREYtoward racial differences. Some would call it political correctness, but anything suggesting the racism of only a few years ago is seen as of-fensive in parts of the United States. Still, social analysts of racial bias in the United States have talked of hidden discriminatory views, but concrete evidence is difﬁ  cult to pinpoint. Oprah’s audience does not appear to consider race in its devotion to her.  The foreign press generally has been and continues to be kinder and gentler than the U.S. press in its assessment of both the star and her work. The words of Indian writer Anita Chicklet of  Zee News  reﬂ  ect the almost worshipful attitudes of various overseas journalists in dub-bing Oprah “the Queen of Hearts” (a phrase reminiscent of the adora-tion of the late British Princess Diana), a person of substance, and a much-loved role model. U.S. columnists, in contrast, over the years have used language about Oprah that appears patronizing: “Oprify,” “Oprahization,” “Empress,” “Saint Oprah,” and the “Czarina of popu-lar culture” in “the Oprahsphere” that is ruled by the “daytime queen of empathy.” Perhaps as Oprah has become more involved in signiﬁ  -cant activities, the critical weather has undergone a change, with more frequent serious statements and fewer ﬂ  ippant articles about her, and when the comments are light, they tend to be more friendly than nega-tive. Along with the growth of Oprah’s empire and inﬂ  uence, leading journalists in both the news and entertainment industries have devel-oped an affectionate type of deference toward her.  As Willie Geist pointed out on a “Morning Joe” television program, there is an “eleventh commandment: thou shalt not criticize Oprah.” Her status over the years, which has grown far beyond the reaches of the television audience, has become immeasurable. Oprah,  Washington Post   columnist Eugene Robinson wrote, “transcends even the transcendent.”  At times it is as though anything hinting about an Oprah connec-tion will be published. Oprah is news to the extent that Google gathers daily items from all over the world for “Oprah Alert,” which is avail-able to Internet users who want to follow everything about the media queen. All it takes is the mention of her name to be labeled a story of interest. When a mining disaster occurred in Tasmania in 2006, nu-merous companies phoned an Australian hospital to offer large sums of money to the survivors to buy the rights to their stories. But the only prominent name noted in the press and the Web site was  The Oprah Winfrey Show.   THIS POWERFUL CELEBRITY 17 No matter the occasion, in recent years, if Oprah’s name can be brought in, even the most far-fetched subject for a report appears some-where. Perhaps this was the strangest, when in 2007, a real estate poll was conducted about the popularity of Oprah versus that of Donald Trump. More baby boomers and seniors picked Oprah rather than Trump as their preferred real estate agent. Of all the areas that Oprah has been involved in, selling real estate isn’t one. Nevertheless, the very use of her name has cachet, regardless of whether the event has any relationship to Oprah. Her name, or even something that sounds like it, will make news: thus, the naming of a now four-year-old horse as Oprah Winney of Sanford Characters stables.  Because of her popularity and fame, Oprah’s career is frequently compared to that of Mary Kay Ash, the late cosmetics entrepreneur whose business empire continues to thrive even after her death. When Mary Kay died in November 2001, the obituary in the  Washington Post  noted her signiﬁ  cance in revealing to women like Oprah an under-standing of the methods she had used in gaining success; later, the same methods worked for Oprah, most signiﬁ  cantly involving groups in her company’s business activities.  Few would debate that Oprah has won her stripes the hard way: na-tional and international celebrity have made her someone to be reck-oned with as owner or partner in networks, schools, and businesses. On television and radio, the conservative talk show host Bill O’Reilly, not known for his lavish praise of media stars, has described her as “the most powerful woman in the world,” a woman who has “credibil-ity” and “talent.” Even her well-known rival, Jerry Springer, who also has a television empire, has stated she is “the best there is or has ever been,” a position apparently supported by  Forbes  magazine.  Forbes,  like O’Reilly, has named Oprah the world’s most powerful celebrity.  There is no overlooking her vast wealth. For several years,  Forbes  listed Oprah as the highest paid African American in the United States, the world’s only black billionaire, and the ﬁ  rst black billionaire in world history. Oprah’s earnings top those of Tiger Woods, whose wealth is greater than that of any other athlete in the world, and she had, for a time, even more billions than J. K. Rowling, author of the Harry Potter series. (In July 2008, the British paper,  The Guardian,  reported that Rowling’s ﬁ  nal Harry Potter book,  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows,  put Rowling’s earnings higher than Oprah’s.) However, Oprah 18 OPRAH WINFREYremains the highest-earning media personality; reputedly, recently she signed a three-year contract that is said to bring her $55 million from XM satellite radio alone.  In contrast to the mixed assessments of polls and critics, public praise of Oprah is frequently hyperbolic. Many people go through periods of intense loyalty to entertainers in the music, television, and movie in-dustries, and Oprah’s fans are among the most dedicated. She is seen as a “parable of the American dream,” Alexandra Stanley wrote in the  New York Times ; someone who preaches “self-help” to an accepting au-dience.  Audiences stand, cheer, and applaud when she enters a room, and not all of the adulation can be ascribed to managerial directions given in advance. Women—there are far fewer men in attendance at her shows or reading her magazines—laugh at her slightest suggestion of humor—some quite earthy—and cry when Oprah’s eyes tear up. She is regarded as a woman who helps show others how to live. The worship-ful attitude has reached a point where some admirers have seriously suggested that Oprah be nominated as a vice presidential candidate. In support of such sentiments, a television writer has borrowed a term formerly used to describe Bette Midler; the “divine Ms. M” has become “the divine Ms. O.”  The now-defunct  MS  magazine once repeated a fan’s accolade, la-beling Oprah as the “most accessible and honest” American psychia-trist. Oprah’s television role in the daily lives of numerous viewers may or may not fulﬁ  ll the calling of a doctor, but if one thinks of her many venues available to her followers, in addition to her support of psychol-ogist Dr. Phil’s program ﬁ  ve days a week and his monthly column in her magazine,  O,  Oprah’s role as psychiatrist to the nation is not untoward. Eva Illouz, in her book  Oprah Winfrey and the Glamour of Misery,  states, “Oprah shows us how to cope . . . by offering a rationalized view of the self, inspired by the language of therapy.”  Newsweek  credits her with playing a role in creating “the cult of confession.”  On air, Oprah urges children to conﬁ  de in trusted adults to protect themselves from predators. Oprah sees her role as consummate helper. During the Clinton administration, she played a part in having a bill passed for child protection. Informally, the bill was called the Oprah Bill, but the actual legal document is named the Child Protection Act,  THIS POWERFUL CELEBRITY 19which became law in 1992 when President Clinton signed it. Oprah was so committed to seeing success of the law that she provided money to hire attorneys to protect children from sexual predators, and her name is frequently invoked in such matters. Protection of children against predators has been a lifetime interest of hers, resulting from her own bitter experiences as a child. In July 2008, the Associated Press carried a story of a prosecutor, Jill Starishevsky of the Bronx, New York, Child Abuse and Sex Crimes Bureau, who had successfully brought to trial a case against a man who had been constantly raping his stepdaughter from the time she was six years old. The little girl had been watch-ing Oprah’s show, in which the message told sexually abused children to inform parents or teachers about the molestation. Three years had passed since the beginning of the abuse, but the child, who had been silent all those years, informed her teacher about it the day after she heard Oprah speak. Although most events of this type rarely make the newspapers, this particular one did, and it stresses the importance of the Oprah effect.  She remains a strong advocate for abused children. On a September 2008 television show, the subject was Internet predators. The aim was to inﬂ  uence Oprah’s audience to urge support of a new Senate bill, the Protect Our Children Act, which targets child pornography.  Oprah’s national role as healer expanded for a time during the Bush presidency, when the nation was attacked by terrorists. Oprah served in that capacity following the national disaster of September 11, 2001. When the terrorist attacks on New York City and Washington, DC, were the only subjects of the media for days, Oprah, along with other celebrities, was prominently featured as a participant in the healing process, using her daily program to move toward that goal. Oprah ap-peared with First Lady Laura Bush as they held hands in their shared grief over the thousands of lives lost in the assaults. For weeks after the horriﬁ  c events, Oprah appeared to be everywhere, taking on, more than ever, the role of therapist to a troubled country.  At that time, Oprah was avowedly apolitical. However, toward the end of the Bush presidency, when Oprah became a partisan in the po-litical process as a supporter for Democratic candidates, she altered her impartial national role of therapist to the country. It is highly unlikely she will be called upon or volunteer to participate in any future events 20 OPRAH WINFREYpresented by a Republican administration. Her lover of many years, Stedman Graham, has been said to be an Obama supporter, and, al-though Graham is known as a staunch Republican, Oprah probably will no longer be on the A-list of desired speakers for his party. (She has never participated in such events.) Inasmuch as Oprah and Graham have usually gone in different directions in political matters, it cannot be of any great concern to her. She seems to take a ﬁ  rm stand against those who are angry about her involvement in politics different from their own.  Because of her fame, we expect to ﬁ  nd library shelves ﬁ  lled with Oprah biographies of all kinds, but that assumption is incorrect. Al-though there are biographies, they are not all kinds. A few out-of print and out-of-date adult books of earlier vintage exist, and there are some children’s books as well. These works fall into two main categories: bi-ographies and books of sayings. However, a problem exists with several of those publications, particularly those that are a collection of say-ings without speciﬁ  c dates. Some statements that lack dates could lead readers to believe something to be true of the mature Oprah, whereas she, like most of us, surely has altered some of her views over a period of time. Perhaps the best example is Oprah’s change of heart about re-maining steadfastly outside the political arena.  In several books and articles, careless but not insigniﬁ  cant errors ap-pear. An entry in an encyclopedia erroneously lists the paternal rather than the maternal grandmother as the person with whom Oprah spent her early years. A 1990s biography lists a wrong birth date for Oprah. Another claims Oprah’s mother married a man with whom she had a longtime relationship; in fact, she never married. One describes Oprah as short, a description completely at odds with reality, because she is ﬁ  ve foot six. Furthermore, tabloids may present a special problem be-cause their sources of information are typically “friends” who are never identiﬁ  ed.  Even before opening some of the books about Oprah, readers are confronted with titles that usually contain words similar to the hype of advertisements such as “wonderful” and “remarkable.” Although many of the books are excessively benevolent, none is authorized. (At one time, Oprah planned to write her autobiography, but she was per-suaded to abandon the project because some of her intimates, including  THIS POWERFUL CELEBRITY 21Stedman Graham, believed it would be a detriment to her career.) Shortly before a well-known tell-all author released an Oprah biogra-phy, Bill Zwecker, a columnist for the  Chicago Sun-Times,  suggested the  London Times  was exaggerating in describing that writer as “the poison pen biographer.” On the other hand, Josh Schollmeyer, of the magazine  Chicago,  took another view, perhaps more centrist, that the book would not be “a puff piece.” Nonetheless, it was always unlikely that Oprah would sanction it, and, when asked, Oprah stated she would have no input. Not long ago, Oprah’s father, Vernon decided he’d write a book about his daughter, something he neglected to tell her.  When Oprah took umbrage, gossip columnists reported that she had threatened suit. Her more mild public statement was that they had “talked.” Vernon Winfrey’s book will not appear. Generally, informa-tion about Oprah is selective, and if she does not want something made public, it is carefully controlled when possible. However, the tabloids frequently run stories about her that claim to be true. Nonetheless, the sources generally are not named, though reporters, not on the payroll of the gossip papers, have said that the tabloids have very large and persistent staffs that track stories constantly.  The implication suggests that most of the stories are true. Although it may appear that her life is an open book, because much is personal in nature, it is Oprah herself who determines what she tells readers of her thoughts and life story in her magazines and on radio and television. She grants few interviews.  Oprah brought suit against a man who later became the author of a self-published book,  Ruthless.  She charged that the author, Keifer Bonvillain, had maligned her and attempted extortion. Newspapers exercised much caution in reporting the situation, giving little public-ity to the matter or sale of the book. The case was dismissed without much notice, yet the book remains in print. Bonvillain’s account seems confused and defensive as he tells his story of being an innocent party who had received the revelations from a former employee of Harpo, Oprah’s company. Whatever the truths behind the matter, the book was marketed through Amazon.com. Although the number of purchases has not been publicized, references to the work continue to surface. Still another hostile, self-published book appeared a year later, and it also may be purchased. Titled  Don’t Drink the Kool-Aid,  the author 22 OPRAH WINFREYCarrington Steele lambasts Oprah for her religious and spiritual views, something frequently done by bloggers.  Few books critical of Oprah are written by the professional press. Most are scholarly and focus on speciﬁ  c areas of research. One that has covered a larger territory and has been reviewed more widely is Janice Peck’s  The Age of Oprah: Cultural Icon for the Neoliberal Press.  One reviewer of Peck’s book describes her as “a prosecutor” who regards Oprah as a “symbol of this age of navel gazing narcissism.” Peck sees the country as “self-centered” and Oprah’s gospel of self-reliance as “pitiless toward the poor.” In a lengthy “Black Agenda Radio Interview” hosted by Brace Dixon, Peck agrees that she regards Oprah’s message as politi-cal, a politics “that puts the personal responsibility for being poor and oppressed exclusively on the poor and oppressed.”  Furthermore, Peck maintains that U.S. society has not transcended race, that we cover up and avoid many issues, which is what Oprah has done, with the result that her “majority white following” remains com-fortable with her.  Unlike most monthlies, Oprah’s magazine,  O,  rarely prints any fault-ﬁ  nding letters to the editor, an omission that suggests that readers who take the time to write to the editor have nothing critical to say. Although few would question the U.S. public’s affection for the enter-tainer or her impressive social and cultural roles, the constant praise contributes to an adverse effect that is diminishing, at least as far as critics are concerned.  Several scholarly specialized books, each focusing on some aspect of Oprah’s work or philosophy, have been published in recent years: one is about Oprah’s concepts of religion; another explores her effect on U.S. national culture; and another follows her rise in becoming a cul-tural icon. T wo analyze her book club as well as her selections of books for the club. One writer, Kathleen Rooney, the author of  Reading with Oprah: The Book Club That Changed America,  wrote a lengthy piece for the  Washington Post  in which she explores the stories that followed Oprah’s support of Obama. 9  (Rooney also produced a collection of es-says,  For You, I Am Trilling These Songs. )  There have been announcements of several books, among them another unauthorized biography of Oprah, as well as articles, books, and comic strips about her. Comedians ﬁ  nd multiple avenues of humor  THIS POWERFUL CELEBRITY 23about her and her activities. On a Comedy Central show titled  The Root of All Evil,  comedian Louis Black presented “Oprah versus the Catholic Church.” Neither Oprah nor spokespeople for the Church have commented publicly about the presentation.  Over the years, Oprah has declared several times her intention to retire from her daily television program, but until September 2009, she kept changing the date. Despite unconﬁ  rmed reports that her show continued to lose viewers, she signed a new contract to extend the date to 2011, including those roles of actress and television producer. However, rumors persisted that Oprah would not renew her contract with CBS after 2011, once she bought into the new network, OWN. In 2009, Oprah tearfully announced the news. Also, she has expanded her publishing empire twice in recent years. Her original venture with her ﬁ  rst magazine,  O,  has grown hugely. Although recent statistics show a decline in subscriptions, the largest loss has been in individual pur-chases at supermarkets. What is happening is considered part of the general economic decline, and  O  remains the most popular women’s magazine in the United States. However, not long after the report that her other magazine, the  O At Home  publication, was in trouble, the magazine ceased publication when another backer could not be found to replace Hearst. Still Oprah’s wealth permits her to explore new ven-tures in many ﬁ  elds. Not only has she expanded her business empire, but she also has enlarged her role in educational projects large and small as well as her role as international philanthropist. Whatever her future options, the likelihood is that she will continue to be a major player in multiple areas.  As for her personal life, it is and will undoubtedly remain a topic of interest to readers and writers. For the tabloids and entertainment magazines, she is an industry, with her activities being reported on an almost daily basis. Should she ever retire completely, they would lose a valuable commodity.  NOTES     1 .  Arizona Republic,  12 Nov. 2007.   2 .  Philadelphia Enquirer,  21 May 2008.   3 . Eurweb.com, 20 Aug. 2008. 24 OPRAH WINFREY  4 . “Top of the Ticket,”  Los Angeles Times,  Apr. 2008.   5 . “The Other O-Factor in Oprah’s Gentle Decline,”  Guardian  (New York), 27 May 2008.   6 . “The Reliable Source,”  Washington Post,  1 May 2008.   7 . Jeanne Wolf, “Little Things Matter,”  Washington Post,  16 Dec. 2007.   8 . “The Astrology behind Oprah’s Thyroid Problem,” 21 Apr. 2008.   9 . Kathleen Rooney, “The Five Myths about Oprah, Obama,”  Wash-ington Post,  14 Sept. 2008.  