  Chapter 3  MEDIA MOGUL  Several years ago, when  Washington Post  columnist Howard Kurtz wrote the book  Hot Air, All the Time,  he listed names of performers he labeled as “high priests of talk.” Who could foresee that one of them would become, as another writer described, “America’s motivation Queen”? All of the performers are familiar to any television or radio listener and even to people who are neither but know the names from general con-versations held over the years. Of the seven Kurtz chose from both day-time and nighttime talk shows, Oprah was the only woman. Although today there are several women daytime competitors, her fans continue to make up one of the largest audiences of daytime television watchers. Journalists designated Oprah the “queen of daytime television” because of the large number of women who opted to watch her programs rather than other offerings, day or night. Polls reveal that more women view-ers prefer the lighter fare of daytime talk over the subject matter of eve-ning talk shows, which are more news oriented or erudite in contrast to what many critics call the sensational, sentimental, hokey, and true confessional topics of daytime programs. Women watch daytime shows in larger numbers than men. The subject matter of both daytime and evening programs may be the same—that is, serious and important—but 84 OPRAH WINFREYthe presentations have been worlds apart. However, more changes have occurred in evening presentations than in daytime, inevitably as audi-ence numbers have declined and networks attempt to ﬁ  nd ways to keep or improve ratings.  Another columnist, Judith Timson, wrote in the  Globe and Mail,   “I’m trying to remember what our world was like before Oprah remade it.” Through her show and magazine, which reveal Oprah as a salesper-son of sentiment, good feeling, and self-improvement, Timson writes, “We have been given a transformative way to view our lives.” So sig-niﬁ cant is  The Oprah Winfrey Show  that toward the end of 2008 it was added to the Spanish-language offerings for secondary schools in six major Hispanic television markets: Chicago, Los Angeles, New York, Houston, Miami, and Dallas.  Perhaps the most basic reason for Oprah’s ongoing popularity is the one given by an Internet entertainment writer, who saw her as “a best girl friend to women.” But Timson’s view of Oprah’s persona is that she makes herself “indispensable.” In this new era of blogging, the same description seems to apply, despite the hostile statements that appear when some viewers decry some of her actions. Unlike letters to the editor, many of the blogs appear unedited, using language that would be bleeped from television and radio and kept out of newspa-pers. Blogs about controversial subjects concerning Oprah may cover 20 or 30 pages at a time. Numerous pages of angry blogs appeared on the Internet when Oprah refused to have Republican vice presidential candidate Sarah Palin on her show prior to the 2008 election. When Oprah did invite Sarah Palin to appear on her show after the election, the former candidate turned her down. However, once Palin had re-signed her position as Alaska’s governor and had a book to market, she changed her mind and appeared on Oprah’s show in November 2009, a year after the election.  Television critics and comedians were not kind to either the guest or the host, although Palin’s appearance provided a much-needed boost to the show’s ratings. Fairly or not, after much hype before Palin’s visit, the actual show was uninformative. Oprah’s role the critics found ei-ther sycophantic or supportive. Aside from the barbs Palin sent the way of Senator McCain’s staff, television newscaster Katie Couric, Levi Johnston (the father of Palin’s grandson), and the staff of  Newsweek   MEDIA MOGUL 85magazine that had printed on its cover her photo as a hockey player, she had little to add to anything she had said previously or elsewhere—except for labeling Johnston’s upcoming photos in  Playgirl  as “porn.” However, a writer for the  Los Angeles Times  found Johnston preferable to interviewers (without actually naming Palin, Oprah, Walters, and King), because he was “at least” able to keep audiences awake.  A few months after Palin’s appearance on Oprah’s show, her daugh-ter Bristol was the guest. As might have been anticipated, newspaper reports about the show emphasized Bristol’s anger at her son’s father and her plan to remain celibate until she marries. That situation went back and forth several years later, providing much publicity for both Bristol and Levi.  Inspired perhaps by Palin’s mention of porn, the following day, Oprah returned to the type of discussion she had eschewed for awhile. As Michael Langston wrote in the  Examiner , “Oprah . . . jumped full feet into the tawdry topic” with her guest, former porn star Jenna Jameson. Jameson talked about the large numbers of women who are interested in pornography and about the memoir she’d written in 2004,  How to Make Love Like a Porn Star: A Cautionary Tale.   Television talk shows are as old as broadcasting, but they came into their own sphere in the 1960s. On occasion, writers have compared daytime talk shows to soap opera because of the similarity of content, so it is not just happenstance that talk shows have replaced a number of soaps, although a few soaps have been able to keep going for decades, as have Oprah-type talk shows. Scholars of popular culture have linked the roots of such shows to 19th-century life, with its particular form of tattletale tabloids, theatrical melodramas, carnival acts, and advice columns for women in daily newspapers that became the forerunners of the late “Dear Abby” and more recent, generally less friendly, modern guides to living. Additionally, the pre–television-era true confession magazines, once the favored reading material in hairdressing salons, are considered precursors of talk shows. Covers from  True Story  and other confessional magazines predating World War II framed and hung in chain restaurants are intended to capture a sense of a less sophisticated era long since passed. A  True Story  cover hanging in a Cracker Barrel restaurant along Interstate 95 obviously captivated its readers with the top headline: “Truth Is Stranger than Fiction.” That and the title of 86 OPRAH WINFREYthe lead story, “My Own Love Trap,” could easily be today’s program on television, not excluding Oprah’s show (though the details of the story would surely have been far less explicit in the past). Love lost, found, betrayed, and betraying are frequent topics, although the formats differ. The links between such older forms of popular culture and today’s talk shows reveal a comparable selection of subjects considered appealing to women. Nothing is random in the choice of subjects chosen by produc-ers, who not only are aware of women’s interests but also watch rival programs, observe ﬁ  gures in the world of entertainment, and keep up to date with tabloid and gossip publications such as the  National En-quirer, Star, Globe,  and  People.  Oprah’s life is a favorite subject for these publications. Until recently, assertions that all talk shows, daytime and evening, had some of the same characteristics are now only partly ac-curate. Since the 1990s, the focus of some day and evening program-ming has been altered, leading writers to note that even serious news programs have become more entertainment oriented, while some day-time programs have offered more consequential discussions. Holding the interest and attention of a changing population is a constant and major concern of networks. In that sense, networks and newspapers have similar problems; moreover, the public has been warned about the possibility that newspapers may disappear, to be replaced by the Internet, and network revenues are down.  News reports are shorter. Lighter subject matter often is introduced, and opinions of news people rather than objective factors are voiced more and more frequently—most often on cable shows. Perhaps the impetus to lighten evening talk came from the appearance on playful late-night comedy shows such as  Saturday Night Live  of former presi-dent Clinton, former vice president Gore, former president George W . Bush, and President Obama, who all took the opportunity to reveal themselves as regular guys. Reporters have called attention to their fre-quent appearances on television—although less so for Bush. First Lady Michelle Obama became the ﬁ  rst person to share the cover of Oprah’s magazine since it was introduced. Interviews with presidential wives, not only on television but also in the magazine, have added to Oprah’s cachet.  The popularity of such appearances and increased numbers of view-ers led to more spoofs during the 2008 campaigns. Favorites among  MEDIA MOGUL 87them were satires of vice presidential candidate Sarah Palin. That show garnered the largest audiences in the history of  Saturday Night Live  and was repeated several times. Palin also was a guest for one episode of the show. Even a stand-in Oprah appeared on one of the programs. Satire, surprisingly, does not appear to disconcert or discourage most viewers, regardless of their political afﬁ  liation. Oprah seemed not to object to the comedy show during the run-up to the election. And Palin sold a record-breaking number of her memoir books a year after the 2008 election.  At the opposite end of the spectrum, producers have attempted to increase the shrinking numbers of viewers of their regular evening talk programs by inviting reputable and prominent journalists as guests. (Some of the newer cable programs appear to thrive on combative speakers.) Members of every recent administration also have become frequent guests on nighttime shows as well as Saturday and Sunday daytime talk programs. The popularity of the numerous weekend talk shows has networks vying for the same participants, who frequently go from one program to another. All sides gain mileage from such events: politicians presenting their views in what appears to be a less partisan environment and hosts in raising the bar on topics and issues.  Over a period of about two decades, weekend and many daytime talk shows (particularly the frivolous ones) have been at their height, leading journalist Peter Carlson to label them “America’s great growth industry.” Daily talk shows have proliferated, and only some of the more offensive programs were discontinued even though many became more and more sensational when no topic was taboo. Participants will-ingly shared personal and private elements of their lives with viewers. Despite doctors’ reports that patients generally are reluctant to discuss sexual matters with them, it seems those very people are ready to go on television and tell all. Many of Oprah’s shows have supported such discussions of intimate matters. Sometimes the comments by Oprah or visiting experts have been used to emphasize the uninhibited nature of the show or guests. And, although there are fewer sensational presenta-tions than before, they still occur with some regularity.  Interspersed with prosaic or meaningful topics have been some un-usual confessions. In addition to programs about homosexuality, Oprah raised the subject of husbands who have had sex changes. She pushed 88 OPRAH WINFREYthe boundaries of transgender by having as a guest the “pregnant” Thomas Beatie, a transsexual who was on the show more than once and is a man who has twice given birth. Six months pregnant when he ﬁ  rst appeared with his wife on Oprah’s show in the spring of 2008, Beatie had been a beauty queen in his younger days but later under-went a sex change. Although legally he became a man, he did not have the female organs removed, with the result that he was able to be-come pregnant when his wife of ﬁ  ve years, Nancy, was unable to do so, even though she had two daughters from an earlier marriage. Although he and Nancy wanted a child, numerous doctors refused to treat his pregnancy, and some people, including members of his own family, re-garded the situation as an abomination. Not long after his appearance on Oprah’s show, Beatie gave birth to a daughter, and subsequently had another child. Not only did his presence draw many viewers to the shows, but also several newspapers reported the experiences. In the days before television, the circus might have been the forum for such entertainment.  Programs on sexual matters display many characteristics of Oprah’s presentations, not only those dealing with intimate matters that ac-count for her large numbers of fans: before-and-after photos of guests, intimate relations, emotion, and humor. Still, there have been angry reactions to the more graphic shows, even though warnings are issued in advance about the suitability of the material. Sex therapist Laura Berman was the guest expert on a show discussing the topic “Behind Closed Doors: Sex Therapy.” Writing for the  Sun-Times  before the show aired, Berman answered typical questions posed by people concerned with the material and issues in sex therapy. In a reassuring article, Berman sought to allay worries people have in their sexual relation-ships; on the show, her discussion was both more open and intimate than that in the written piece. Berman will continue to appear on fu-ture programs when Oprah moves to OWN.  Because of public interest—or prurient interest—in the matter of sex changes, the following year, staff from Harpo notiﬁ  ed an Edmonton, Alberta, Canada, woman of the plan for Oprah Winfrey’s show to have a program on sex-change surgery. The unnamed woman was seek-ing a sex change in Canada. Although there was no immediate date for Oprah’s show, the studios were considering the subject of trans- MEDIA MOGUL 89sexuals. In the past, there had been funding for sex-change surgery in Alberta’s budget, but that had been eliminated in 2009, because various individuals and groups organized to defeat the plan. It was suggested, however, that sex change might become a topic for a future program.  Although there are serious presentations about sexual matters, there are also lighthearted ones as well, as with a guest appearance by Steve Harvey, popular talk show host and author of  Act Like a Lady, Think Like a Man.  With a live audience apparently consisting entirely of women, as well as preselected women on Skype (the Internet calling system) from various cities who asked questions that seemed previewed, Harvey’s appearance on Oprah’s show was a combination of fact and humor about the war between men and women. As they were being beamed in via television, the remarks and questions of those outside the studio focused on sex, sexual relationships, and activities.  Oprah had featured an entire episode introducing Skype to her viewers. Through the use of Skype, Oprah has been able to hold talks with anyone, anywhere, at any hour. The technology, which is only a few years old, continues to expand. And Oprah, who appears always ready to try new things, uses Facebook, YouTube, and T witter (al-though, reportedly, she has tired of this last one).  Everyone during Harvey’s guest appearance was openly humorous about sexual parts, sex toys, heavy petting, and oral sex. In response to several questions, Harvey played two roles: the surprised man, inno-cent in his comments, as he comically rolled his eyes, and wise advisor to the women on how to behave with men. With a change of mood, Harvey listed ﬁ  ve questions women need to have answered when they begin a serious relationship with a man.  For her part, Oprah laughed along with the audience as Harvey joked about the surprisingly frank queries and revelations. Only when the issue became one of honesty and ﬁ  delity between a couple did his tone change. So too did Oprah’s. Although she was uncharacteristi-cally reserved about such matters, her body language clearly revealed her own strong feelings. Her  O  magazine, like many (or most) women’s magazines, frequently publishes articles by therapists about ﬁ  delity and related matters.  When Oprah started in Chicago in 1984, nobody anticipated the effect her program would have. Having replaced the irreplaceable Phil 90 OPRAH WINFREYDonahue, she always credits him for his pioneering work on television in creating the one topic format that she emulated. She insists that his dissenting voice has been important for the health of television. Donahue’s show had established the pattern not only for Oprah but for all the other daytime talk shows. However, Donahue also had multiple detractors, as has Oprah, even though the type of criticism differs.  Donahue has turned away from talk shows to concentrate on serious documentaries. In much the same way, Oprah has become more in-volved in other types of programs. Nevertheless, some of the criticism of Oprah by media critics still is valid. With discussions described as “sensational,” such topics continue to be explored on her show. Writ-ers have noted occasions when Oprah became uncomfortable with the subjects on her program; though she appears to be less so with the pas-sage of time, it is reﬂ  ective of changes in our culture. Contending she has no desire to manipulate people or take advantage of their miseries, she has said frequently that her desire in life is to do good. Looking at her contributions to national and international betterment, who can question her assertions? Most critics, despite their cynicism and a cer-tain mockery of the breadth of her statements, acknowledge the truths of her intentions.  Television ratings are always dependent on audience interest. To keep people tuning in, it’s necessary to provide variety in shows, and some topics have been extremely provocative. From the beginning, talk shows have run the gamut from sleazy to serious. In that lineup, Oprah’s programs have generally been ranked at the classy end in both style and execution, leading to her top ratings and many Emmy Awards, in-cluding a Lifetime Achievement Award. Individual honors continue to come in, such as those for her philanthropic activities, which include her Angel Network and many other causes all over the globe—all of which have helped raise awareness and money.  Substantive alterations took place in Oprah’s telecasts once she de-cided to raise the level of her programs. During the years that competi-tion increased among daytime talk shows and subject matter became more repugnant,  The Oprah Winfrey Show  made important strides toward abandoning the tawdry factor. While competitors seemed to compete for the title of most revolting and shocking, she frequently enhanced the quality of her shows.  MEDIA MOGUL 91 Nevertheless, she has not always escaped the mineﬁ  eld; even when experts are featured in discussions about anything of a sexual nature, numerous critics attack the programs. Currently, bloggers—many of whom are anonymous—are the most hostile. Ironically, they seem to be among the audience for her shows.  Meanwhile, other talk show hosts sometimes presented such offen-sive programs that one writer labeled them “the swamp.” Of course, not all audiences appreciated Oprah’s efforts to offer more quality pro-grams. At times, viewers have been ﬁ  ckle, preferring to tune out Oprah and tune in other hosts or soap operas or game shows. Popularity polls taken periodically reveal a seesawing between hosts. But even critics, who usually ﬁ  nd daytime shows worthless, trashy, and objectionable, approved of some changes in Oprah’s programs. That doesn’t mean all journalists have credited her efforts to improve the caliber of talk shows; some writers, whose ﬁ  eld is television culture, continue to fault her programs. The anti-Oprah critics voice dismay at the role she plays in U.S. cultural life, seeing her as pandering to and supporting medioc-rity. Yet when she became a spokesperson for the Obama presidential campaign, there were those who also criticized her for that.  She has been faulted for being anti-male, perhaps because her audi-ences are mostly women. Black journalists, in particular, have expressed intense anger about what they see as her unfriendly attitude toward black men. Sensitivity to that subject has not changed over the years, so that Oprah’s involvement with the movie  Precious  brought about more attacks on her judgment and supposed animosity. The fact that Tyler Perry also was a coproducer of the ﬁ  lm seemed not to lessen the anger of some newspaper writers, nor did the presence of Oprah and Gabourey Sidibe (who played Precious) at the 2010 Oscar event, where Oprah spoke of the young star’s achievement as a “classic Cinderella story.”  Despite widespread praise for the ﬁ  lm and its stars, a similar reaction to that of the past was heard: that the ﬁ  lm demeaned African Ameri-cans. The writer Ishmael Reed voiced the same type of comments that had been made years earlier with the ﬁ  lm  The Color Purple  and other ﬁ  lms that focus on the lives of African Americans. Ironically, after many years, the book  The Color Purple,  which was published in 1982 and won a Pulitzer Prize, is still discussed and admired by many critics. 92 OPRAH WINFREYClasses in literature often study the book, and the movie was Oprah’s introduction as an actress; the show also was a hit on Broadway and elsewhere, with the current producer being Oprah Winfrey.  Another novel,  Push,  might have been overlooked had it not been made into a ﬁ  lm, particularly under the auspices of Oprah. As critic Ishmael Reed describes it, the subject is the “merciless abuse, grossly incestuous abhorrent degradation of a young girl.” The subject is one that Oprah has been interested in for years, primarily because of her own painful history as an abused, neglected child, raped by a family member and her mother’s boyfriend. Although the ﬁ  lm did not win an Academy Award, it did win at Sundance and abroad, in Cannes and Toronto. Perhaps some of the writers and readers who turned away from the ﬁ  lm did so because, as one wrote, life has enough pain and anguish without seeing it in the movies.  There will be many more ﬁ  lms on Oprah’s new network. Although the book club may be a thing of the past, a new club is being formed, the Documentary Film Club, whose ﬁ  rst offering,  A Family Affair,  was scheduled to be shown on OWN in 2011. The documentaries planned for the new club will focus on “emerging creative voices.” No doubt the lives of women will continue to be a major theme and interest in Oprah’s future work, just as her television programs have been.  Divorce has been a topic shown from several perspectives on Oprah’s program. On one show, Haley, a sophomore in college, and her mother, Michelle, were the guests for an episode titled “Women Leaving Men for Other Women.” In a frank discussion, both mother and daughter described their experiences after Michelle and Haley’s father divorced after a 24-year marriage. Although the husband/father and his family considered the situation (that is, Michelle’s homosexuality) abhorrent and against their religion, Haley protested their views, stating it was the divorce that made her unhappy, not her mother’s homosexuality. Jesus never said a word in the Bible about sex, she said, and her moth-er’s sexual orientation has nothing to do with her goodness as a person or as a Christian. God, alone, can judge, Haley stated, and she herself has no right to do so.  The subject of divorce is addressed from differing perspectives on different shows. On another Oprah program, the issue of loyalty and disloyalty was explored, with guests consisting of a father and his two  MEDIA MOGUL 93children, Daisy and Chris, as well as a divorce counselor. In a previ-ously made ﬁ  lm, two other children talked about their mother and her boyfriend, while Chris wept as the children described their sadness. When Oprah speaks of the rage that children can develop, the guest counselor explains that children must express their feelings; however, it must be the parent who approaches the child for such a discussion in order to take the pressure off. Often, children blame themselves for the breakup of their parents’ marriage. Even though the counselor reas-sured Daisy and Chris of their innocence in the matter, they spoke of things they did to try to bring about their mother’s return. But the sad truth, according to the expert, is that they didn’t cause her to leave, nor can they make her return. He advises, as a rule, both parents together should tell their children the truth. They need to tell children about their own sadness, that they are going to live separately, and stress that the children are not to blame. Further, he says, parents should practice in advance what they need to say, knowing that the children will cry, but they must also listen to their children.  After Oprah asserted it is never too late to heal damage, another ﬁ  lm was shown on the program, featuring the same counselor and a 16-year-old girl, Ebony, who felt guilty about telling her father years earlier she had seen her mother embracing another man. After her parents were divorced, for seven years she carried the burden of believing that she had caused the divorce. She turned her sense of responsibility against herself and became sexually promiscuous with as many as 22 partners. She also took drugs and became pregnant but lost the baby. Her parents knew nothing about her activities, and she feared telling them. But, on the show, the counselor had her confess to both parents through a ﬁ  lm that was shown. Although the father assured Ebony he will always ac-cept her, the mother does not. Counselor Neuman wanted the mother to differentiate between the girl and her behavior, and the mother ad-mitted she had not handled the situation well.  Oprah takes the opportunity to express a point of view she holds strongly: it is necessary for parents to talk to their children in situations of this nature. Oprah bluntly asks the mother whether she was aware that Ebony had seen her embracing another man. When the mother denies it, she also confesses she’d moved away before telling her child about the upcoming divorce. 94 OPRAH WINFREY Both Oprah and Neuman are in agreement that children need adults to talk to about important personal matters, and if they can’t discuss such things with their parents, there must be adult friends to whom the children can turn. People familiar with Oprah’s history understand the impetus behind her views.  Varieties of sexual themes appear frequently on the show, with the discussions having become more open over the decades. In advance no-tices of upcoming shows on sex, viewers are warned that such programs are meant only for mature audiences. Accordingly, Hal Boedeke, also known as “the TV Guy,” writing a blog for the  Orlando Sentinel , humor-ously states, “Lady O wants to make sure adults are getting the Big O.” Nevertheless, although some viewers may protest about the presenta-tions, the numbers of viewers have not diminished. Apparently, the popularity of such discussions as marriage, divorce, and sex increases viewer interest. In support of such ﬁ  ndings, on one Oprah program, Oprah’s guest, a professor from the University of Utah, discussed her 13-year study about women’s sexuality, which resulted in the book  Sexual Fluidity.  Among the ﬁ  ndings was women’s attraction to other women, and some people expressed surprise that the writer was able to work on such a controversial a topic in Utah. Her response to such questions was to point out that the University of Utah is a great place and no differ-ent from any other academic institution.  Years ago, when Oprah decided to improve the nature of her pro-gram, more professional guests were added, so that a number of the is-sues discussed have had serious and thoughtful analysis. On days when the country has been eager for solace as well as information about signiﬁ  cant current events such as the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan, the economy, or careful consideration of other major happenings,  The Oprah Winfrey Show  attained stature commensurate with some of the best television offerings. At such times, her broadcasts have focused on the problems confronting the nation, and she has brought in experts to explain and air multiple points of view. Frequently, issues of concern to all Americans are on the agenda.  It seems prescient of Oprah and her staff to have had a show in September 2009 about health care in the United States; soon the sub-ject became a linchpin in the new president’s program following his election—but it became a topic that led to much controversy among  MEDIA MOGUL 95the electorate and, according to a number of election analysts, was a major factor in the loss of many Democratic governors and many Dem-ocratic seats in Congress. Michael Moore, maker of the ﬁ  lm  Sicko,  was a guest on Oprah’s September 2009 show, “Sick in America.” Moore’s premise, supported by Oprah, is that the system has failed large num-bers of Americans. In preparation for the show, one of Oprah’s em-ployees called several insurance companies about three different cases that needed health insurance, and in each instance the company rep-resentatives found reasons to deny coverage to the individuals. Several of the insurers were among the largest in the United States: Blue Shield, Blue Cross, and Aetna. Moore, Oprah, and a Princeton Uni-versity health care economist argued that all Americans have a fun-damental right to health care, whereas a guest from the insurance side countered with the statement (one frequently repeated by insurance company spokespeople) that Americans have better health care than people in foreign countries. Although the insurance industry represen-tative pressed for a balance between private and public care payment, the problem of health care in the United States remains contentious.  When Oprah has experienced certain health issues herself, the entire world learns about her physical ailments while she shares personal in-formation. Her rejection and later acceptance of the idea of menopause gave rise to a publicizing of what one writer calls “the new attention-grabbing younger sister of menopause, called ‘perimenopause.’ ” 1  Many doctors approved the publicity given the problem, although other physicians and scientists objected to the commercial exploitation of the subject by various sellers of medicines, books, and supplements. Nevertheless, when the hour devoted to perimenopause on Oprah’s program came to an end, the e-mail response was so overwhelming that it caused Oprah’s site to crash, as has happened after other programs viewers cared strongly about.  Several years ago, an Oprah program about postpartum depression explored the grim subject of mothers who injured or killed their chil-dren. It followed the structure of most Oprah shows, with different sto-ries, taped segments, testimony by some of those affected, an expert advisor—usually a doctor—and research data. The program provided much information and was different from the carnival setting and at-mosphere that often has surrounded other media presentations of the 96 OPRAH WINFREYsubject. Some talk shows and newscasts turn painful or tragic events into entertainment. Despite the important educational value of a pro-gram, some talk shows use sentimental techniques to arouse the audi-ence to great emotional heights, with excess sometimes taking over to the detriment of the somber warnings.  Emotion on Oprah’s show is not always focused on the sorrowful. Every show has an advertising component, and Oprah mentions the names of the gift-giving companies several times throughout the hour. The variety of subjects and guests obviously account in part for the popularity and durability. Still, some topics resurface frequently, and some are highly charged.  Oprah periodically has taken to the road with a “Live Your Best Life” tour. When she ﬁ  rst began her biennial project in 2001, a “personal crusade,” she said she plans to continue it in the future. The idea behind Live Your Best Life may be used in a different format or venue, and the plan may involve a complete change from the past. It is not known whether Oprah will take it out on the road again.  A typical tour took place in Philadelphia several years ago. Calling her “the Amazon queen of touchy-feely,” David Hiltbrand, a reporter for the  Philadelphia Inquirer,  describes the crowd as “screaming” upon her arrival in a limousine and “practically levitating” when she took the stage. Although the cost of tickets was high, most of the crowd seemed to think it worth the price. What they did get, writes Hiltbrand, was a “cross between a revival meeting and a self-help (one day) seminar.” Oprah often refers to her work as a mission, and, according to the sta-tistics of  Fortune  magazine, these self-afﬁ  rmation tours, which inspire the thousands of women ticketholders, bring in more than $1.5 million. The rules for the events were similar to the regulations of her television show; attendees didn’t know the subject matter or format in advance; they were not allowed to have a photo taken with the star; nor were they permitted to seize the microphone during the afternoon session, when members of the audience participated.  During a two-hour morning program, Oprah spoke about her child-hood on her grandmother’s farm in Mississippi, and she spoke about her trip to Africa during the Christmas season. Typically, the message of her talk was of the need to ﬁ  nd “the seed of grace” in the unhappy episodes of existence (as in her own bad experiences). “She recounted  MEDIA MOGUL 97plenty of these,” writes Hiltbrand, and they also involved “diets, hair and shoes.” The two-hour afternoon sharing session, with speakers se-lected by Oprah, focused on the same types of problems aired then and now on her television shows: marriage, sickness, and weight. Among the large numbers of mothers and daughters in the audience, many seemed to be enthralled, some describing themselves as ediﬁ  ed and in-spired by the star’s message that they “rise above circumstances and expectations to pursue their souls’ distinct destinies.”  Her shows, even with the variety of topics, often carry the same message. Although the matter of mental health makes many people skittish and often is a taboo topic in families and organizations, early on, Oprah devoted several programs to exploring and explaining bipo-lar disorder. She has had a number of programs about physical health, but fewer have focused on mental ailments. The guests on such shows often have had much experience with the illness, although some may not have it themselves. In 2004, actor Maurice Benard, from a long-running television show, appeared on the program to speak about his battle with the ailment. He returned in 2007 with his wife, who talked of the enormous amount of patience required of families who have to deal with the illness. They made clear that denial by the sick person is part of the problem.  At one time, Benard asked the writers of his show to portray his char-acter as a person with bipolar disorder, but their acquiescence resulted in his becoming ill after playing the role for several months. When he had an attack of anxiety, both he and his wife realized the role had put too much stress on him, and she had to ask the writers to alter the story line. Benard spoke of taking lithium for 15 years and stated that he cannot ever give it up or he’ll become ill again. Among the dos and don’ts of his life is his inability to ride on airplanes, an example of the restrictions on the lives of people who have the illness.  Other guests with the disease—some of them famous—treat their illness in completely different ways. Well-known Irish singer Sinead O’Connor appeared on one of the programs to talk of ways to deal with the sickness throughout life. Despite her worldwide success and now happy life, O’Connor had suffered intense bouts of depression, and her childhood had been ﬁ  lled with violence. Yet when others on the program asked for advice, her response was humorous but not 98 OPRAH WINFREYhelpful: “Move to Ireland,” because it is a country in which nobody bothers you.  An entirely different perspective on the sickness came from a fam-ily consisting of a man with bipolar disorder, his mother, and his wife of three years. The young couple are the parents of two children. The mother describes her son as having been normal until he reached his teens, at which time he was diagnosed with bipolar disorder. His was not an unusual pattern. Many people with the illness are unaffected previous to their teen years. Nothing has helped him, although he has been on many medicines. His wife fears his frequent rages and will not leave him alone with their children because of his violent, uncontrol-lable actions, such as throwing a large television set down a ﬂ  ight of stairs. His own self-image is desperate, yet nobody has been able to help him. Part of Oprah’s program featured another victim of the illness, the former child star, Patty Duke, talking on ﬁ  lm with the guest and his mother. Although the scene suggested that Duke, as well as the man and his mother, were alone, the audience knows millions of people are watching Duke, who speaks reassuringly and makes the practical suggestion about joining support groups, which at the very least would assure the family that he wasn’t alone in his suffering.  A guest on several programs was Kay Jamison, who is a psychologist on the mental health staff at Johns Hopkins University, is well known for her work on bipolar disorder, and has written several books about the illness. The signiﬁ  cance of her presence comes also from her life: she was diagnosed in her youth with bipolar disorder. One has to read her books to understand the magnitude of the problems, but because of the structure of the shows, Jamison’s role had to be limited to brief dis-cussions about the difﬁ  culties of the illness, and, like any professional, she urged continuing investigation of medicines, doctors, and group therapy. On one program, when Oprah suggested that too many people claim to have the disease, Jamison took a more centrist view, agree-ing that the diagnosis has been abused on occasion, but nevertheless there are many ill people who have not been diagnosed properly. For example, rage often is a component of bipolar illness, yet some people are able to hide their illness, as one of Oprah’s guests told of disguising her sickness for a number of years; even after being given her diagnosis, she refused to take medicine, until ﬁ  nally the rages could no longer be contained.  MEDIA MOGUL 99 Perhaps it is the nature of such programs that may leave viewers dissatisﬁ  ed. A one-hour show that includes numerous advertisements surely cannot begin to solve a lifelong, deep-seated illness. Thus, crit-ics may be justiﬁ  ed when they speak or write about the shallow nature of such a presentation. However, purveyors of a program that earns $6 million per week, $300 million per year, and $75,000 for a 30-second advertisement, seem not to worry about gripes from critics.  Much ink has been spent on Oprah’s style, which is always touted as refreshingly extemporaneous; that is, she doesn’t like prepared scripts for herself, preferring a looser, more folksy approach. This same tech-nique lost her a news announcer’s job in Baltimore, yet led to her pro-digious success as a talk show host in Chicago. Although numerous articles speak of the spontaneity of the star—that is, her impulsiveness, even toward self-confession—various reporters have called her shows scripted and managed action used to create a sense of authenticity. How-ever, others, including journalist Marcia Ann Gillespie, have defended her, saying that Oprah doesn’t always speak pleasantries. Neither does she provide meaningless talk. Still, even when she appears to be asking and commenting instinctively, it usually results from careful advance preparation. Another critic disputes Oprah’s authenticity, labeling her a con artist. Another voice in the conversation, well-known authority on male and female speech patterns Deborah Tannen, has spoken of Oprah’s natural ability with rapport talk, which is typical of women’s conversational patterns. Nevertheless, in actuality, talk shows have very little spontaneity, although audiences have been led to believe that most talk shows are a type of shoot-from-the-hip production.  Such behavior is attractive to the audience, and being seemingly unscripted allows Oprah to use her special type of humor that her au-dience delights in. On a show dealing with marital issues, Oprah in-jects humor that lightens the tension: you have great sex; you’re rolling around in bed, having a great time, and then the next morning ﬁ  nd he’s still an idiot. The humor is not always so blatant; sometimes it is only suggestive. Scripted? Perhaps, but probably not. Her often risqué humor leads comedians to engage in some of their own, with imitations. A memorable example occurred on  Saturday Night Live,  when the actor satirized both Oprah and the title of a play with a portrayal of her inter-viewing ﬁ  rst ladies in a session called “The Vagina Monologues.” Oprah seems to ﬁ  nd laughter in much that others would not. She engages the 100 OPRAH WINFREYaudience in the fun not only verbally but through body language—a raised eyebrow, exaggerated eye movements, and other facial expres-sions and gestures. And when she is really amused, she brings a deep, long, throaty laugh into the mix. Further, she has coined a humorous vocabulary for body parts, such as vajajay for female sex organs, that a friendly audience ﬁ  nds both funny and acceptable.  When the program is given over to fashion, in which the theme may be a new look for the season, Oprah’s humor punctuates everything: minidresses, denim, sweaters. Sometimes she will speak mockingly of her own body, and, as she looks at one of the sleek models, Oprah clowns; commenting on the wide separation between the breasts of the model, she asks with pseudo innocence, “how do they do that?” But she does love clothes, as is evidenced in the hundreds of glamorous photos taken of her over the years. On occasion, the entire hour on the show features high-end designers whose pricey clothing might not ﬁ  t into the range of most Oprah watchers, but even if the audience doesn’t buy the products, they enjoy the display. Oprah so enjoys shopping, not only for herself but for many other people, that her enthusiasm becomes infectious.  A serious subject that Oprah returns to periodically is bullying. One of her most memorable instances occurred when two young women au-thors were guests on the show early in the 2000s. Both women, who are friends, had written books about bullying among girls. Rachel Simmons wrote  Odd Girl Out: The Hidden Culture and Aggression in Girls  and Rosalind Wiseman wrote  Queen Bees and Wanabees: Helping Your Daugh-ter Survive Cliques, Gossip, Boyfriends and Other Realities of Adolescence,   which became the source for the movie  Mean Girls.   Therapists frequently connect brutality to women as an act of bul-lying, and physical attacks on women as an extreme form of bullying. Abduction of girls is a more alarming part of that pattern, a topic that Oprah has been determined to bring before the public. Among the large number of girls who have been violently seized, most have also been raped and murdered. Survival is rare, but even more rare is long-term survival as a captive of the rapist/captor. In attempting to keep the different types of violence an ongoing subject for her audience, Oprah wanted to interview Jaycee Dugard, a young woman who had been kidnapped 18 years before being found alive. During the years of  MEDIA MOGUL 101her captivity, she had been forced to live in a hut adjacent to the home of the captor and his wife and had given birth to two children. Although Oprah had made her ﬁ  rst ever attempt to tell a producer she wanted to interview the young woman, the family refused.  Oprah, always determined to explore the hidden and secret elements of bullying that becomes violent, chose to bring the subject of domestic violence to her show in a program called “The Rihannas of the World.” Oprah used as prime examples two famous stars of the music world, Rihanna Fenty and her boyfriend, Chris Brown. During an argument between the two, Brown had beaten Rihanna brutally until someone called the police. Yet Rihanna was reluctant to press charges against Brown, despite Oprah’s warning that a man who hits once will hit again. Chris Brown angrily defended himself on other talk shows, pointing to the help he had given Oprah in entertaining students in Africa. Be-cause of that, he thought Oprah should have been more helpful to him. Oprah’s response was to advise Brown to seek counseling, which he clearly needed.  A reporter following the Rihanna episode on the show tracked down the ex-wife of a famous gospel star, BeBe Winans, who had been on Oprah’s show a number of times. His wife was also the victim of do-mestic violence, and newspapers had reported the story in a way that could not be ignored. Yet, despite the ongoing court case, Oprah con-tinued to promote the gospel singer’s albums, according to his ex-wife, Debra. Finally, the message reached Oprah, who then barred the singer from her show. In talking emotionally to her audience about violence, Oprah offered a grim statistic: one in four women and girls or more suffer from a form of domestic violence. Nevertheless, Oprah’s work, Anna Quindlen’s best-selling novel  Black and Blue,  other books—both ﬁ  ction and nonﬁ  ction—essays, and seminars about violence do not ap-pear to have altered the numbers.  Not long after the airing of the show with Rihanna, Oprah had as her guest Connie Culp, a woman whose husband had shot her in the face with a shotgun several years earlier. The severe damage to her face led to the ﬁ  rst facial transplant in the United States, but 80 percent of Culp’s face was destroyed, as was its sensation and her senses of taste and smell, and today she is legally blind. The transplant saved her, although her photographs reveal a woman whose face can never be considered 102 OPRAH WINFREYnormal. Thomas, the husband, was sentenced to a seven-year prison term despite his attempt to commit suicide—which he botched.  When Culp told Oprah she had considered taking Thomas back after completion of his prison term, Oprah asked her for reasons, which seemed inexplicable to both Oprah and her audience. Today, Culp is still thinking about divorce.  During the period that Oprah’s show was focusing on the topic of abused women, a domestic violence shelter called New House was given a $10,000 grant by Oprah’s Angel Network in October 2009; the money is to be used for ongoing activities in the program, which provides safe shelter, education about violence, and services to abused women and children.  Not long after Oprah’s shows focused on the issue of violence, leading newspapers featured reviews of a book written by President Obama’s half-brother. Titled  Nairobi to Shenzhen,  it is semi-autobiographical and includes details about his father’s violent treatment of his mother, an American woman who married his Kenyan father after he was divorced from the future president’s mother.  Another horrifying incident of violence was the topic on Oprah’s show in November 2009; but that time it was violence by an animal, a chimpanzee, on a helpless woman who lost her eyes, entire face, nose, lips, and hands. The chimp was owned by the woman’s employer, who had brought him up as a pet. Although the woman survived, she is to-tally blind, has no mouth with which to eat, and only one thumb that surgeons had attached to a hand. Her dependency on others is total. Although the victim wears a hat and veil to hide her face from viewers who would be shocked and horriﬁ  ed by her appearance, she agreed to remove those coverings brieﬂ  y at Oprah’s request. Unlike programs on the show of human violence against other humans, the reaction of the audience had to be entirely different, leaving them to wonder how such an event could have taken place and what possible remedy there can be. Human attacks are generally unpredictable, but that is far less true of animals. Almost a year after the victim’s appearance on Oprah’s and other programs, a news report stated that she was denied further treat-ment for her injuries because of the “complexity” of her case.  Bullying as a form of violence isn’t conﬁ  ned to one gender. Suicide is not rare in both sexes who have been bullied. A case of bullying led  MEDIA MOGUL 103to the death of a young teenage girl on whom a devastating hoax was played. Through the Internet, the mother of a rival girl was able to create a ﬁ  ctional young man who purportedly was interested in the vul-nerable girl. After leading the child to believe she had an admirer, the woman began to destroy the girl’s conﬁ  dence and self-esteem to the point where the girl committed suicide by hanging herself. Although the perpetrator of the lie was arrested and brought to trial, nobody can predict the ultimate effect the publicity will have on other young people.  Some psychologists believe that sexual bullying of boys is the most harmful of all forms, because it is attached to the sense of masculin-ity. In May 2009, Oprah’s show focused on the deaths of two 11-year-old boys, one from the island of Saint Croix and one from Georgia. The mothers of the boys were guests on the program, in addition to a psychologist who talked about the warning signs behind suicide. He warned parents to be more conscious of a child’s depression as well as changes in ordinary daily habits. Parents often are unaware of events that lead to depression, and schools usually ignore such things, Oprah’s guest stated. Vulnerability in children is a topic Oprah has returned to again and again. Vulnerability is not new, but opportunities for harm have expanded in this electronic age, along with schools, blurbs, and gangs.  Still another Oprah program, as well as one on the  Ellen DeGeneres Show,  featured the bereaved mother of an 11-year-old boy who had committed suicide. The mother, Sirdeaner Walker, became an advo-cate for safety in schools, appearing before Congress to urge support of a bill requiring schools receiving federal grants to provide bullying prevention programs. Her story about her son’s despair is used to high-light the inadequacy of schools to handle the problem of bullying. Al-though Walker had apprised members of the staff at the school about the situation, the school took matters into its own hands without bring-ing in trained professionals and worsened the situation that led to the death of the child.  An Oregon author and founder of the faith-based group, The Protec-tors, started a letter-writing campaign to have people send to Oprah stories of bullying of their children. Calling it another type of civil rights movement, Paul Coughlin, founder of the group, believes that 104 OPRAH WINFREY“bullycide” is driven by despair and that other reactions to bullying are problems in public education, psychological issues, and even mental disorders leading to school shootings.  Bullying may lead to not only suicide but also murder. Further, it is not limited to girls or boys, straights or gays, or members of any one ethnic group. In the late 1990s, the United States and other countries were horriﬁ  ed to learn of the murder of a young university student in Laramie, Wyoming. T wenty-one-year-old Matthew Shepard was tar-geted by two young men who deliberately set out to rob a gay man. Not only did they rob Shepard, beat him, and smash his skull, they also tied him to a fence with a rope and left him to die. At the murder trial, a girlfriend of one of the murderers stated that they wanted to teach Shepard a lesson: not to come on to straight people.  Following Shepard’s death, several attempts were made to pass a federal bill against hate crimes, but all of them failed. Today there is hope that such a bill may pass in some form. There have been songs, ﬁ  lms, documentaries, and a play about the Shepard incident to bring attention to such crimes. Matthew’s mother, Judy, also wrote a book about her son’s murder. Grief counselors have become part of American psychology, and Oprah has also had them on her program.  During the period that Oprah was focusing on violence and bully-ing, the question of hate crimes arose once again with the shooting and deaths of large numbers of soldiers at Fort Hood, Texas, in the fall of 2009. The assailant was a military psychiatrist, an American Muslim who did not want to be deployed to a country populated by other Muslims. In the aftermath of the event, many discussions about hate crimes took place, when various people classiﬁ  ed the incident as such. Although it was not possible for Oprah to be present in the hos-pital where the wounded were recovering, she interviewed one of the wounded soldiers, a woman, who was said to have ﬁ  red at the assailant as he shot her three times. The assailant’s fate has not yet been deter-mined.  Violence as a social issue in the United States has long been an im-portant subject for Oprah. Almost two decades ago, in recognition of Martin Luther King, Jr.’s, birthday, Oprah announced that she would undertake the topics of racism and the judicial system and race rela-tions. The series covered many topics related to violence: from racism and interracial hatred (including Japanese Americans and Native  MEDIA MOGUL 105Americans) to fear and hate crimes. So much has been written about the effect of television on U.S. culture and daily existence that many of the reviews, articles, and books begin to sound the same. Television plays a central role as image maker and in terms of its impact on at-titudes, behavior, philosophy, politics, and spending patterns on people around the world. Most journalists agree that endorsements on televi-sion by high-proﬁ  le celebrities of anything from merchandise to child rearing have more commercial worth than anything other individuals might provide. On all Oprah programs, advertising, which occurs every few minutes, consumes huge amounts of time. During one show, the advertisements shown ran the gamut from large to small items and from personal to impersonal: cars, weight loss, animal food, bug spray, fast food, dishwashers, cheese, and syrup. Stars are part of the sales package of programs, issues, and merchandise. On the other hand, those pro-grams (and magazines) also gain substantially through identiﬁ  cation with various commodities. There are many women who not only look at merchandise on television but purchase articles Oprah recommends. On one program after Oprah called attention to a medicinal com-pound that supposedly enhances a woman’s sex drive, she brought on a ﬂ urry of phone calls to a small Maryland pharmacy making the custom mixture.  No matter the product, many affected companies have remarked on Oprah’s extraordinary inﬂ  uence on sales. Because of the conﬁ  dence she has instilled in audiences, they will follow her recommendations, says the president of a branch of a publishing company, so that Oprah “cre-ates markets all the time.” When a show provided a demonstration by Art Smith, author of  Back to the Table  and Oprah’s former chef, the presentation gave Oprah another opportunity to clown and do a bit of sashaying around as she proclaimed her love of potatoes. The subject of food and the ways it is served provides the advertising opportunity to push the products of various chains. But as Oprah gives prices, she soft-ens the fact that she is advertising, humorously noting that she wants the discount being offered.  There is, however, a small group that questions the honesty of her recommendations. Finding almost everything Oprah does to be manip-ulative, commercial, and self-serving, one disgruntled former employee of Harpo published a screed about the star on the Internet. Claiming that Oprah has business ties or a quid pro quo arrangement with many 106 OPRAH WINFREYcorporations, networks, and publishing houses, the writer calls her a world-class phony who is able to deliver audiences because her name sells everything, and companies are not interested in how she does that. (Nobody would contest the ﬁ  rst claim, but the second one is unknow-able.) The author, Elizabeth Coady, who had been a senior associate producer for  The Oprah Winfrey Show,  wrote the piece as a form of protest against the conﬁ  dentiality contract that restricts people for life for writing or talking about Oprah. Coady claims she wants to write a book about Oprah’s operations, but the courts have upheld the agree-ments.  Although the millions of admirers far outnumber the critics, there are other dissenting voices besides Coady’s. A book called  Everybody Loves Oprah  quotes and names some hostile journalists. One such jour-nalist is P . J. Bednarski of the  Chicago Sun-Times,  who wrote 20 years ago that Oprah was amoral about sexual matters and uninvolved with important moral and social issues. In the two decades that have passed since Bednarski criticized Oprah, many of her activities, as well as the praise she has earned for them, contradict Bednarski’s statement. The ﬁ  rst thing most people say about the star is how much good she does. Other negative remarks by Bill Zehmer of the now-defunct  Spy  maga-zine, voiced dislike of her speech, her use of famous names, and her ﬂ  ippancy, and he ﬁ  nds the people who work with her sycophantic. He even derides her appearance, as did many journalists in earlier years when they discovered her Achilles heel—her weight. Because Oprah herself often voices her unhappiness when she gains weight, it became an important issue. However, Oprah’s appearance over the years—her hairdos, makeup, jewelry, and clothing—reveal her as savvy about her looks. And now that she has reached her mid-50s, she seems reconciled to not being svelte.  The frequency of exposure on television is also a major factor in selling a product or, as Oprah’s boyfriend Stedman Graham labels everything, a brand: books, movies, political positions, and even the politicians who espouse the positions. This fact explains the constant polling by companies employed to track the effect of products that can-not be measured through sales ﬁ  gures. It is no surprise that the beneﬁ  ts behind sales or image go in two directions—to the talk show and to the purveyor of a brand or product.  MEDIA MOGUL 107 Almost every study of popular culture ﬁ  nds that television blurs the diversity of U.S. life and culture. No matter the topic or guests, the underlying structure and values are those of middle-class America. An Indian writer, Shraddha Jahagirdar-Saxena, however, points to Oprah’s ability to reach out to everyone—that is, “the common man”—with issues that affect many, such as weight, abuse, and discrimination. The audience must be comfortable. Therefore, solutions to problems must conform to those particular values, which writer Barbara Ehrenreich describes as the middle-class virtues of responsibility, reason, and self-control. Ehrenreich, an essayist, professor, proliﬁ  c nonﬁ  ction writer, and social commentator, is interested primarily in the lives and status of women. Her most attention-getting book is  Nickel and Dimed: On (Not) Getting by in America,   but she has also written analytically about the entertainment business, describing Oprah’s shows as a type of lesson delivered in the guise of entertainment.  Although not all talk shows nor their audiences are the same, Oprah’s live audience generally is 80 percent white, middle class, and female, and they want to hear about the problems of other women, even though the guests may very well conform to a different social, cultural, or economic group than the viewers. Researchers inform us that viewers ﬁ  nd it satisfying to hear people speak of their problems, regardless of whether they identify with the problem. There also is a type of catharsis in the very expression of what the audience regards as forbidden or sinful. Ratings rise when the topics are sex, drugs, and in-cest. Such was the case with the story actress Mackenzie Phillips told on Oprah’s show in September 2009, when she talked about her book and the “consensual relationship” she had with her father. The following February, on a different show, Phillips retracted the word  consensual,   saying she had learned that incest is never consensual with a child. In a sense, the appeal of taboo subjects is similar to that of certain types of mystery and crime novels for large numbers of readers. The most horriﬁ  c plot and episodes are acceptable, even pleasing, to the least bloodthirsty individuals, because, as psychologists inform us, these in-dividuals can have the experience without participation or any of the danger or consequences. Soap operas have had similar appeal, but those facets of popular culture, somewhat like the “true story” of women’s magazines, have disappeared or taken a different tack. 108 OPRAH WINFREY The harshest media critics ﬁ  nd two opposing characteristics in day-time television: one is as ampliﬁ  er and manipulator of the conven-tional, the ordinary, and the bland, which projects accepted stereotypes rather than exploring the wide differences in human behavior. Its oppo-site is a type of reductive tabloidization that sensationalizes, simpliﬁ  es, and exploits individual narratives with a style that ﬂ  attens everything into sound bites. Complex issues are watered down to suggest instant solutions and results. In the brevity of television time, drug or sexual abuse, poverty, violence, and other major social problems are shaped into manageable stories, the equivalent of three-act plays with intro-duction, development, and resolution. The most extreme conduct is turned into theater, and reality is replaced by that theater. In the course of an hour minus the time devoted to commercials, problems are pre-sented, dramatized, discussed, and solutions appealing to audiences are found.  Daytime television is aimed at a mass audience, as are most movies, and it employs many of the same techniques that are based on altera-tions of time. Inasmuch as the events narrated on the program took place previously, unlike real-life situations, they can be speeded up or slowed down; scenes are instantaneously cut from one to another; ex-periences and episodes, which in actuality may be unrelated, are col-lected and made to seem part of a story; most techniques of ﬁ  lmmaking are brought to bear through use of multiple cameras, zoom lenses, fore-grounding or distancing of images, lighting and use of scenery, sound effects, and music. Background scenes from other sources clearly have been ﬁ  lmed in advance. Take the example on Oprah’s programs ad-dressing the issue of cross-dressing and gender change: a guest’s lifetime struggle; relationships with parents and siblings, wife, children, and the outside world; decisions; and results are all explored within the limi-tations of a television hour. It is a pattern that is used over and over. Because of varying types of viewers, daytime and evening television have some important differences. Although both use celebrities and/or experts, the numbers are not the same; daytime shows by and large, except for their hosts, are usually not dependent on such outside stars or pundits.  Although  The Oprah Winfrey Show  brings in outside stars, often from the entertainment world, daytime programming seems to prefer every- MEDIA MOGUL 109day, average guests, whereas evening programs seek professionals. Most nighttime talk shows, with the exception of those hosted by comedi-ans, focus on news or politics. Even though producers of both day and evening programs seek spirited participants who are not opposed to verbal conﬂ  ict, the types of program participants are not alike. Daytime shows privilege ordinary people over experts, because their stories and exchanges are more personal and emotional, which is what their audi-ences expect and tune in for.  Hosts are seldom associated with a program’s initiation, although the producer must always put the host in the forefront. The producer, who is usually a woman, must also ﬁ  nd a new take on stories to make them interesting. In fact, as Ehrenreich claims, “the plot is always the same.” Thus, to capture the attention of the audience, producers constantly seek guests who are picked not only because of their stories but also for their personalities and looks; the producer seeks and deliberately fosters impassioned revelations from guests. Although the seeming sim-plicity of the presentation is actually artiﬁ  ce, as writer Jean Shattuc points out, very few viewers realize that the participant—that is, the nonexpert guest—has had what amounts to brief lessons in acting be-fore the show; the producer and aides have coached the guests in what might be called show-and-tell methods. Like the director of a movie, the producer seeks to bring out the strongest kind of emotional presen-tation but also wants to keep it at a controlled pitch. Opposite the cool of professionals and experts, the nonprofessional guest with a narrative to tell is encouraged to reveal every feeling, orally and physically, so that both the studio audience and the home viewer are caught up in the story. To avoid the occasional mistake, the producer thoroughly checks the backgrounds of guests in advance, from letters attesting to the truths of their stories to supporting statements, tapes, and pictures, and perhaps information from physicians. The producer must approve and even improve the nonprofessional participants’ appearance, cloth-ing, hair, and makeup prior to the program so that they are appealing to the audience.  Many people disagree about the signiﬁ  cance of talk shows. The de-voted followers who faithfully watch the programs claim that the shows add meaning and understanding to their lives. Almost without excep-tion, viewers speak affectionately and admiringly of Oprah. Some, who 110 OPRAH WINFREYfollow every story about her, talk as if a close relationship exists between them and the star. Former Harpo producer Coady describes reactions of audiences at shows: they cry when Oprah enters her television studio, gush when she speaks to them directly, and long to be touched. Journal-ists write of occasions when Oprah has left the stage to hug a member of the audience who has revealed a traumatic experience. All daytime hosts—unlike those on evening and weekend programs—present an aura of warmth, intimacy, and friendliness. Everyone is on a ﬁ  rst-name basis, and most hosts, including Oprah, use personal pronouns as often as possible to create an informal atmosphere. Where some hosts hold a microphone while walking around, Oprah will sometimes sit in the audience and, on occasion speak with a few people during the break. This may appear to be a spontaneous act, but the producers have se-lected those people before the show. The conversation may then serve as friendly transitions between the segments of the show that have been broken into frequently by advertisements. In a one-hour program, the actual time given to the subject may be less than that devoted to the advertisers.  Some writers—popular culture scholars for the most part—ﬁ  nd talk shows shameful, not necessarily because of the subject matter but because they believe the guests are exploited. Journalist Barbara Ehrenreich, describing the participants, sees them as so bereft of love, respect, and hope that they are willing, even eager, to reveal the most intimate aspects of their lives. Their homes, she claims, are often “trailer parks and tenements.” Many live in poverty; they may be on welfare or unable to pay their bills, or they may work two jobs to survive. No mat-ter their situation, they are turned into exhibits for the purpose of en-tertainment. The guests often allow themselves to be humiliated while the audience goes “slumming,” says another writer. Some journalists have disparaged the shows; Janet Maslin called them “muck mara-thons,” whereas Anna Quindlen described such programs as an airing of dirty laundry and the revelations as “the dark night of split levels.”  Television, after all, is a business, and the entire venture is based on a syndicate’s vision of viewers as a commodity that must be sold to adver-tisers who have a product to market. However, it falls to the producers to keep a show looking fresh and different from its competition. Gen-erally with only a week to prepare each show, the producer is much  MEDIA MOGUL 111like a newsperson working in a noisy ofﬁ  ce ﬁ  lled with every imagin-able type of research ﬁ  le and publication. The subject matter, though, is social problems, not news, with emphasis on personal or domestic content. Although frequently shows move beyond the experiences or considerations of the typical viewer, the attraction is many sided, with a fascination similar to that of human interest stories generally found in the C or D sections of newspapers, which are geared toward women (although a recent newspaper poll has found those sections popular with men as well). Yet, almost always underlying the content of the talk shows are views that are conservative, conformist, and moralistic. All of this is true of  The Oprah Winfrey Show.   The audience at an Oprah show only appears to be selected at ran-dom. Tickets are difﬁ  cult to obtain and must be sent for far in advance, perhaps months before the program. Although millions of people watch the show, only 325 get in for each taping, according to Harpo Produc-tions. Tickets are not available at the door. Because certain colors do not photograph well on television, the studio audience is asked to avoid wearing beige or white and is expected to play an active role in the show, having usually been selected by a coordinator who wants the group to seem diverse. Writing for the south Florida  Sun Sentinel,  Kathryn Whitbourne recounted the details of her visit to the show. Security, on entry at the Harpo complex, included searches of handbags and removal of cameras, cell phones, and beepers, even taking away the writer’s copy of  O  magazine.  While guests wait until their names are called for admission to the studio, they are free to visit a gift shop that surprisingly (at least dur-ing Whitbourne’s visit) sells almost no Oprah memorabilia. When gift giving is a major part of the show, the items are impressive and worthy of mention in the next day’s newspapers. The topic of the never-to-be-forgotten gift of cars several years ago has become part of televi-sion lore. Those particular gifts received much attention in the press once the public learned the gift recipients had to pay taxes for the cars, which had not been purchased by Oprah but were an advertising gim-mick of one car dealer (and the occasion for snide remarks about the fact that Oprah and company were not the actual givers). One excited guest sold her Pontiac in order to open a business, Big Girl Cosmetics, which was called a “beauty empire” ﬁ  ve years later. Cars are but one of 112 OPRAH WINFREYthe items audiences have been gifted with. Over the years, Oprah has given away UGG boots to her staff as presents and also made them a must-have item for many others; Apple iPods; books galore; and shop-ping carts ﬁ  lled with products from sponsors. One report on such gifts mentioned the delivery of uniforms from Chicago for staff to wear when delivering “special gifts” to people in the audience. (The uniforms are also said to have “special signiﬁ  cance” to fans of the show.)  Gifts vary in cost and value, but one of Oprah’s “favorite things” to give away was a refrigerator that had a built-in television set and radio. That gift provoked great excitement—more than was visible when she had distributed debit cards sponsored by Bank of America (when it was more afﬂ  uent) to a surprised studio audience who learned that the money had to be given away to individuals in need or to charities. Oprah wanted the audience to experience the feeling she has—that gift giving is a source of happiness. However, she gave an additional gift of DVD recorders—a keeper—to the more than 300 people in the audience. Rumor has it that when Oprah moves to her own network, the “favorite things” part of her shows will be abandoned.  Surprisingly, considering Oprah’s reputation for generosity, there were no giveaways for the general audience at the show attended by Whitbourne. That appears to be typical, unless giveaways are central to a particular show; only a box of tissues may be found under the seat, for what Whitbourne refers to as “those touching moments.” Before the program, some members of the audience, in addition to the guests, also have had coaching, and during the show, the camera will focus on them. The lighting is directed toward those particular people, though the entire audience is expected to get involved, if only to applaud, ask questions, or show emotion. A warm-up precedes the program, and then the host appears.  Viewers who have watched talk shows are probably aware of the structure followed by all of them, but writer Jean Shattuc has formally broken that down into seven parts describing a model, even to the number of minutes generally spent on each segment.  The ﬁ  rst section is the longest, and the last section is the shortest. Part one, introduction of the topic and guests by the host, consumes between 13 and 17 minutes, during which the host plays the perfect lis-tener. The problem or challenge is explored in part two, in 6 to 9 min- MEDIA MOGUL 113utes, by various people—the host and members of the audience, who ask questions and may contribute information about similar experiences. Part three is even shorter, 4 to 6 minutes, time partially expended by divergent points of view; at that point, if an expert is brought in, that person adds another tier of information to the matter. The audience is then given 3 to 6 minutes in segment four to question the expert. Other guests may be involved, or perhaps the host will abandon the role of listener and become a participant who tells her or his story. Once the issue has been developed and explored, the time has come to ﬁ  nd resolutions, and 2 to 5 minutes are given over in part ﬁ  ve to various possibilities; by then, host and expert are on the same side, although the audience may not agree. Another 2 to 5 minutes, in part six, are spent in exploring possible answers and validation. The ﬁ  nal segment, part seven, has almost no time to wrap things up, between 30 seconds and 2 minutes. The concluding statement, by expert, guest, or audi-ence participant, is invariably hopeful and positive.  Oprah’s show is usually taped several weeks in advance of its airing, providing the producers the opportunity to edit it and exercise some control over what is shown. The exceptions to the advance taping are those that cover breaking news and depend on immediacy for their impact. Even though the audience is aware of most of the preparation and earlier planning, few people resent it. Critics may question Oprah’s sincerity and view her as a skilled actress, but viewers see her as natural; they approve, laugh, and applaud her outspokenness; so implicit is their trust in Oprah, they do not seem to know or care that everything on the program is managed and not spontaneous.  Many writers—journalists and scholars alike—have emphasized the fact that Oprah is a highly visible black entertainer, but her audiences are predominantly white. Although on her program she frequently deals with racial matters and furthers activities of blacks in art and educa-tion and now politics, her race is apparently unimportant to her white viewers, central to her black viewers, and analysts regard her as “a com-forting non-threatening bridge between black and white cultures.” Af-rican Americans, until recently, have not been very visible, although the change of administration with a mixed-race president has altered the dynamic. Some of these perceptions result from Oprah’s earlier re-moteness from both political activism and the civil rights movement. 114 OPRAH WINFREYHowever, it has also been pointed out that the commercial aspect of her show—that is, the advertising—requires maintenance of a neutral stance on race. And, although her active role in the campaign, nomi-nation, and election of Barack Obama was a meaningful departure from her previous position, she did not follow the suggestions of some of her supporters to accept a job with the new administration.  In her series on racism, however, Oprah did not remain neutral. Al-though a variety of opinions were expressed, all the speakers agreed that racism is undesirable. Oprah’s perspective agreed that racism is undesir-able, and her view on racism is described as “therapeutic,” because she has said that “the lack of self esteem” brings about “all the problems in the world.” Numerous scholars fault that approach, which they name as “identity politics.” Oprah insists that racists are ignorant and afraid. They must change their attitudes, and, unless they do, generation after generation will perpetuate the same biases. Language itself, even un-knowingly, can be racist, and Oprah herself confesses to having used racist expressions. Because anger solves nothing, she and the 1992 se-ries facilitators said, and continue to say, it must be supplanted by for-giveness. People must change their attitudes, beginning in their hearts. Some scholars—among them Janice Peck—have criticized these views, however, as too subjective and too utopian for very complex issues.  One black member of Oprah’s audience in 1992 challenged the views expressed, telling her: “Listen Oprah, when you leave your show, you go to a lavish home. Lots of us don’t go home to lavish things. We go home to empty refrigerators, you know, crying kids, no diapers, no jobs. Everybody ain’t got it like everybody got it.” Oprah has been faulted for failing to pursue the matter of inequality in politics and economics. Yet little has actually changed economically for the underclass of blacks in the United States in the early part of the 21st century, and, although more and more people of color have moved up economically, television programs do not necessarily reﬂ  ect the changes that have taken place in the culture.  According to the lengthy article by Janice Peck in  Cultural Critique,  when views of this sort were expressed on the show, the star would go to another speaker or a commercial. 2  Thus, according to some analysts, the emphasis was on “individual transformation, which both Oprah and her predominantly white, female constituency” favor over societal  MEDIA MOGUL 115change. Similar to the framing of the race series, a number of Oprah Winfrey program subjects are topical matters that have been discussed in other media. Individual transformation is a staple, a building block in Oprah’s philosophy, something she returns to again and again on the air and in person.  There is no reason to believe her core message will change in the future, even after her move from network daytime television to cable. After leaks and ongoing speculation among television speakers and watchers, Oprah tearfully announced she was going to bring her net-work talk show to an end early in 2011. At that point, she had been on the show for 25 years, and she “[felt] in her bones” it was time to change course and do other things. There was almost a Wordsworthian melancholy in her statement—no grieving for the past but rather gain-ing strength from it.  Whereas the majority of her faithful audience seemed devastated by the upcoming change, critics for the most part agreed with her decision, and many believed the change would be refreshing and exciting. They pointed to Oprah’s savvy and almost unerring choices in her work of the last 25 years.  The Harpo organization, her spokespeople said, would remain in Chicago, the home city, but many questioned what would happen once the show came to an end. The new show is not be produced in Chicago. The change brings a loss for Chicago, as well as a number of television stations, no matter what the speculation is about the future. Colum-nists talk of the ﬁ  nancial loss that will be sustained by networks—not only to afﬁ  liates carrying the show but also to programs that followed it. Chicago writer Mark Brown for the  Chicago Sun-Times  mentioned rumors that Jerry Roper, president and CEO of the Chicagoland Cham-ber of Commerce, said that Oprah has been more than “a local icon.” Another called her “an economic engine” who might move her orga-nization to Los Angeles.  A number of names have surfaced as possible replacements for Oprah’s show—more and more of them as the date draws closer for Oprah’s departure. However, another talk show and magazine entre-preneur, Martha Stewart, has apparently been inﬂ  uenced by Oprah’s decision to change to cable. Shortly after Oprah made her announce-ment, Stewart also made hers. T wo well-known people whose positions 116 OPRAH WINFREYon almost everything are at the opposite end of the spectrum from Oprah have been mentioned as possible replacements for Oprah. Both are or have been employed by the Fox Network: Glen Beck and Sarah Palin. When the question was raised with Palin shortly after she joined Fox, she announced that she wanted to keep her options open. Palin has numerous admirers, but she has not had a television show; Beck not only has had his own show, but also was said to bring in more viewers of other talk shows among longtime Fox performers. In a Gallup Poll, ac-cording to the  Salt Lake Tribune,  Beck’s U.S. admirers outnumber those of the Pope. The same paper and others consider him “a brilliant enter-tainer” but also a right-winger without a conscience who provides on a daily basis a “stew of venom and fabrication.” Though it now appears unlikely, if Beck does replace  The Oprah Winfrey Show,  he would pro-vide the television critics and audience with much material to discuss.  As for Oprah, says her closest friend, Gayle King, there should not be, nor will there be, a “pity party.” After all, Oprah is leaving the pro-gram by choice and nothing else. A poll taken by the  Chicago Sun-Times   found, after Oprah’s announcement of future change, that she remains America’s favorite TV personality.  NOTES     1 . Alex Kucznski, “Menopause Forever,”  New York Times, 22 June 2002.   2 . Janice Peck, “Talk about Racism: Framing a Popular Discourse of Race on  Oprah Winfrey, ”  Cultural Critique  (Spring 1994).    