 Chapter 5  SCHOOLS  Although Oprah had given money to schools over time, it was in 2002 that her dream of building schools in South Africa began to take physi-cal form. She had promised “Madiba”—the clan name given to former South African president Nelson Mandela and the ﬁ  rst black man to achieve that ofﬁ  ce—that she would build a school there. During an early trip to Soweto (an acronym for South West Township), Oprah was accompanied by a reporter for a brief visit to the home of some prospective students she had met previously; her visit was to acquaint herself with some sense of their lives. The two girls—cousins who would be among the chosen students—lived with ﬁ  ve other people in a two-room shack. As is typical in many communities, word of Oprah’s visit spread quickly, and outside the house women began “ululating the . . . freedom line of the 1980’s,” but it soon became “Viva, Oprah Winfrey.”  In 2003, ground was broken in the town of Henley-on-Klip for the Oprah Winfrey Leadership Academy for Girls located south of Johan-nesburg, South Africa. Oprah told a reporter she hoped the school would be “a reﬂ  ection” of her. It took until 2007 to get the school up and running. Comprising 52 acres on a 28-building campus of dormitories, 144 OPRAH WINFREYan audiovisual center, gym, and tennis courts, it is, as one new student called it, a “fairy tale come true.” The fairy tale is the result of Oprah’s earlier promise to Mandela.  Oprah, as well as numerous other Americans who had given dona-tions to the new school, made the 10,000-mile trip to South Africa for the opening event. She had spent between $40 million and $50 mil-lion to build the academy, 1  but she declared that the money was meaningless to her in light of her dream that the girls would be the future leaders of the country. As Oprah cut the ribbon, the ﬂ  ags of South Africa and the United States were raised simultaneously, bring-ing tears to her eyes. From the 3,500 applications for admission, 152 applicants had been selected. They would be the ﬁ  rst graduating class. At a later date, the number of students would be expanded to 450. When questioned about the racial backgrounds of the girls and how they were chosen, Oprah stated that all the girls had been interviewed, and among the interviewees were black, white, Asian, Hindu, Muslim, and Christian girls. Although she did not tell the reporter who among them had been chosen, she emphasized that the school was open to any qualiﬁ  ed girl who had good grades, showed leadership skills, and came from an underprivileged home. Some pictures of a few girls were made public.    All the girls selected personally by Oprah came from poverty but were A students. One example given of the type of families the girls come from is of a mother who is also a grandmother; she supports her own family as well as several orphans from her income of $50 per week from a fruit and vegetable stand and monthly food baskets from charity. The maximum family income for any of the chosen girls must be under $700 per month, a great contrast to that of Oprah—also a child of pov-erty, who is now said to be the richest African American of the century. The chosen girls are given everything needed without any payment. Although they have known nothing but poverty, at the academy, they are exposed to all the classes—and more—that elite schools provide for their students. Drawn from various parts of South Africa, the students are housed in a $40 million school, each girl living in a two-bedroom suite. Dormitories have wood-burning ﬁ  replaces in the lounges; there is a health center, a science center, computer labs, and a library. One reporter compared the facility to a luxury hotel. Among the students  SCHOOLS 145are many who have lived their lives without running water and had to carry buckets of water on their heads for all necessities.  Very much aware of the conditions of the state-funded schools in South Africa that were established during the years of apartheid, Oprah has sought to overcome, for at least some girls, the crowded, poorly equipped, and even dangerous schools. The children have had to strug-gle against gangs, the temptation of drugs, and the sexual environment that leads to teenage pregnancy. Their South African teachers and ad-ministrators were said to be chosen from among the most outstanding in the country, with the hope that within a few years of studying at the academy, the girls could “live the dream . . . of Harvard and winning a Nobel Peace Prize.”  Oprah is one of the most generous philanthropists on the globe, and the recipients of that generosity are the children of the world. Oprah has said, several times, she never had children, and now she can bring up the children of others. U.S. talk show host Oprah Winfrey, center front, applauds with schoolgirls in Johannesburg, on August 20, 2006, during her visit to South Africa to interview prospective pupils for the Oprah Winfrey Leadership Academy for Girls. (AP Photo/Benny Gool)146 OPRAH WINFREY The greatest problem Oprah expected for the students was in the African perception and treatment of women in a culture that does not value them, and Oprah ﬁ  nds it vital that those girls, as well as other fe-males, become conscious of “their own power and possibility.” 2  Winfrey frequently says “she wants to nurture kids.” Everything in the girls’ lives seems to concern her. She even took an HIV test in Capetown, South Africa, to encourage her students and their families to do the same, because of the pandemic that is sweeping Africa; almost 1,000 people die each day from the disease, and a larger number become infected. A bleak future faces the young, with an estimate that only about half of them will survive to the age of 60 unless the disease can be eliminated.  Oprah wants the girls to have the happy childhood she never had, with education as the way forward. Perhaps her example will make a difference—with CNN and  Time ’s description of her as “the world’s most powerful woman” and  The American Spectator ’s view that she is the most inﬂ  uential woman in the world. President Obama has a more regional—and perhaps more realistic—perspective of the possibilities; he acknowledges her power and inﬂ  uence within the United States.  Donors for the academy have come from many different areas. One unexpected name is that of Dallas billionaire Harold Simmons, who in 2006 gave $1 million to the academy as part of a $5 million pledge. A few years earlier, Simmons had contributed $3 million to the commit-tee the American Issues Project for ads linking the prospective presi-dent, Barack Obama, to former activists in the Weather Underground, a group associated with illegal activities decades earlier. Apparently, Oprah’s support of candidate Obama did not interfere with Simmons’s gift to her academy.  Oprah established three charities with gifts estimated to surpass $200 million in 2007, and this amount undoubtedly grows larger each year. The three charities are run separately and differently, but her per-sonal foundation, the Oprah Winfrey Foundation, helps support mul-tiple groups in education, medicine, and the arts and has the largest amount of money dedicated to her charities.  Some of the groups are entirely dependent on the foundation for support. However, Oprah’s major philanthropic interest is said to be Africa, where Oprah and her Angel Network have contributed a large amount of money to 40 or more organizations, many of them in Africa,  SCHOOLS 147though not nearly the amount given through her personal foundation. Much of the money for the network has been raised through contribu-tions from people who want to help worthwhile causes, such as the catastrophic Hurricane Katrina in the United States and the 2004 tsu-nami in the Indian Ocean. Soon after Oprah’s decision, however, to move to her own television network, she announced that the Angel Network would be disbanded, even though the statistics about its work are outstanding: 150,000 donors brought in more than $60 million. T wo hundred grants were given to the United States and more than 30 abroad. The money was used to build 55 schools in 12 countries, as well as to provide school uniforms and supplies.  Dave Hoekstra, a writer for the  Chicago Sun-Times,  called Oprah “America’s guardian angel,” as he tells the story of a donation she made to the Angel Museum in Beloit, Wisconsin. 3  When Oprah had Cher on her program several years ago, the conversation turned to angels, at which point Oprah wondered whether there were any black angels, because she had never seen any. The overwhelming answer came from many places in the world: 700 black angels, a varied group of pieces ranging from an expensive Armani to folk art, which Oprah donated to the museum. All of these have become part of The Oprah Collection in which the only work without wings is a ﬁ  gure of Rosa Parks, whom Oprah calls “her personal angel.”  The Oprah Winfrey Operating Foundation is the organization that is responsible for her Leadership Academy in Gauteng, South Africa. To people who question why Oprah built her academy in South Africa, her response is that she felt it was insufﬁ  cient to always give money to charities. A number of bloggers were critical of her choices, complain-ing that Oprah was seeking glory for herself with her efforts in Africa. However, Oprah’s response to such remarks was that she wanted some-thing more tangible than writing “check after check.” The impressive, even lavish, buildings of the academy also led to criticism that such ed-iﬁ  ces did not belong in an impoverished country. But Oprah defended her decisions, reminding magazine writers who interviewed her about the school that the girls in the new academy had “never been treated with kindness,” had never been “surrounded by beauty,” never were “told they are pretty.” She wants them to have and to hear what she did not when she was a child. 148 OPRAH WINFREY Furthermore, domestically, Oprah continues to give funds to some of her U.S. favorites: Mississippi State University, Morehouse College, and a well-known ﬁ  nishing school in Farmington, Connecticut, called Miss Porter’s, to which she sent her nieces, although the school is best known for its rich, ultra-white student body and exclusivity.  Among former students at Miss Porter’s school were Dorothy Bush, mother of George H. W . Bush; Jacqueline Kennedy; actress Dina Mer rill; and socialite Barbara Hutton. It has been written that Oprah’s leader-ship academy was modeled after Miss Porter’s school. Although the girls come from a world of poverty, at the academy they are exposed to all the classes and amenities that elite schools provide for their stu-dents. The many donors to Oprah’s academy support the idea that Af-rica needs educated young people to become the leaders of the future.  When, three years after the opening of the academy at Henley-on-Klip, the girls put on a weeklong arts festival, it was attended by their benefactor as well as friends and contributors to their studies; featured were dance, acting, art, design, photography, cooking, and storytelling. An emotional Oprah talked of the experiences the children had before they came to the school, and the girls themselves told stories of their lives of deprivation. Yet within three years of starting at the academy, they could fulﬁ  ll the dream of education and a meaningful future.  The $40 million school now houses about 300 girls from various parts of South Africa. Even though the school has outstanding facili-ties and provides the girls with every opportunity to learn about music and the arts, Oprah has tried to enlarge their experiences in a world unfamiliar to them. Because they were studying acting at the academy, Oprah wanted them to attend an actual theater. No girl at the school had ever been to see a play before Oprah took them to see  The Lion King,  written by an American but set in Africa and later made into a Hollywood movie.  Like Oprah, the entertainer Madonna also has spent much time in Africa, but in the East African country of Malawi. It is located east of Zambia and became an independent country in 1964. There are sig-niﬁ  cant differences, though, between the activities of the two women. Although Oprah refers to the girls at her academy as her daughters, Ma-donna clearly wanted a more personal relationship with the children, and she made news with her adoption of a baby boy from Malawi.  SCHOOLS 149 The child was living in an orphanage, even though his father is alive. At ﬁ  rst the father gave permission for the adoption, but Madonna en-countered difﬁ  culties immediately, not understanding laws about adop-tion in Malawi and not heeding warnings by a social worker about the problems that would ensue. Some people, including Madonna, have proceeded with their plans for Malawi and its inhabitants. Human rights groups in that country went to court to prevent the adoption; and in the United States, as well as Britain, adoption agencies sug-gested that people focus on the needs of thousands of children in their own countries. Madonna, in defending her actions, talked of the dire straits many children face in Africa because of disease, poverty, and lack of care and hygiene. Madonna ﬁ  nally succeeded in her adoption of the boy, David Banda, as well as that of another child, a girl, a few years later.  Madonna’s squabbles with people in Malawi, however, continued when she announced she wanted to build a school for girls in that country. The quarrel was over a land dispute near the capital city of Lilongwe. Although Madonna paid the villagers $115,000 for the prop-erty, the 200 villagers living on the land refused to move. The govern-ment took Madonna’s side in the argument, stating that the land did not belong to the villagers, who had been given the right to live there only on a temporary basis. As of 2010, the issue had not been resolved. Reportedly, the school will cost $15 million to build. And still another entertainer, Ricki Lake was also involved in opening a new school for AIDS orphans founded by her friend, Malawian and former nanny Marieda Silva, in 2008 in that country.  Yet another celebrity built more schools in another African country. In West Kenya, the tennis star, Serena Williams, opened two secondary schools, each of which will hold 250 to 300 students ranging in ages from 15 to 18. Although she has had no teaching experience, Williams has been teaching in the second school, an activity that differentiates her even more from Oprah and Madonna, and her schools have been built with help from the Build Africa Organization.  Philanthropic efforts such as school building by stars such as Oprah and Madonna cost enormous amounts of money initially, and sustain-ing them ﬁ  nancially is an ongoing expense. Madonna’s initial plan was to spend $15 million, even before ground was broken. Oprah’s outlay 150 OPRAH WINFREYwas $40 million before her academy opened in 2007. Charitable gifts and events will always be required to keep such schools operational, inasmuch as there can never be tuition fees to sustain them. Typical of that money-raising activity was an auction of 150 pieces of Oprah’s clothing in early 2010. With a staff member of her magazine, Adam Glassman, Oprah selected 150 items from her wardrobe to sell on the online eBay. The clothing may be called “castoffs,” but many of the items were intended to be gifts Oprah bought or was given. The money raised will go to her academy. If a less famous person than Oprah were selling clothing on eBay, it would not be news covered by journalists, but the elegance of the clothing, as columnist Amanda Pendolino wrote, was the typical “classy and gorgeous” Oprah style: a Carolina Herrera dress of purple; two evening bags—one a Bottega Veneta and one a quilted Chanel; a pair of red suede open-toe heels by Prada; satin pumps by Jimmy Choo; a pair of pointed-toe Prada boots; and on and on. Even the journalists longed to own something from the collection.  Oprah has been inspired by many people, but one of her favorite memories is of a Christmas when her mother warned the children to expect nothing, yet three nuns arrived with food for the family and toys for the children, including a doll for Oprah. Such memories undoubt-edly have inﬂ  uenced her decisions in her philanthropic activities.  Oprah’s life is so busy, and not everything is reported, even though it often seems that the press follows her every move. When Americans criticize Oprah for her largess to African schools, it may be that the press is less aware or less interested in her charitable work at home. Local rather than national papers are usually the source of informa-tion about such activities. For example, a local paper in Newark, New Jersey, the  Star-Ledger,  reported a $500,000 gift that Oprah made in 2009 to St. Benedict’s Prep school, as part of $1.5 million given to ﬁ  ve nonproﬁ  t schools and organizations in Newark. Mayor of Newark, Cory Booker, has been praised for interesting Oprah and other philan-thropists in helping not only St. Benedict’s but also a charter school, a drug rehabilitation facility, Integrity House, and a shelter called Apos-tle House for women and children. The mayor, who is credited for his vision and constant efforts in the city of Newark and who founded the organization Newark Now, met Oprah through Gayle King. In thank-ing Oprah in a public statement, Booker spoke of the large numbers— SCHOOLS 151hundreds and hundreds—of families in his city who are being helped because of Oprah’s commitment to serving others.  In 2007, another dimension had been added to Oprah’s philan-thropy: a new program called Oprah’s Ambassadors, which was a combi-nation partnership between the Angel Network and Free the Children. The network has brought a pairing of North American schools with ﬁ  ve areas of developing nations. An example of the way the network operates may be seen in a community in southwest Florida. At the Immokalee Middle school, an after-school program has been started that teaches the children about Third World countries, and they learn about ways they can help. That particular school, regarded as a signiﬁ  -cantly impoverished school itself, began holding fund-raising activities to help other children in Africa get classroom supplies. The lessons learned are twofold: about the life of the African countries to which the materials are sent and the knowledge that there are people in the world who have less than the students in Immokalee.  Edgewood High School in New Jersey was chosen as an Oprah Am-bassador School for 2008–2009. Like all the ambassador schools, it was given both a curriculum and ﬁ  nances to start a student organization that would raise money for projects. Students are chosen on the basis of interest; at Edgewood, they would work daily for a half hour after school on a project they selected; in this particular school, they de-cided to focus on global matters and the attempt to collect funds to-ward building a school in Kenya. Multiple activities were begun with the hope to achieve the projected goal.  Newark, New Jersey, is a large city that has a well-known mayor, but other U.S. cities have beneﬁ  tted as well, even though there is not the same cachet attached to their names as Oprah’s Leadership Academy. An organization called the U.S. Dream Academy established learning centers in 10 U.S. cities: one each in Baltimore; Philadelphia; East Orange, New Jersey; Houston; Indianapolis; Los Angeles; Memphis; Orlando; and Salt Lake City and two in the District of Columbia. It also has been the recipient of million-dollar gifts from Oprah’s foun-dations. The learning centers are after-school programs rather than a full-time curriculum, with a mission to provide mentoring for at-risk children who are in danger of incarceration. Through academic and social values training, the plan is to break that cycle. Money is raised 152 OPRAH WINFREYnot only by donations from individuals and corporations but also fund-raising entertainment.  Oprah’s engagement with the various leadership schools has many facets, including activities to further the training of members of the staffs. Opportunities to gain scholarships of various kinds for African girls have also been made available. A Cape Town young woman who had graduated with a degree in psychology became the single candidate from the continent to be given an Oprah scholarship to New York University, where she would study for a master’s degree. Originally from the impoverished community of Uitsig, Ravensmead, and later from Belhar, the young woman spoke proudly of her grandfather and teach-ers, who always encouraged her. Among others to get higher-level train-ing were some of the teachers from the leadership academy who’d been chosen to come to the United States for a course offered by a California technology organization. With increased sales to developing countries that seek to improve both their economy and scientiﬁ  c literacy, U.S. companies want to train teachers in the use of new technology, train-ing that will beneﬁ  t all African countries, not only South Africa.  Yet the country of South Africa, according to some of its critics, has failed to fulﬁ  ll the promise of its earlier years of the Mandela era. When a columnist for the  New York Times  interviewed the Anglican South African archbishop, Desmond Tutu, in 2010, about current problems of his country, Tutu was pessimistic. He spoke of the apparent failure of the dreams that had existed during the Mandela era, describing South Africa as having the “most unequal society in the world. The poverty in which [his] compatriots live,” Bishop Tutu said, is “debilitating, in-humane, and unacceptable.” 4   Of course, the future of all the African countries concerns many people around the globe. Even though Oprah is often called the most inﬂ  uential person—or one of the most inﬂ  uential people—in the world, not everything becomes wine and roses. Failures large and small make the future seem as unhappy or even more so than the past. Although Oprah is commended by millions of admirers, others take note of her failures. When the leadership academy ﬁ  rst opened, a U.S. woman, Joan Countryman, served as the interim head for only eight months. She’d been chosen for her experience as an administrator of an Ameri-can Friends school in Pennsylvania. After she left, a few other women served brieﬂ  y, before a permanent headmistress ﬁ  lled the post. Then,  SCHOOLS 153ironically, after working just nine months at the academy, that head-mistress/principal of the academy, Nomovuyo Mzamane, was dismissed in the aftermath of a sex scandal involving one of the dormitory ma-trons. (The principal had no role in the scandal but was considered at fault for not preventing it.)  Late in 2008, Mzamane brought a defamation lawsuit against Oprah, with the claim that Oprah had made damaging remarks against her in the case against the dormitory matron, Virginia Makopo, by charging the headmistress Mzamane with failure to deal with the scandal of sexual molestation in the school. Because Mzamane’s former employer had been the Germantown Friends School in Philadelphia, it was the venue she knew; thus she ﬁ  led suit in that city. When she failed to ﬁ  nd work in Philadelphia after she’d lost her position in Africa, she claimed that the scandal and Oprah’s remarks about her were the source of her problem. Mzamane had been the third headmistress/principal to leave the school since its opening. Further allegations of sexual abuse followed, not by Mzamane, but of six girls at the academy, and part of the aftermath included expulsion of four girls and the suspension of three. Seeking damages in the range of $250,000, Mzamane defended herself against Oprah’s statements, claiming she was “demoralized” as the result of her “public lynching.”  Oprah’s lawyers asked for dismissal of the case on two grounds: ﬁ  rst, that Oprah had not said anything libelous; and second, that federal court in Philadelphia was the incorrect jurisdiction for a hearing, inas-much as Oprah does not live in Philadelphia, nor does she have busi-ness there. Additionally, Mzamane’s employment contract of $150,000 per year included a clause requiring that arbitration be the route to fol-low in any employment disagreement. A judge in Philadelphia, how-ever, agreed to hear the case on the grounds that Oprah’s remarks had been inﬂ  ammatory, and he ruled that the case should go before a jury. The newspapers were enjoying the notoriety that Oprah would bring to the city; the  New York Post  stated, it would resemble “a visit from royalty” because of the expected crowds. In addition to the courtroom in which the case was to be heard, two adjacent courtrooms were to be set aside. However, after all the hullabaloo, the case came to an abrupt end once Oprah settled the suit when—according to the news reports—the two women “met . . . face to face to end the saga,” and no lawyers were present during their meeting. 154 OPRAH WINFREY As usual, bloggers wrote pro and con remarks about the event, but, typically, Oprah’s staff released no further information about the mat-ter, and that was the end. But bloggers, who are often venomous in their anonymous comments, accused Oprah of lying and several called her “Doperah.”  Although the case in Africa against the dormitory matron, Tiny Virginia Makopo, was ﬁ  led in 2007, it did not come to court until July 2008. The accusations of abuse of the teenage students over a period of four months had led to Makopo’s arrest. In October of that year, the trial took place. Fourteen charges were brought, each of which was denied by Makopo: indecent assault, common assault, soliciting a minor to perform indecent acts, and verbal abuse. Details of each count were listed by the South African prosecutor, Etienne Venter; the defendant, Makopo, denied all 14 charges, which also included assault against a woman colleague. Needless to say, the case received wide publicity because of Oprah’s fame. Among the many newspaper reports, those by the Sowetan press were most prominently quoted abroad. They described the plaintiff, Makopo, before the hearing as attempting to hide in a “female lavatory.” She was unsuccessful, in-asmuch as the papers were able to see that “she was dressed in a blue skirt and a yellow Mamelodi Sundowns football club jersey, and big dark sunglasses.”  A few months before the trial took place, a police ofﬁ  cer had been honored with an award for his investigation of the child molestation case. He came from a special unit in Vereenig that examines situations of family violence, child protection, and sexual offenses. The reports in newspapers stated that the unit had considered “three serious cases of indecent assault.”  Oprah herself did not attend the African trial and would not dis-cuss it in speciﬁ  cs, although she had sent a U.S. lawyer as an observer. Those comments Oprah did make were about reaction to the events that disrupted life at the school. What she learned throughout the pro-cess shook her to the point she called the entire experience “the most devastating of my life.” 5  She also took the blame for hiring employees in an inadequate screening process. Oprah apologized to the parents of the girls, speaking not only of her feelings but also her concern that she had disappointed them.  SCHOOLS 155 The six girls, aged 13 to 15, were allowed to testify for the court on closed-circuit television, and all proceedings were closed to the public. Because of the ages of the girls, they could not be identiﬁ  ed, but as each charge was listed in detail, the 28-year-old Makopo denied them, speaking in her native language of Sotho. The hearing was held in April 2008 in Seblokeng Magistrates Court, outside the city of Johan-nesburg, over a period of several days. 6  Before the surfacing of these serious problems, there had been various complaints from parents, but they were of minor import. Some compared the school to prison, where there were restrictions on visits, phone calls, and e-mail. Others pro-tested that their girls were not allowed “junk food,” and the parents did not like the fact that they themselves had to go through a security gate in order to visit the school.  One parent stated he had allowed his daughter to withdraw from the academy because she had not been treated well by the headmistress when she was ill. The child received no support or counseling from “the very people who were supposed to be looking after her,” he said. Although Oprah asked the girl to return, also meeting for two hours with the family to discuss the situation, the girl preferred to return to her former school. The father expressed gratitude for the opportunity Oprah had given his child, but the girl did not return to the academy. At the end of that school year, Oprah gave what she called a celebra-tion dinner; others called it a “post-scandal celebration”; some named it an “end of the year party”; and still others said it was a “holiday cel-ebration.” Oprah, in a traditional African dress, was greeted warmly by the children. Surprisingly, present at the party were the student and her father who had ﬁ  rst called attention to what became the sex scandal. However, despite their presence and Oprah’s public praise of the girl, the girl continued to refuse to return to the academy.  Oprah’s unhappiness about the situation was clear in the few public statements she made. Before learning of the abuse, she had called her-self the protector and “mamma bear” to the girls, whom she considered her daughters, and she felt she had failed the children.  One problem after another has surfaced at the academy. In April 2009, newspapers reported another sex scandal during which seven students were suspended, although only one of them received notice that she’d been found guilty of sexual contact with another student; 156 OPRAH WINFREYof harassment; of bullying; and dishonesty in denying the truth when questioned by investigators. The incident and suspension of the girls were conﬁ  rmed by one of Oprah’s representatives, but no further details were given because everything about the matter was conﬁ  dential, in keeping with the school’s policy.  In 2008, Oprah cautiously began the search for a new headmistress for the academy, choosing the managing director of the organization Search Associates to head the recruitment for someone with interna-tional experience. Oprah, who likes to be in control of most of her projects, showed a strong interest in ﬁ  nding an Australian teacher. Al-though advertisements for the position were printed in a number of newspapers, she had the director for recruitment, John Magana, sign contracts that would limit the amount of information revealed in the search.  Perhaps her interest in Australia had been sparked by an invitation Oprah received to visit an Aboriginal community in Australia where a festival was to be held. The area, described as the “spectacular Malkgu-lumbu Falls,” is in the Northern Territory, the town of Beswick, 250 miles from Darwin. Even though Oprah could not attend the central Arn-hem Land arts festival, she did invite a Cape York Aborigine, Tania Major, to be a keynote speaker at the academy. Major had been chosen as the 2007 Australian Youth of the Year; undoubtedly, Oprah’s interest in indigenous people and culture had been a factor in the invitation.  Darwin, the capital city of the Northern Territory, Australia, is both the most populated city in the territory and the least populated capital city of Australia. The original inhabitants are the Larrakia people, who are also known as the Aboriginal people. Although the population is comprised of people from different backgrounds, it has the largest num-ber of Aboriginals of any Australian capital. Its proximity to Asia made it a target for Japanese war planes in World War II, and more bombs were dropped on it than on Pearl Harbor, Hawaii, by the same Japanese ﬂ  eet. Darwin is a getaway to Asia and is closer to the capitals of ﬁ  ve other countries than to the Australian capital. A department of educa-tion oversees all activities for students but is said to focus on indigenous students and in the last few years has restructured the schools. The choice of an Aborigine girl to speak at the academy opens many pos-sibilities not only for her future but for other Aborigine girls as well.  SCHOOLS 157 When Oprah was interviewed by the  Cape Argus  newspaper in Af-rica, she spoke of mistakes she’d made at the academy, in being too protective of the girls and of appearing to keep them isolated. ( These were criticisms made by parents and others with a greater knowledge of South Africa.) Perhaps, she said, the school should have had a more mixed group academically, rather than choosing only the most gifted, but she also spoke of her hopes for the girls; they are thriving and have exceeded her expectations, “fulﬁ  lling [her] dream and vision.” Through the girls, she ﬁ  nds inspiration to keep going.  Periodically papers report on another lawsuit ﬁ  led against Oprah or Harpo Productions, and sometimes reports appear about Oprah and Harpo ﬁ  ling suit against someone. The company has to keep a team of lawyers occupied frequently. Although Oprah has used the phrase “Aha moment” in her magazine for several years without any problem, in 2009 the well-known insurance company, Mutual of Omaha, ﬁ  led for a trademark called “Ofﬁ  cial sponsors of the aha moment.” Harpo sued, but the insurance company did not retreat easily. With some movement back and forth between two parties that did not want to surrender, but with neither anxious to have more publicity, Harpo and Mutual of Omaha settled quietly.   Washington Post  columnist Eugene Robinson wrote two columns critical of Oprah’s involvement in building schools in Africa instead of in the United States. Robinson believes that the primary obliga-tions for Americans are for America. He points out that many U.S. schools are “failing [and] dysfunctional,” yet “in the inner-city schools [he] visited, most students desperately want to learn.” He makes several points about contradictions in Oprah’s statements about teenagers in the United States and Africa, but his emphasis is on the needs of poor school-age children in the United States. 7  In a  Post  column written 10 months later, Robinson scolds Oprah: “This Isn’t About Oprah.” He is annoyed by her remarks about the school scandal, because, he asserts, she seems to make everything “about her, not the alleged vic-tims.” At the end of his column, however, he offers an olive branch, saying Oprah does know the most “sacred trust” is in “caring for other people’s children.” 8   A blogger, who gave his name and spoke of his country as South Africa, pointed out that he was not being unpatriotic when he was 158 OPRAH WINFREYcritical of Oprah’s undertaking. His statements about his concern could well have been enlightening for U.S. readers, when he objected to the selection of only poor girls for the academy. Why should there not be a mixture of rich, black girls, coloreds, and Indians (Asians), he asked. After all, they are the mixture of people in South Africa, and the acad-emy should reﬂ  ect that.  The academy court case remains a topic of interest for many people in Africa and the United States. Soon after the scandal erupted about the academy, a former Peace Corps volunteer wrote an article for the  Providence Journal  titled “Gift to Africa Teaches Oprah Painful Peace Corps Lesson.” Denis Farrell, the volunteer, had been in Zambia when Oprah ﬁ  rst began the work of building the academy, and, although he left Africa in 2002, before the school opened, he continued to follow the development of her project. What he writes is both a caution to those who would naively offer help to Africa without knowing the dif-ﬁ  culties and praise of Oprah for her efforts.  Farrell sees irony between expectations of success and the realities that follow. People are “charmed” by the children, and impressed by the adults “who have big plans” but no money, and so the philanthro-pists build “school[s] . . . clinic[s] . . . librar[ies].” Through such ac-tions, the giver “feel[s] like a hero.” But actually it is all like gossamer because things fall apart. 9  The writer compares himself in his ﬁ  rst days in Zambia to what Oprah felt when she went to South Africa: “Pure joy and compassion.” However, he questions anyone’s desire to provide “a Western solution to an African problem” and, in particular, Oprah’s plans to give the girls all kinds of luxuries they have never known but which will make “leaders” of them. When he writes “hmm” to her na-ïveté, the reader recognizes the questions he poses. Can Oprah succeed where others have failed? Did anyone warn Oprah about “Ukwa” ( jeal-ousy in the Senga language) . . . or about “corruption . . . deep poverty . . . rampant disease,” or changing social attitudes and behavior?  There are so many failures and disappointments that follow from the actions of well-meaning people, and the dire consequences are much greater than those that westerners can understand. Farrell rec-ommends that it would be wiser to scale back in every way, in ambition and spending, to get to know village people and to explore examples of smaller, less ambitious projects.  SCHOOLS 159 Some Africans have nothing but praise for Oprah’s undertakings and urge her to continue them in the hopes that the children’s lives will be better and that the children will be the leaders and educators of the future. They don’t question the possibilities. In the academy there is on display a painting of Oprah carrying a child. It had been given to her by a woman in Texas who wanted to bring Oprah’s atten-tion to those who struggle with terrible diseases. However, the painting suggests for the viewer a more far-reaching meaning: to do good for a child; to reach her when she is only at the beginning of her life; and to educate her so that she, like Oprah, will bring hope and meaning to those who follow.  In every issue of  O, The Oprah Magazine,  Oprah ends with a sig-nature column, “What I Know for Sure.” The January 2008 piece de-scribes her experiences in the nightmarish aftermath of the sex scandal at the academy. She remembers Betty Rollin’s book,  First You Cry,  and she did just that. But then she moved on. With the founder of the Houston, Texas, Child Trauma Academy, they put together a plan that she followed, ﬁ  rst during the difﬁ  cult weeks in Chicago, and later after her arrival back in South Africa. Using what she had learned from Eckhart Tolle’s book,  The Power of Now,  Oprah decided she would deal with the situations as they arise. She founded three teams: an investiga-tive team ﬁ  rst, a psychological team, and, for a new beginning at the academy, a fresh educational team.  Along the way, friends wrote letters of encouragement. One re-minded her of the reality, in effect, “what is, is,” and such things “come with the territory.” Another said, “Every time a heart breaks . . . some-where something beautiful is being born.” A determined Oprah was ready to start again. Yet Farrell’s experiences in the Peace Corps in Africa has led him to say it isn’t easy to change the world: “The real test comes when things fall apart.”  NOTES      1 . Roger Friedman, “Oprah’s Charities Worth More Than 200 Mil-lion,” Fox News, 5 Jan. 2007.   2 . Oprah has said this many, many times in many places, as well as in  O . 160 OPRAH WINFREY  3 . Dave Hoekstra, “Angel Museum a Heavenly Attraction in Wis-consin,”  Chicago Sun-Times,  11 June 2010.   4 . Desmond Tutu, interview by Deborah Solomon,  New York Times,  4 Mar. 2010.   5 . Eugene Robinson, “Oprah’s Learning Curve,”  Washington Post,  5 Nov. 2007.   6 . Reported in  Cape Argus  (South Africa) ,  29 July 2008.   7 . Eugene Robinson, “It’s Not All about iPods,”  Washington Post,  9 Jan. 2007.   8 . Robinson, “Oprah’s Learning Curve.”   9 . This is the title of a famous African book by Chinua Achebe. Achebe used a line from the poem “The Second Coming,” by William Butler Yeats. Farrell’s reference invokes both Yeats and the poem, but the reference by Farrell is used to invoke the problems Oprah has faced and continues to face in her African school.   