  Chapter 4  AMERICA READS  Always looking for ways to maintain the attention and involvement of her audience, and with an eye on ratings, Oprah and company intro-duced what was, at the time, a novel idea: a monthly television book club. (Other shows and television channels brieﬂ  y adopted the idea.) Oprah would chose a book she’d read and enjoyed, then announce the title on the air; a program with the author’s appearance would follow; and, ﬁ  nally, a group of diverse, carefully picked, packaged, and screened readers would discuss the book. At the beginning, every month, (except in summer) a book title would be announced, although there would be no regular day that the club would be on the program. A decade later, there were no deﬁ  nite schedules. Between 2000 and 2009, 36 books were assigned for club readers, but each year had a different number of books. In the ﬁ  rst year of the club, there were nine readings, but, by 2009, only one book was on the list:  Say You’re One of Them,  a prize-winning collection of African short stories by a Nigerian priest, Uwem Akpan, who studied writing in the United States.  Before the choices were to be named on the air, sealed boxes of books were sent to public libraries with the labels “Do Not Open Until———.” With the usual declarations, hype, and advertising, the club was born 118 OPRAH WINFREYin televisionland, in 1996, when the ﬁ  rst book discussion took place, about Jacquelyn Mitchard’s  The Deep End of the Ocean.   From the beginning, every book chosen by Oprah became a best-seller and an exceptional boon to the publishing industry. A June 5, 2009, article in the  New York Times  (with no attribution to a particular author) examines both Janice Peck’s  The Age of Oprah  and Oprah’s in-ﬂ uence on her book club members. Quoting Peck, the reviewer writes that the club has elevated Oprah “to the status of cultural icon,” an expert who “tells people what to read,” the “lessons” to be learned, and the “questions to ask.” Furthermore, says the reviewer, Oprah’s chosen commentators are expected to “agree with her . . . reading of the book.” Everything appears to be about self-help—the same theme of her tele-vision show. Although the reviewer ﬁ  nds both the show and Oprah’s approach to books “sentimental, shallow and manipulative,” the effect on the audience is powerful; it places Oprah “as the savior of women from themselves,” and, incidentally, makes Oprah and the publishing industry large amounts of money. Peck has pointed to a notable dif-ference between the lessons Oprah imparts and those of classrooms: Oprah is concerned with self-discovery and wants the focus to be on lessons learned about oneself, whereas university classroom instruction tends to focus on separating the self from the work and therefore main-taining objectivity.  Linton Weeks, in the  Washington Post,  called Oprah’s choice of books the equivalent of hitting the lottery for writers, but that same descrip-tion has obviously held true for publishers. 1  Throughout the country, bookstores large and small, knowing the effect of Oprah’s pronounce-ments, immediately stocked numerous copies of the recommended book. Even a writer’s ﬁ  rst novel could sell as many as a million copies, and, as an editorial in the  San Francisco Chronicle  noted, “even classics that were getting little trafﬁ  c on library shelves” were being sold in the millions.  Publishers Weekly  backed up the data of Oprah’s inﬂ  uence with the claim that hardcover and paperback books could not get onto best-seller lists unless readers knew the author’s previous work or were an Oprah pick. 2   Oprah’s choices are always available in paperback and thus available to a larger number of readers. Once her book club became a reality, a browser or reader going into any bookstore and numerous coffee shops  AMERICA READS 119could not fail to see a special display, shelf, or bookcase, given over to “An Oprah Selection.” Her chosen books even had an imprint to that effect. Only a year after the introduction of the book club,  Newsweek,  along with other magazines, labeled her the most signiﬁ  cant person in the modern book world, and one  Newsweek  writer, in reviewing a thriller, had words of advice for publishers about turning their books into best-sellers: “pray for an act of God. . . . or Oprah.” Inspirational books, even if not chosen for Oprah’s club, became very popular as a result of exposure on her show, particularly after the events of 9/11. One was a book of poetry,  Heartsongs,  whose success was fueled by a visit of the 11-year-old author, Mattie, who later died of a severe form of muscular dystrophy. Not only did his ﬁ  rst book become a best-seller, but after his appearance on Oprah’s show, the child signed a ﬁ  ve-book contract. Oprah called him inspirational, a “friend,” and “an angel on earth.” When a Maryland park and statue were dedicated to the boy’s memory, Oprah was in the group of celebrants.  Not everyone had liked Oprah’s pushing the young poet’s work. Jour-nalist Robert Elder, a reporter for the  Chicago Tribune,  commented: “Sentimental? Yes. But publishers have found that sentimentality sells.” Elder, publishers, and Oprah are not the only people involved with books who have discovered the value of sentimentality: author Tom Clancy earlier gained considerable publicity for several years when he wrote and talked about his deep affection for the afﬂ  icted child and had dedicated a novel to him. 3   Writer David Streitfeld (then on staff at the  Washington Post ) was one of the few writers who found Oprah’s efforts commendable in urg-ing people to read and compared her effectiveness in getting people interested in books to that of 19th-century tycoon and philanthropist Andrew Carnegie, who, among his other deeds, endowed 2,500 librar-ies. But a  Washington Post  colleague of Streitfeld’s, Amy Schwartz, was not as fulsome with her praise, raising the possibility that Oprah was simply harvesting the returns of a recent national revival of reading. 4  Nonetheless, so inﬂ  uential was Oprah considered in her effect on na-tional reading habits that, in 1999, the National Book Foundation, at an elegant black-tie affair hosted by actor Steve Martin, presented Oprah with its 50th anniversary gold medal. Even a decade later, Oprah’s inﬂ  uence on reading has remained signiﬁ  cant. Hers has been 120 OPRAH WINFREYthe largest book club in the world—ever. It is important to note, as  New York Times  reviewer David Carr did, that she is open with her au-dience and “never has a piece of what she is pushing . . . she is not for sale.” 5  However, the books are for sale, and most importantly the book-sellers order whatever Oprah recommends, knowing that there will be a huge readership for the product.  Accepting the medal from the foundation, Oprah spoke of the para-mount role books had played in her life. She said that books have always been its most pleasurable part. They’ve also helped her to learn about herself and the world. Singling out Maya Angelou’s autobiographical work  I Know Why the Caged Bird Sings,  she has talked of it as a work of validation for her as an illegitimate, poor, black Southern-born teen-ager who had suffered many hurts. For the ﬁ  rst time, she understood that it was possible to move beyond her misery to a better life. At that point, she began to understand the force of writers and their books.  Yet, despite her passion for the written word and after several years of praise for her effect on the publishing industry and the reading pub-lic’s increased interest in books, Oprah, who had been nicknamed the “queen bee of book clubs,” suddenly decided to abandon the club as part of her television program. On a Friday show (often a day when an-nouncements are made that don’t make the news), she informed the audience that the novel  Sula  would be the last book chosen for the club. She announced, in a statement that would provoke criticism, that she no longer could ﬁ  nd interesting books to read, introduce, and discuss on her program. Although Oprah did not tell the audience of other fac-tors in her decision, there was more to the matter than lack of worthy books.  Regardless of the huge number of books sold, from 600,000 to a mil-lion new copies per book, a market survey revealed only a limited view-ing audience for the television discussion of books, considerably less than those who watch Oprah’s regular daily programs. The shows about books became less frequent over the years. Experiments with the format had been tried to maintain interest—informal dinners and conversa-tions with authors, ﬁ  lms of dramatic scenes from books, even discus-sions with women whose life experiences were like those of the book characters—but the numbers of viewers still dropped. Also, reportedly, sales of books were beginning to ﬂ  atten (though Oprah’s picks con- AMERICA READS 121tinued to sell more than other works). Meanwhile, an “inside source” leaked the somewhat curious disclosure that the task of screening one book per month was exhausting for Oprah and her staff, “the single hardest thing that had to be done for the television program.” If so, it is surprising that Oprah continuously refers to books she is reading or has read. Friends claim that she prefers reading to television, and an issue of her now-defunct magazine  O At Home  contains a lengthy article with photos about her books and library in her California house.  Some of the publishing companies sturdily supported Oprah’s deci-sion publicly—after all, how could they do otherwise, given the im-portant ﬁ  nancial boost she’d made to the industry? Random House put a full-page “Thank you, Oprah” in the April 12, 2002, edition of the  New York Times.  The company expressed gratitude for the years of work she’d devoted to “books, authors, and readers.” Nevertheless, it was a serious and unexpected blow to the publishing industry, and several spokespeople felt her statement was an unjust disparagement of U.S. publishing. Although the demise of the club unquestionably was a great disappointment to many writers who wanted to be chosen, it meant much more to the publishers who had made many millions from the sales.  Reviewers also were skeptical about the reason given for disbanding the club. As Carlin Romano of the  Philadelphia Inquirer  pointed out, the ﬁ  nal book Oprah picked,  Sula,  had been written 28 years earlier by Toni Morrison, one of four Morrison novels Oprah had chosen. Romano questioned why “out of decades of published ﬁ  ction in English” she was unable to recommend a single novel each month for the club. Romano’s piece turned more derisive with the comment that anyone as rich as Oprah could certainly give up the arduous task of a monthly book selection and take an easier road for her program “like talking between commercials or serving in the  Israeli Defense Forces. ” 6  Crit-ics also pointed out that more variety might prove more palatable to readers as well as reviewers, some of whom found the Oprah selections excessively restrictive—that is, with a sameness from one work to another.  Although fans continued to associate Oprah with books, a num-ber of negative statements were made about her choices. Critic Carol Muller listed a series of “Oprah topics” that she found in books she was 122 OPRAH WINFREYreviewing. Those topics were listed without comment as possible themes for Oprah’s programs and for articles in Oprah’s magazine: lesbianism, abuse, osteoporosis, devotion, retardation, and a crisis of faith. Such ad-verse judgments about Oprah’s subject matter are related to various ear-lier deprecatory reviews by others, criticizing many of Oprah’s choices as focusing on dysfunctional people. For instance,  Wall Street Journal  writer Cynthia Crossen might have been speaking for various review-ers in stating that the reach of Oprah’s book selections went from “A (abused) to B (battered).” Such descriptions are frequently applied pe-joratively (mainly by men) to books—and movies—favored by women. Another reviewer, Robert Clark, suggested that the term “woman’s novel” should be dropped for her choices, and “the Oprah novel” should be substituted because her selections have the same formula.  The excuse given for  The Oprah Winfrey Show ’s abandonment of the book club had numerous people wondering about Oprah’s judgment. There was a loud, sometimes angry, outcry and not a little scorn from readers, comedians, and even comic strip artists. There was humor as well: columnist Ben Crandell, writing in one of his “South Beach” re-ports in the  Sun Sentinel  in April 2002, headlined it as “Oprah’s Shelved, So Others Must Pass on the Good Word.” With strong, tongue-in-cheek language, he called Oprah’s dismissal of the club “Betrayal. Intrigue. Ruthlessness . . . heartless . . . shocking . . . callous.” (Other book clubs have since been launched; one in particular in Britain, seeking what is known as “the Oprah effect,” has been touted as bringing in a “whole new generation of literary superstars.”)  Another farcical illustration of the mileage gained from the clumsi-ness of Oprah’s action appeared in a mocking comic strip drawn by Matt Janz. Titled “Out of the Gene Pool,” the strip had Oprah speaking of the boredom she had felt in reading while she ate her lunch; no lon-ger interested in the book, she put a carrot in her nose; that experience, which she describes as “spiritual,” provides “rebirth.”  The cartoonist, making fun not only of Oprah’s loss of interest in books but also of her television persona, satirizes both the star and the audience. An easy target for ridicule, in her pronouncement about the disappearance of worthwhile books and her public personalizing of all her experiences, she became a satirist’s dream. Janz mocks her televi-sion persona, her interest in things spiritual, and her unsuspected but  AMERICA READS 123apparent belief in the phoenix myth—regeneration from ashes. Charac-teristically, she reveals everything to her audience because she wants to include them in her awakening, the great phenomenon of renewal. But what an awakening she has had, she tells the audience, the abandon-ment of books for carrots. Examining a centuries-old debate about mind and body, the cartoonist skillfully and humorously conﬂ  ates body—that is, the carrot—with spirit. Oprah’s renewal comes from a vegetable, not from some clever or brilliant thesis or work of art.  A further spoof refers to the huge headlines and lengthy stories that supposedly appear in the next day’s newspapers. Newspaper reports tell of many thousands of women who also want to thrust carrots up their noses and experience what Oprah did, so that they overrun grocery stores and hospitals and bring about a surge in the stock market.  Six years after the ﬁ  rst of the books was introduced, in the summer of 2002, Oprah’s Book Club was put to rest. Was it predictable? Did the majority of readers like her choice of books? Apparently so, con-sidering the vast numbers of sales. Oprah’s good friend, writer Maya Angelou, weighed in, stating that she didn’t agree with all the choices, but reading is what matters. If, indeed, lack of audience interest was the problem—rather than the lack of good, readable books—could the cancellation of that feature in the show have been premature? Consid-ering the vast amount of publicity given to the dustup Oprah and com-pany had with one of the novelists, Jonathan Franzen, shortly before the decision to give up the book segment of the program, interest in the book selections (among readers, nonreaders, and, in fact, general interest throughout the country) was aroused to a pitch not enjoyed before and could only have served to swell the numbers of the show’s audience. In what may be an exaggeration of the entire affair, the cul-tural critic of the  Chicago Tribune,  Julia Keller, has written that “it was the Franzen episode [that] put [the book club] on the map.” Keller con-siders Franzen’s  The Corrections  so important in transforming “literary culture in 2000–2009,” because it “made her book club controversial” and U.S. readers like controversy. Keller is not alone in her view that the book club has been an “astonishing cultural force.”   The Corrections,  like all of Oprah’s choices, became a best-seller from the moment it was selected for the book club. Because of a public brou-haha with Oprah, Franzen became the most-written-about writer of that 124 OPRAH WINFREYyear. Without the Oprah association,  Washington Post  book reviewer Jonathan Yardley asserted that Franzen would not have achieved much commercial success. An Oprah choice for the book club was a guaran-tee of a vast readership. In several columns, Yardley reafﬁ  rms his belief that Oprah genuinely champions books, but he also hastens to inform readers of his thorough dislike of her television program. The one time Yardley watched it, he “nearly gagged on all the treacle and psycho-babble.”  Book critics have noted that all books anointed by Oprah become best-sellers, bringing in millions of dollars to the author and, of course, the publishing industry. For many writers, that recognition has opened the doors to further opportunities. Franzen, for example, whose name became known everywhere with the reading public, has become a regu-lar contributor to prestigious magazines, even though in the eyes of many, he had committed the unpardonable sin of ingratitude as one of the chosen. Despite the renown and money gained, Franzen objected to being placed in a class that included “schmalzy one-dimensional” books. His own book, said Franzen, is in the high art tradition, and he didn’t want to be known as an Oprah Book Club choice.  Sides in the conﬂ  ict were chosen, but far more were and are on Oprah’s team. In addition to her loyal audience and readers, those who expressed their opinions in print, among them people in  New York  magazine,  Newsweek,  the  Boston Globe,  and the  Chicago Tribune,  called Franzen stinging names that he duly records in an essay. To one he was a “mother----er,” to another a “pompous prick,” an “ego-blinded snob” to a third, and to a fourth, a “spoiled, whiny little brat.”  It is surprising that the Oprah producers in their background checks of participants in their programs overlooked Franzen’s essays and his hostile statements about the shamelessness of television. He proclaimed his longing to return to a time when the public and private worlds were separate. How could anyone, including Franzen, have thought he could be a candidate for any television program that thrives on the personal and intimate? When, in 2010, Franzen published another novel,  Free-dom,  which achieved notoriety almost before publication, Oprah and Franzen reconciled. All apparently was forgiven on both sides, and the “new” Franzen is now described as “mellow.”  Not many authors are reluctant to become known to the public, par-ticularly when their books, no matter how well written, signiﬁ  cant, or  AMERICA READS 125appealing, more often than not have a limited audience. Given the thousands of books published each year, wide readership is like a game of chance. Furthermore, even with strong reviews, many books fail to attract attention. Works of nonﬁ  ction, apart from politics or history, have more of an uphill ﬁ  ght to reach large audiences.  Not all of the books Oprah periodically singled out are novels, nor have they been works to be discussed by the club. For a number of years, Oprah also selected nonﬁ  ction publications for themes on her program. Her mostly female studio audience may consist of mothers and daughters, some young, depending on the topic, or older women, and few or no men or fathers. The fact is that Oprah’s viewers and readers, in and outside of the studio, have been primarily women.  One tenet of many of these programs, and stressed also through the club—is an Oprah mantra: everyone, male and female, young and old, has to learn for herself or himself that our lives are in our own hands. We cannot bypass either hurtful situations or the person who causes suffering; the person who has given us pain or made us angry, accord-ing to Oprah, must be made aware of the issue. It is essential to assess our own feelings and, if necessary, get help from those around us whom we like and trust so that we are enabled to speak out. When we allow fear of loss to prevent us from being open and honest, we can only lose more. The subject, as in the lessons of the books, is one that resonates in many, many speeches and interviews that Oprah gives, reﬂ  ecting her own learning curve over the years.  By urging girls and women to refrain from expressing anger or ag-gressiveness, Oprah, in her choice of books, and the numerous pundits on her show point out that our culture has always taught dishonesty; it is behavior that must change. If, for some, openness in relationships means being cast out by friends or groups, the experience may be good fortune that leads to a more centered existence. There will be other people who feel as they do, and, when they discover those people, life will get easier.  Whatever led to the demise of the book club, less than 10 months after her decision to abandon the entire concept, Oprah surprised view-ers, the publishing industry, writers, and the book-reading public at the end of February 2003, with an announcement reminiscent of the late comedienne Gilda Radner’s famous line, “Never Mind.” Oprah was reviving her book club. Like almost every act of Oprah’s, it made 126 OPRAH WINFREYnewspaper headlines in both the hard news sections and in the style and entertainment segments of many papers. But lest she would have to proclaim that she’d found current books alright, worthy of reading and discussing, she was going to rediscover (or perhaps discover) the classics. Although it is unclear what subjects she studied in college, like literature majors everywhere, she began reading the great writers of the past: Shakespeare, Faulkner, and Hemingway, among others. While being honored with a standing ovation for all she had previously done to inspire an interest in current books, she told the Association of American Publishers she would be returning to the recommendation of books, “but with a difference.” There was speculation about whether her decision would bring the same kind of joy as her announcement several years ago of the formation of the original book club. The incor-rect prediction and consensus was “not likely.” Publishing, like other industries, thrives on sales, and the question was how many publish-ing companies had the sales rights to the old classics. Would people simply dust off old copies of some of the required books of their youth, and libraries go to their warehouses to retrieve multiple copies? How many readers would want to enter the classroom for the either ﬁ  rst or second time? Would only English majors apply? Would the new book club take the place of the classroom and, if so, how? Would the return to classics—in the way that Oprah’s other programs have stimulated viewers—lead to a renewal of interest in literature and literary degrees in colleges and universities?  The announcement of the revitalization of the club certainly brought joy to the hearts and pens of readers but also to comedians and cartoon-ists. Multiple writers, including the caustic British critic Christopher Hitchens, couldn’t resist giving advice to Oprah. When he told a group of high school students that she should consider a discussion of Tolstoy’s  Anna Karenina,  he playfully put forth the idea that it could provide material for a long, long time for Oprah and her friend, psychologist Dr. Phil McGraw. Hitchens also recommended George Eliot’s novel  Middlemarch  as particularly appropriate for Oprah’s show. The novel, which tells of the sexual and intellectual frustrations of an unhappily married Victorian woman, is one that, he believes, offers endless pos-sibilities for Oprah’s program. Putting aside Hitchens’s humor, the choices in more recent ﬁ  ction also offer the reader stories of sexual and  AMERICA READS 127intellectual frustration, subjects not limited to the 19th century. And Oprah has chosen a number of them. Further suggestive humor was invoked by a Chicago columnist who wrote, “She’s just about the only one making our country read things that aren’t printed on the sides of cereal boxes.”  The club was resurrected a short time after the opening of the Oprah Leadership Academy, when Sidney Poitier’s memoir  The Measure of a Man  was chosen as the ﬁ  rst book in the new club and the 56th choice for the club overall. Oprah described the book as “a spiritual autobi-ography,” an apt term for a work that reports on faith, race, and the inﬂ uence of great leaders such as Mandela and Gandhi. In talking on her show about the actor, Oprah called Poitier “one of the greatest men . . . on the planet.” In the history of ﬁ  lms, the actor stands as the ﬁ rst black performer to win an Oscar for best actor. The year was 1964, and the ﬁ  lm was  Lilies of the Field.   It seemed for a time the classics would later have a revived chance for sales with Oprah’s new club undertaking, even if the authors are dead. In recent years, it has become more difﬁ  cult for current writers ei-ther to get published or to make any money from their writing, at least in the United States if they are not selected for special programs such as Oprah’s. Also in modern times, large corporations control most of the book industry so that publication now has less to do with quality than marketability. A world-famous star with Oprah’s international follow-ing can have a major impact on the rejuvenation of reading. When Oprah made the promised announcement of a newly revived book club, stores immediately were deluged by sales. And for several years, their faith and hopes were rewarded, no matter what the choices were.  Oprah soon gave up on the classics and returned to more contem-porary books, which appear to have little or no relationship to each other. Like the selections for the ﬁ  rst club, the works are mostly those of women writers, and the majority of choices are American. Rarely does she depart from ﬁ  ction, and it seems as though they are much like the picks that one might make in wandering through a bookstore or li-brary. Whether Oprah herself chooses the books or members of her staff do so is not made public. Some novelists appear to be favorites; for example, Faulkner’s books have been chosen three times (a some-what surprising choice given that college students—even literature 128 OPRAH WINFREYmajors—are known to need assistance with his works). However, it isn’t surprising that Oprah favors novels of the South. After all, she comes from that region. In the mix of choices are some philosophic/religious/spiritual works that surely would not have become best-sellers without the Winfrey imprimatur.  When Oprah resumed the program with her book club, publishers continued to be thrilled with its enormous impact on her following, knowing they—the publishers—had the equivalent of the baseball ﬁ  eld story: “If you build it, they will come.”  But with Oprah’s announcement a few years later that she would be giving up her daily show on network television, gloom reigns today in the publishing industry. Although there has been much wavering about the matter, it   appears that there will be no book club in the world of OWN. Several newspapers have stated openly that Oprah’s “big switch” will not only change afternoon television but also that book publishers are facing “doom.” The few details about plans for the future focus on movies—mainly documentaries—rather than books. Stock advisors speak of the loss of income for networks, perhaps for the city of Chicago, and for earlier authors as well as newer ones, whereas the new OWN channel is predicted to become a great moneymaker.  Keeping track of Oprah’s wishes about her book club can be dizzy-ing for her reading followers. After stating she was giving it up, she announced she was adding Franzen’s newest work,  Freedom,  to her list. Perhaps it was the large number of positive, even glowing, reviews that led to her decision, and it was a good time to make amends with the writer. Franzen himself has reported, “All fences have been mended,” leading reviewer Edel Coffey (the  Irish Independent ) to remind one how “amazing [it is] what a little success can do.” 7   A complete list of the 36 newer choices on Oprah’s soon-to-be-extinct book club books might be compared to an electrocardiogram, as the lines go up and down. Some years have many selections, but the ﬁ rst year had the most: nine. Some years had only a single book. Before Oprah’s announcement of the coming change, she had announced a type of appendage to the club, but this was another format, a children’s book club known as the Kids’ Reading List. A team was chosen to put together the names of books appropriate for little ones aged 2 to 12  AMERICA READS 129and beyond. Oprah’s favorites were included, as were recommendations from experts in the ﬁ  eld of children’s literature. Although the list is on record, little has been done with it.  One writer, unafﬁ  liated with any of Oprah’s undertakings, decided that Oprah herself would make a good subject for a children’s book. Called  Oprah: The Little Speaker,  by Carole Boston Weatherford, the trade journal  Publishers Weekly  listed it along with reviews of other chil-dren’s books. In Weatherford’s book, the reviewer writes—in words suggesting less than a strong recommendation—there are “frequent ref-erences to God’s presence . . . to almost beatiﬁ  c effect . . . The inspira-tional message comes through clearly . . .” And the work “closes on an oddly smug note . . .” 8   As in the past, some Oprah book choices have made it to the big screen, and Oprah intends to continue that practice. Even while ready-ing herself for the major change to cable television, she and Tom Hanks announced plans to coproduce a movie based on an Oprah book pick,  The Story of Edgar Sawtelle.  It is unclear whether all her movie pro-ductions will be on her channel. Because there are other works being considered, it may be that various types of movies will replace the book club. Even though Oprah will be giving up the book club when she leaves her show, her publication,  O, The Oprah Magazine,  which has been an outstanding success, will continue.  Three publications, called “vanity magazines” by  Washington Post  food writer Candy Saigon, dominated the women’s market for several years: those of Martha Stewart ( Martha Stewart Living ) ,  Oprah Winfrey ( O, The Oprah Magazine ), and Rosie O’Donnell ( Rosie ). Although everyone eagerly awaited the ﬁ  rst of these, Martha Stewart’s  Living,  Oprah’s magazine has been more popular from the beginning. The three of them, but particularly Stewart and Winfrey, demonstrated strong qualities in all their undertakings, so that from the beginning, the magazines were expected to do well. Yet other women celebrities who also launched magazines during the same period failed in their at-tempts after a short period of time: Ivana Trump (whose magazine  Ivana  went under almost immediately) and Tina Brown (who left her much-praised and prominent editorship at  The New Yorker  to start  Talk,  had poor notices from the onset, despite an inordinate amount of puffery 130 OPRAH WINFREYfrom the publishing company). The failure rate for start-ups in maga-zines is extremely high; even Oprah’s second venture into magazine publishing,  Oprah At Home,  also came to an end.  Like Oprah, O’Donnell began as a television star. However, after six years, O’Donnell left the world of television in May 2002 (although brieﬂ  y she appeared on other shows including  The View ). She also de-parted from magazine publishing in September 2002. Rumors had been circulating, from early on, about problems between her and the pub-lisher of her magazine. Her exit from the magazine world, though, was stormy and nothing like the earlier move from television. In contrast to the ﬁ  asco that marked the end of O’Donnell’s involvement with the magazine, her talk show was so popular she was known as “the Queen of Nice,” although not everyone agreed with that description. One writer at  Forbes  called her opinionated, and only a month after O’Donnell’s brief retirement from television, she proved herself to be not only opin-ionated but also determined to wipe the slate clean—or break it—as she scorned both the title and image that she’d previously enjoyed. Claiming “the bitch ain’t so nice anymore,” she began to take on other roles, including that of stand-up comic, returning, in part, to the type of comedy work she had done at the beginning of her career, except that her early comedy routines were much more wholesome than the later ones. It is apparent, however, that there will always be a place on television for O’Donnell, who is said to be returning to daytime televi-sion soon, with a talk show on Oprah’s new network.  The magazine  Rosie,  inaugurated in April 2001, a year after the ap-pearance of  O,  was a replacement for 125-year-old  McCall’s,  which had been losing millions. The original 19th-century  McCall’s  focused on selling dress patterns of James McCall, a tailor, but it underwent multi-ple reincarnations over the years, and the last one bore no resemblance to earlier issues. When the publishing company, Gruner and Jahr—a di-vision of Bertlesmann, an enormous German multimedia group—and its staff closed down the old publication, name and all, they searched for a viable new magazine to take its place. Obviously seeking to emu-late the success of the other two publications,  O,  and  Martha Stewart Living  (labeled “the mother ship of them all” by writer Candy Saigon), they focused on Rosie O’Donnell as someone who would be strong com-petition to both. She was famous, funny, and popular, and she showed  AMERICA READS 131some of the same personality traits of both Oprah and Stewart: strength and determination and staying power with audiences. Gruner and Jahr knew, as Hearst did with Oprah, it would have a ready group of sub-scribers from the television audience.  For a short period of time, the two stars, O’Donnell and Oprah, seemed to be almost in lockstep: television, magazines, and even books for readers. O’Donnell, though, limited her picks to children’s books and even announced it before her decision to leave her long-running show. Nothing came of O’Donnell’s plans for a book club, however.  When it ﬁ  rst began publication, the new magazine,  Rosie,  seemed to fulﬁ  ll the publisher’s hopes, with strong sales and increasingly lucra-tive numbers of advertisements. Its format was standard: crafts, health, food, causes (not quite so standard, because of their controversial ele-ments politically and socially, but they were and are O’Donnell’s favor-ites). There was one particular topic that O’Donnell and the magazine skirted: the gay life that O’Donnell was leading quietly. Although it was not a secret, most of her audience and readership apparently were unaware of it. After all, in the main, O’Donnell projected something of a 1950s image of family life as the (adoptive) mother of several chil-dren. Then, after years of being circumspect about her private affairs, O’Donnell went public with her autobiography,  Find Me,  a book that opened the closet door. Since then, O’Donnell has made no attempt to hide the facts of her sexual preferences. She is certainly not the ﬁ  rst or only entertainer to make such an announcement, but there may have been fallout in ratings for what was considered a family show. Her tell-all book had preceded by a month her exiting her television show. Soon after publication of her book, sales of the magazine began to fall precip-itously. Few critics speciﬁ  cally ascribe the drop in newsstand purchases to O’Donnell’s outing but rather to her social and political views. Yet these are views she has always held, and they did not appear to offend the readership previously. Soon, stories of wars between O’Donnell and her staff were being told, and then information about the hostile rela-tionships of O’Donnell and the publishers surfaced.  Although O’Donnell had declared that she had wanted to be a cooperative member of the magazine group, she later said that had not worked, and she did not want to be a control [expletive] “like 132 OPRAH WINFREYOprah and Martha,” but she would become one. She would be as uncompromising as they are, she avowed. However, control belonged to the publishers, and O’Donnell resigned after ﬁ  ring off salvos against their actions. The publishers then retaliated publicly in stronger lan-guage, blaming her for destroying the magazine and violating her con-tract. By the end of 2002,  Rosie  was still on the newsstands, but the December issue was its last. Described by  Washington Post  writer Peter Carlson as an “awful” magazine, it is clearly ﬁ  nished, having lost more millions of dollars, and nothing has taken its place.  Over a period of years, Rosie has drawn comments and imperson-ations. Not as successful as Oprah, O’Donnell’s show was never a rival to Oprah’s—they were in different time slots and on different chan-nels—nor was her decision to retire from  The Rosie O’Donnell Show  the result of competition. Neither was her resignation from the magazine bearing her name.  An element of commonality in the early backgrounds of O’Donnell, Stewart, and Winfrey seems to have driven the three of them to leg-endary heights. However, unlike O’Donnell and Oprah, Stewart came from a two-parent family who lived to see her phenomenal success. But Stewart’s fall from grace came with the allegation that she had violated the rules of insider stock trading. The stock in question was one issued on the premise that a cancer drug being developed was going to be a new miracle drug. When early reports turned out to be unfavorable, those with inside information decided to unload the stock. Stewart al-legedly heard about the upcoming announcement of the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) from her broker, and, before the news broke, Stewart had her broker sell her stock. Some ﬁ  nancial writers pointed out that Stewart was a very small player in all of this, and some pro-tested her trial in the media. Her defense was that her broker had been instructed to sell the stock at any time it fell below a certain price, and the sale had nothing to do with inside information. In an ironic twist of fate, after her broker’s indictment and the investigation of Stewart, the FDA approved the cancer drug.  Numerous speculative stories about Stewart were printed, because television commentators and comedians found her situation too inter-esting to ignore. Before all this happened, Stewart headed a huge com-pany built on revenues from a television show, magazines, and her own  AMERICA READS 133line produced for Kmart stores—all activities she resumed after being released from prison. A federal grand jury had indicted Stewart, charg-ing she’d lied and misled investigators about her role in the stock sale; although there was much disagreement among prosecutors and other experts, journalists, and members of the public, the Securities and Ex-change Commission brought a ﬁ  ve-part civil complaint against her for insider trading; it was not a criminal charge, but she was found guilty. Not surprisingly, the public disagreed. Thus, when CNN took a poll, 68 percent of the responses were pro-Stewart.  Some Stewart champions, mostly women, believe the attacks on her have a distinctly antiwoman tinge, a hostility directed toward a strong, aggressive and successful woman; the accusations, her supporters say, would never be leveled against a man in the same situation.  When the indictment was announced, Stewart stepped down as chairman and chief executive ofﬁ  cer of her company. No matter that Stewart denied all the allegations of insider trading, her company’s stock fell abruptly to a small percentage of its value. The popularity of her magazines also went into a spin, and, for the ﬁ  rst time since its inception, the media and retailing company showed losses of several million dollars. Although government lawyers were banging the drums for jail time, few independent lawyers expected Stewart to go to prison, but many expected her to pay a signiﬁ  cant ﬁ  ne. That expectation was borne out. Furthermore, Stewart went to jail.  Yet her products continued to be marketed, particularly in Kmart, where the sales of her products had remained high. Today, she is shown frequently in television ads touting them, and she seems more popular than ever. As a gesture of support for Stewart, Kmart would not allow the sale of the May 21, 2001, issue of the  Globe  because the tabloid featured a story based on an unfriendly book about her. The front-page headline of the paper stated, “Mean Martha Exposed.” For a time, com-mentators focused on the Stewart story. One instance was in fashion columnist Robin Givhan’s November 22, 2009, lengthy article—with pictures—about Stewart’s style of dress (dowdy and dull) Givhan’s crit-icism of Stewart’s clothing elicited protests from readers of the  Washing-ton Post,  who questioned and made fun of Givhan’s high fashion values for Stewart, a middle-aged woman in years and build, one who makes products for the lower end of the market. 134 OPRAH WINFREY Famous names are expected to sell products and magazines. Appar-ently, most buyers are able to separate the product and magazine from a blemished name and personal life of many well-known entrepreneurs. That has surely been the case with entertainers in other ﬁ  elds. Perhaps, though, it is the very taint of scandal that catches the public and the shoppers’ eyes. Business assessors opine that media chiefs will continue to search for more stars who will attract purchasers, so that famous names are ﬂ  oated periodically in the news.  Although circulation fell for Stewart’s magazine, it may or may not be attributable to the publicity about her stock trading. Signiﬁ  cantly, despite the fact that advertising is up, news reports have also pointed to somewhat poorer circulation for Oprah’s magazine, which has never been touched by scandals of any sort. Neither Stewart’s nor O’Donnell’s magazines, however, seem to have offered much of a challenge to Oprah’s, even though there was no apparent difference to be found on the magazine racks in stores, inasmuch as some of the largest grocery chains stocked both Stewart’s and O’Donnell’s magazines, sometimes one or the other, but, inexplicably, not Oprah’s for a long time. Al-though there may be some arcane reason for the choices, food stores seem to beneﬁ  t from the sales of all women-centered magazines.  Oprah has been a huge factor in the sale of books, a boon to writ-ers, publishers, and bookstores, and even to discount and department stores such as Costco, Sam’s Club, and Target, all better known for food items and other merchandise. A large number of book stores carry her magazine, but most discount stores do not. Even though some stores did not publicize Oprah’s book choices by distinguishing them from other books, most book stores contained separate racks of Oprah’s book selec-tions. Her logo on books reportedly increased sales tenfold, according to a report by Time Warner. 9  Although those early books are no longer featured, the ones that remained in print still carried the sticker an-nouncing them as an Oprah choice, and once Oprah came back to the business of touting books, no matter the subject, logos and sales went up. In fact, her ﬁ  rst book choice when renewing the club in the summer of 2003, John Steinbeck’s  East of Eden,  quickly rose to the top of the paperback best-seller list.  Oprah’s Book Club choices varied in number, theme, period, author’s roots, and their relationship to Oprah’s other picks. Furthermore, there  AMERICA READS 135were usually signiﬁ  cant differences between the books chosen for the club, some of which were the work of authors who appeared on Oprah’s show. One of the exceptions to these is the real life of a woman named Jaycee Lee Dugard, who’d been a child kidnap victim for 18 years without trying to escape from the man who fathered her two children. There was also the similarity between Duggard’s experiences and the psychological conditions faced by an actress, Mackenzie Phillips, au-thor of  High on Arrival.  For more than 10 years, Phillips had an incestu-ous relationship with her father without ending it or seeking help.  Like her television programs and her book clubs—with their enor-mous effect on sales—Oprah’s magazine has been described by writer Patricia Sellers of  Fortune  as “the most successful magazine launch ever.” 10  Although it ﬁ  rst appeared on U.S. newsstands in July 2000, it was expanded within the year to an international edition. The interna-tional edition is as glossy as the U.S. one and almost as huge. However, the subject matter is not entirely the same. A signiﬁ  cant percentage is devoted to South African matters and people, with both black and white women as the readership. The magazine grew in the United States to a readership of two and a half million within a short period of time. With an annual revenue topping $140 million, it is a consid-erable part of the Harpo empire, surprisingly proﬁ  table in an industry in which most magazines rarely make a proﬁ  t in the ﬁ  rst years after their establishment. At a time when other longtime popular women’s magazines have failed,  O, The Oprah Magazine  continues to attract a signiﬁ  cantly large number of new readers. The items advertised, photo-graphed, and recommended to readers are geared toward the purchaser at the high middle income level: Tommy Hilﬁ  ger clothing for members of the family; Calvin Klein and Estée Lauder perfumes. The majority of items for the home—crystal and elegant table settings—would not be found in low-end or discount shops.  Success of a high-powered publication does not come without dedi-cation and tussles. According to Gayle King, editor-at-large of the magazine, Oprah is obsessive about  O,  overseeing everything, even “commas” and “exclamation points,” and numerous people have told of the amount of time and work she puts into it. But there also have been reports, though carefully squelched, of tension and problems in the staff. Given the tight control of all Oprah operations, the likelihood 136 OPRAH WINFREYis that further information will not be provided. Only the positive sto-ries are publicized, such as the gifts and trips she gives to staff.  From its inception, like many other magazines directed toward women,  O  has followed a pattern of topics known to appeal to a speciﬁ  c group of women, those said to be more ﬁ  nancially upscale than Oprah’s daily television watchers.  O,  however, includes some regular features of its own, with something for everyone, from cosmetics to books. Clearly, it is Oprah’s magazine, and at times she seems ubiquitous. Fol-lowing Oprah’s opening essay, “Here We Go,” is an attractive calen-dar for the month, with photographs appropriate to the season. Thus, one year, the offerings for the month of November feature knitting yarns in richly colored yarns of red and burnt orange, a teakettle and cups of hot tea, and an autumnal sunset scene; an August calendar pic-tures a mother and her two children bathing in the ocean. A featured statement by a recognizably famous person—such as Gandhi or James Baldwin—heads up the calendar, with aphorisms for most of the days. Every issue of the magazine has a different subject announced on the cover. Some that have appeared over a two-year period are Friendship, Success, Creativity, Family, Intimacy, Fun, Confession, Adventure, Love Your Body, Stress Relief, You’re Invited, Home, To Your Health, Love, Sex, and Dating, Communicate, Balance, Energy, Truth, Free-dom, Couples, Strength, and Weight. Many seem to relate to topics that are dealt with on the television show. Various illnesses, including bipolar disorder, depression, alcoholism, psychosis, and suicide, are fea-tured, although the different venues have different tones.    Each issue of the magazine offers advice of many kinds, much of it in Oprah’s pieces, as well as in the regular monthly columns, and in articles by specialists on a particular subject. Like the comments made about Oprah being the national therapist, the magazine seems to fulﬁ  ll the same role. The style of  O  is personal, often confessional. Most of the problems of life ﬁ  nd their way eventually onto the beautiful glossy spread, which features a photo of Oprah on the cover as well as an impressive number inside. Sometimes the cover photo is duplicated in greater detail within the magazine. And, when a particularly beautiful picture of Oprah appears in newspapers and other magazines, it also is printed in  O.  Over a period of several years, through photos alone, a reader may gain insight about the star’s preferences in clothing, from  AMERICA READS 137 Oprah Winfrey stands in front of the cover of the premiere issue of  O, The Oprah Magazine , at a press breakfast in New York, April 17, 2000. With a newsstand distribution of 1 million,  O  debuted nationwide on April 19, 2000. (AP Photo/Ed Bailey) casual shirts and pants to elegant hostess apparel. The same may be said about her hairdos: long, short (relatively), curly, straight, ﬂ  ipped, upturned. All are eye catching. The covers also reveal her ﬂ  uctuation in weight.  When Oprah was asked why only her picture appears on every cover, her answer was somewhat ingenuous; it was to avoid the neces-sity of making choices of other people every month. Only on two occa-sions has someone been pictured alongside her: Ellen DeGeneres and Michelle Obama. In addition to the many pictures of Oprah inside the magazine, the photos are generally of celebrities—perhaps alongside a brief article by or about them. Background scenes of ﬂ  owers, green ﬁ  elds, and blue water abound. And, although a great many of the arti-cles are about serious matters, there are occasional ones about pleasure, with descriptions and photos of parties Oprah has given. The settings are usually a tribute to the elegant life of the rich and famous. Against a backdrop of colors, ﬂ  owers, and greenery are gorgeous shots of food—hors d’oeuvres, salad, a chicken main dish, drinks, and desserts. The table settings and linens may be like the products that the star recom-mends in every issue with its soft selling style in the magazine and on 138 OPRAH WINFREYtelevision. All of those displays are big business, but not the usual fare of most of her readers.  Among the monthly articles, Oprah’s “Here We Go” column in-troduces the theme treated in the majority of articles, most written by women and for women. However, three men writers have been regulars: Dr. Phil (McGraw), Dr. (Mehmet) Oz, and Nate Berkus. The view held by readers of Oprah as a woman not only of wisdom but also tenderheartedness underlies advertisements as well as articles.  Every issue features an interview in which Oprah talks to someone famous or important to her, people she knows well or only through rep-utation, but generally those she admires. Some of the interviews have special interest for women, such as the one Oprah had at the home of Elizabeth Edwards when she had just written a book and appeared on the television program but before all the unsavory facts came out about her husband. On occasion, the interviews provide insight into Oprah herself. Oprah always credits her friends for the help they have given her in good times and bad. However, Oprah would undoubt-edly say it is almost impossible to fend off the press—both reporters and television commentators—who search out scandals. Not only did Elizabeth Edwards write a book about her life, but so too did John Edwards’s former aide, Andrew Young, and Young’s wife, Cheri, produce a tell-all book,  The Politician,  which purportedly outs John, Elizabeth, and “the other woman.” (The Youngs were guests on Oprah’s show, during which Oprah pointedly revealed distaste for the entire matter. When Edwards’s mistress and mother of his child Rielle Hunter was questioned by reporters about revealing photographs and a story in a magazine—not  O, The Oprah Magazine —she was critical of Oprah and her “belief systems about sex.” In the back-and-forth stories that have been printed, it seems as though only Oprah escapes with her dignity intact.) Later, Oprah had Hunter on the show as a guest, although, to date, Hunter has not written a book.  In the constant effort to provide multiple points of view—and not just happy, positive ones—varied positions are shown whenever pos-sible in the magazine. Thus, in the issue ﬁ  lled with testimonies to the value and importance of friendship, there is also a thoughtful piece on ending friendship: why and how it happens and when it should hap-pen. Not all friendships are forever, and one must face such realities  AMERICA READS 139honestly. Illness and health are frequent subjects in  O,  and when some particular spark catches the attention of the public, Oprah interviews for the magazine unusual people whose strength and willpower in the face of a ravaging disease inspires others. (Although illness and health are not usually the focus of plots in book club choices, the books also frequently seem to have links in their subject matter; reviewers some-times suggest that certain novels would be good choices for the club because they are depressing and/or painful.)  Every month, at least one article—and sometimes as many as four articles—about health is printed in the magazine. The matter of weight, particularly, always a staple of women’s magazines, gets much atten-tion. Inasmuch as it seems the entire world watches Oprah’s weight,  O  provides a forum to reveal her successes and failures, just as she has on her shows for years. In one issue, she listed the many different diets she tried. However, as faithful readers and viewers know, one diet after another has failed, as is evident in magazine photos and her daily show. However, over time, there has been a diminishing of that discussion.  Advice of all kinds is given in every issue, such as the understand-ing of and information about money in Suze Orman’s column “Finan-cial Freedom.” Hers is a practical guide to the management of money. Orman, like several of the other contributors, answers questions of all kinds, primarily about money and investments. Occasionally, though, she moves into other areas, such as providing an executor’s checklist for handling a will. Unhesitatingly, she tackles problems of modern U.S. culture and mores in discussing important and sensitive issues. A central theme is the way women control their own income. Tradition-ally, even when both partners in a marriage worked, they pooled their salaries, with the man taking charge. However, as the ratio of working women increased and people began to marry later, women became more independent and accustomed to handling their own ﬁ  nances. Orman looks at the situation from many perspectives, yet advises women they do not need permission to control the money they earn. Power shouldn’t be apportioned according to the size of a paycheck. (Perhaps this should be part of Oprah’s admonition not to give away your power. It is central to her views.)  Beauty, health, and style articles appear in every issue, as well as a monthly self-help piece by Oprah called “Something to Think About.” 140 OPRAH WINFREYThis turns into a written exercise with the listing of numerous questions that need to be answered by the reader in the spaces provided. The seg-ment becomes a kind of self-therapy as the reader follows the technique occasionally used by therapists, including Dr. Phil in his own monthly advice column “Tell it Like It Is.” He answers questions that are asked by individual readers, but the advice may be applied to a much wider audience.  More and more often in recent years, Oprah has written of events from her childhood, remembering her grandmother, who, despite her harshness and rigidity, communicated unspoken affection to the little girl through small actions. Even though she was unaware then of her grandmother’s love, the events she recalls from those early days have come to her slowly over time, as in the “Aha” moments others have described each month. After years of trauma in several relationships, Oprah began to recognize the gifts her grandmother gave her. Perhaps remembrance of things past serves her like the “grateful journal” of the type she has advised young women to keep. The aha moments of hers and others take on the quality of epiphanies, turning into the light of recognition.  Oprah is a sharer, which is different from relinquishing control. When we share, we help others as well as ourselves. Talk is sharing—talk is healing, she tells readers, as a strong believer in communication and intimacy. Talking isn’t whining or being humbled and defeated. It is like a building block of character, and those who refuse to bow to silence and isolation elicit her admiration. Not only on television but in her magazine she often speaks of her early hard life; yet there is never self-pity, because she has learned that individuals must take charge of their lives and ﬁ  nd their own happiness. Everyone yearns for family and affection, but such longings are not always fulﬁ  lled.  At various times, Oprah has spoken of her own traumatic introduc-tion to sex. Although what Oprah tells the reader about her early life is no longer new, she identiﬁ  es with those troubling points underlying teenage sex: the failure of parents to communicate with children, the distances between them, the need girls have for love and acceptance, and the pervasive unhappiness and self-blame resulting from sexual ac-tivities. The fact that Oprah is now middle aged and has dealt with the anguish of her experiences long ago does not alter the similarities  AMERICA READS 141of root causes. In every period of life, children and adults deserve love and approval, but they do not always ﬁ  nd it. In an almost a Words-worthian view, Oprah writes that one must not grieve for what is not given, but take another path. Whatever our achievement, success in life comes from learning to love and accept ourselves. Central messages such as these account for the affection and trust of women worldwide and undoubtedly will continue to be important in the time remaining for  The Oprah Winfrey Show,  the ongoing  O  magazine, and other Oprah undertakings.  NOTES      1 . Linton Weeks formerly wrote for “Style” in the  Washington Post.      2 . “The Oprah Effect,”  Publishers Weekly,  Oct. 2006.    3 . Robert Elder, of the  Chicago Tribune,  didn’t much care for Mattie’s poems. He sees cynicism in the publishers, Tom Clancy, and Oprah, sug-gesting they are opportunistic in using the child’s work and fatal illness for their own gain.    4 . Amy Schwartz, “Will Oprah Save the Book?” Dec. 1996. Amy Schwartz is a former columnist and editorial writer for the  Washington Post.  She currently works as vice president for education and youth at the Wilson Center.    5 . David Carr, “How Oprahness Trumped Truthiness,”  New York Times,  30 Jan. 2006.    6 . Carlin Romano writes for several newspapers. In this piece, he takes Oprah to task humorously for her obviously manufactured excuse to cancel the Book Club. In contrast to the seriousness of most crit-ics, Romano and Matt Janz, although writing for different papers, ﬁ  nd much humor in Oprah’s activities.    7 . Edel Coffey, “Jonathan Franzen: Oprah, Obama, and My Smelly Socks,”  Independent  (Ireland), 5 Oct. 2010.    8 . Review of  Oprah: The Little Speaker,  by Carole Boston Weather-ford,  Publishers Weekly,  22 Feb. 2010.    9 . Kate Pickert, “Oprah’s Book Club,”  Time,  26 Sept. 2008.   10 . Patricia Sellers, “The Business of Being Oprah: She Talked Her Way to the Top of Her Own Media Empire and Amassed a $1 Billion Fortune. Now She’s Asking, ‘What’s Next?,’ ”  Fortune,  1 Apr. 2002.   This page intentionally left blank