 Chapter 6  LIVING LIFE THE OPRAH WAY  Throughout the years, Oprah has hosted many shows on topics that also ﬁ  ll central roles in all magazines, not only hers: food—goo d and bad; weight—healthy and unhealthy; physical ﬁ  tness; spiritual happiness; and emotional strength.  Oprah’s focus on healthy bodies and minds helped make her a top player in television, radio, and publishing, but it has been her unplanned as well as her planned engagements that revealed the extent of her inﬂ  u-ence on consumers. Currently, it is the matter of talking on cell phones while driving; more than a decade ago, it was the meat industry, when she joined other prominent ﬁ  gures in discussions about beef and at-tacked the industry for selling unsafe products. Oprah’s involvement in revealing the dangers of eating beef that could be tainted brought on a ﬁ  restorm from all segments of the industry: the economy was affected, cattlemen were enraged, lobbyists were perturbed, and, in Amarillo, Texas, the industry’s lawyers brought suit against Oprah. If so famous a star had not been involved, the case would not have attracted much in-terest, but it became a major story pushed by media attention. With an atmosphere resembling that of a circus, Amarillo and the rest of Texas were in the news as long as the case continued. Lines of people and 162 OPRAH WINFREYautomobiles—sporting pro and con bumper stickers—ﬁ  lled the streets, in addition to fans, photographers, and imported preachers.    Oprah won her case, not only initially but also on appeal, with the people closest to her giving moral support. However, the case was soon forgotten; restaurants soon took orders for beef; there have been fewer details of Oprah’s eating habits; her magazine’s food section is not tak-ing a position about good and bad food; and the United States appar-ently is back to eating hamburgers. Although, more recently, the matter of tainted eggs has been in the headlines, Oprah did not discuss it on her show.  Oprah’s current campaign is about having people pledge to refrain from using a cell phone or texting while driving. She also includes the use of hands-free auto devices in the pledge, and will not be deterred from enforcing it among her own employees. They, and others who Oprah Winfrey reacts to a fan reaching out to her as she leaves the federal courthouse after jury selection in Amarillo, Texas, January 20, 1998. A jury of eight women and four men was selected in the multimillion-dollar defamation case pitting Texas cattlemen against the talk show queen. (AP Photo/Eric Gay) LIVING LIFE THE OPRAH WAY 163might be affected by her inﬂ  uence, reportedly are fearful of resisting her decree; as “Just Plain Darren” of East Coast Radio writes, “You don’t mess with Oprah.” Her inﬂ  uence spreads far and wide. Columnist Peter Bart states, without much exaggeration, her “empire is wealthier than an emirate,” and “her devotees seem to yearn to touch the hem of her garment.”  As Oprah began her newest venture, much about the future was un-known, except for the news releases that came out—and most provided the same information. However, much has been also going on behind the scenes while Oprah along with her staff and colleagues deter-mined the direction OWN would take. The news reports talked of the shows that would be starting sometime in late 2011. Although dates and information were contradictory, the show was actually launched on January 1, 2011.  With the title “Winfrey Launches Rehab Show,” the announcement gives the debut date as January 11 for the eight-episode program that will focus on issues about food and eating disorders. It is a one-hour documentary series, during which the treatment center and a group of people will take part for a period of 42 days. The announcement of the program notes that it presents a “rare look inside,” one in which “pa-tients face their demons” in their attempt to discover “what’s behind the food.”  Anyone who has the least familiarity with Oprah’s show or maga-zines knows about her lifelong battle with food and weight and her challenges over the years with one diet or another. As nutritionists from the University of California, Davis, Judith Stern and Alexandra Kazaks have written in their book  Obesity,  if people could control their weight through willpower, there would be no problem. Fifty short biographies appear in their book, one of which is Oprah’s. Like others who have struggled with obesity, Oprah has sought the magic pill or diet. In 2008, she went on a vegan detox plan, and at the same time her Web site of-fered a healthy menu. Like everything else that Oprah does, it was news around the world, with enthusiastic response to the plan, at least tem-porarily. A Canadian reporter chided her about the “21 day cleansing diet.” With her pleading words “Oprah, Oprah, Oprah,” writer and co-medienne Linda Cullen professes admiration but also sees “a disturbing 164 OPRAH WINFREYtrend” in the many diets Oprah has followed, and she lists a few, including the names of some gurus that have become “gazzillionaires” because of Oprah’s imprimatur. Other plans followed, such as the announcement of a future anni-versary issue of O. Also, the magazine will continue to include recom-mendations about diets and related topics. Perhaps there will be future articles about Oprah’s personal struggle with weight, even though she now appears to have separated herself from the subject. More information given to the public, not about the magazine but about future career plans, was the all-encompassing new program’s cable name. Known as  Oprah’s Next Chapter,  it was chosen to replace the 25-year-old  Oprah Winfrey Show.  The program will be in prime time, and Oprah no longer will have a daytime offering.  When questioned by interviewers about the reasons for the dramatic changes that will be made, Oprah states: “I didn’t have a life. . . . I only get to live my best life on the cover of the magazine.”  OWN: The Oprah Winfrey Network that she and Discovery Net-works hold jointly, once launched in 2011, according to the  Christian Science Monitor,  “is very likely the ﬁ  rst television network based around a single person.” That shouldn’t surprise anyone, considering all the enterprises Oprah has been involved in over the years with the em-pire she built, as one report put it. Oprah consistently promotes self-improvement and celebrities. Oprah watchers know her empire is part magazine, part radio, part a channel on XM Sirius satellite radio, mov-ies, and the Harpo production company. When she moves to her new venue, she will be hosting a show two to three times a week, unlike what she has done for 25 years. Few details have been given thus far, but it has been announced that her programs will not come from her Chicago studios. When reporters asked her about the amount of work she’s put-ting in to get ready, she responded that, in looking at tapes, not only is she “up to [her] knees, [but] up to [her] thighs.”  The self-improvement themes will continue to be a feature on the new channel. Some programs will be partly original shows, and some will focus on Oprah. Even though Oprah will not be on every program, the chairman of the new network, Mary Altaffer, has assured backers and viewers that Oprah will be in charge “behind the scenes.” The new shows on OWN are expected to reach about 80 million homes. Those  LIVING LIFE THE OPRAH WAY 165announced to date run the gamut of topics, including familiar names: people who have appeared on earlier Oprah programs, such as Lady Gaga; Gayle King (who will appear regularly with her own program); Shania T wain (the Canadian country singer who will host a series called  Why Not? ); Dr. Laura Berman (author of  The Book of Love,  sex therapist, and “guru,” described as making the discussion of sex lively in “juicy . . . installments” as a regular on Oprah’s show); and there will also be well-known people from a wide variety of activities, including theater, jour-nalism, politics, and business. However, before those future appearances take place, Oprah is planning a program during which she will travel around the globe interviewing guests.  Some media experts are concerned that there will be saturation on the new network because of the dip in Oprah’s ratings that has taken place in the past decade or so. However, the defense for that is to compare Oprah’s numbers with those of other stars and to ﬁ  nd little difference.  Meanwhile, assessments by pundits of past and future activities have been ﬂ  ourishing. Now that Oprah’s highly successful magazine has cel-ebrated its 10th anniversary while others have failed, nobody predicts its demise. Some reporters have counted the pluses and minuses for the magazine. One instance comes from Courtney Hazlett, who, in her MSNBC program,  The Scoop,  listed Oprah’s monthly appearances on the cover of every issue in 119 different outﬁ  ts, 74 different hairstyles, and with 2 convertible cars. Hazlett quotes Oprah’s statement about her “all-time favorite” cover, the August 2004 issue, which showed her on a beach, where it was chilly enough for the photographer and crew to follow her with heaters — obviously it wasn’t August for the shooting. Outstanding books also get a nod in the same anniversary issue, with 10 of them “that rocked Oprah’s decade.” Thus far, it appears there will be no continuation of any type of book discussion in the new shows, popular as they have been. Oprah has frequently changed her mind about matters concerning the book club.  Oprah inevitably is a star maker. Over the years, she nurtured many people who appeared on her show regularly until they had followings that enabled them to ﬂ  y on their own. That type of move was described several years ago by Roger King, himself a star maker, as “taking some of the gamble” out of the business. There have been dieticians and cooks—among them, Rachel Ray, who has her own show, a line of kitchen 166 OPRAH WINFREYproducts, and cookbooks. Ray has had a number of appearances on Oprah’s program and the Food Network. In the line of a succession of Oprah’s chefs is Art Smith, who had followed Rosie Daly. Smith and Daly each wrote a cookbook. An Oprah magazine cookbook was pub-lished in 2008 that received much praise, particularly for its stunning photographs.  Art Smith now owns several prestigious—and expensive—restau-rants, is a recognized philanthropist in his own right, and is so popular as a result of exposure on Oprah’s show that newspapers carried the story and pictures of his marriage to his companion of 10 years, Jesus Salguerio, an artist and cofounder of Common Threads, a national pro-gram for children. Smith’s book  Back to the Table  was a best-seller as he traveled across the country giving promotional talks to groups. One media relations director described audience adoration for Smith, which is not surprising given that he tells them not only about his book and recipes, but also stories about his life and his “precious” and “slightly eccentric“ mother, Addie Mae Smith, who went along with him on an African safari trip.  Others made famous through association with Oprah include Bob Greene, exercise trainer and author of books about health; Phil McGraw, the psychologist Oprah brought onto her show for numerous programs about mental health; Mehmet Oz, a practicing heart surgeon, who, like McGraw, followed the trajectory from television guest to daily host and monthly columnist as well; and Nate Berkus, a popular designer who also went from Oprah’s show to one of his own, although television critics have been suggesting it may not survive in the ratings game.  Musing about his years working with Oprah, Berkus reminds people he’s been on the show 66 times and has done 127 makeovers, during which he discovered large and small lessons about “our humanity.” In calling his new venture—a daytime talk program—a “conversation,” he credits Oprah for much he has learned. While on her show, he re-ported on home and fashion interests just as he did for her now-defunct magazine  O At Home.  On one of Oprah’s shows featuring gays and sometimes their family members, Berkus was included. Regulars de-voted to the program follow the lives of many people associated with Oprah and thus are aware of the death of Berkus’s partner in the tsu-nami that struck Asia in 2004, when the two men were there on vaca- LIVING LIFE THE OPRAH WAY 167tion. Berkus has been signiﬁ  cant in  O, The Oprah Magazine,   but now that the decision has been made to shift the taping of the daily Oprah television program to New York, the future is cloudy for Chicagoans such as Berkus, even though the announcement was made that Harpo, with its many branches, will remain in the city, and Oprah has opened another shop in Chicago, indicating she is not cutting entirely her con-nection to Chicago.  All of these people have shared interests with Oprah—some strictly with food and diet, some with exercise, and one with mental health. A reporter for the  Washington Post  likened a “top-ranked televangelist in the Arab world” and “New Age Guru,” Amr Khaled, to “tele-megastars Joel Osteen and Dr. Phil,” whereas a number of critics have faulted McGraw for what they have labeled “ﬁ  ve minute therapy,” a charge, naturally, that he disputes. Whether it is his visibility in so many of Oprah’s undertakings or his audacious and sometimes combative daily television show that is the source of the negative assessments, his ar-ticles ﬁ  t into an established pattern of most women’s magazines.  Oprah continues to control the Dr. Phil program, but a few years ago there was a dustup over his interference in the problems of the singer Britney Spears, even though, ironically, he was practicing without a license, because he’d allowed it to lapse. However, he maintains an ex-tremely high rating on television. His show has a staff of about 300, his elder son Jay also has a television program, Dr. Phil’s self-help books have sold in the millions—adding to the millions of dollars he earns from his shows—and he continues to tour in many places with the program he calls “Get Real.” Rumors about the state of his marriage circulated a few years ago after some gossip was printed in the tabloid press. A num-ber of blogs and various comments also appeared, such as the recom-mendation that the marriage counselor get marriage counseling, and some papers reported Oprah’s displeasure about the stories. Most of the criticism of McGraw advises the public that his show is a form of the ﬁ ve-minute therapy he has been accused of. Solutions must be offered by the end of the one-hour program. Yet, despite negative comments from the press and the reputed anger of Oprah, McGraw’s popular col-umn is still run in her magazine. He gained some publicity during the celebration of the 10-year anniversary of the magazine when the show was being taped at Radio City Music Hall. Oprah and Dr. Oz helped 168 OPRAH WINFREYhim shave off the mustache, described as a “trademark soup strainer,” he’d worn for more than 40 years.    Dr. Mehmet Oz has interests not only in the mental and physical elements of health, but also shares an additional passion with Oprah: spirituality.  Forbes,  describing him in a lengthy interview, reports Oz’s belief “that spirituality is as important as material life.” 1  In another lengthy piece about Oz titled “Dr. DOES-IT-All,” Frank Bruni of the  New York Times  describes Oz glowingly not only as a host for television and radio, but also as writer of books and articles for magazines, and “one of the most accomplished cardiothoracic surgeons of this generation.” 2  Oprah’s label for Oz is “America’s doctor.” Before leaving for his own show, Oz appeared on Oprah’s program 55 times. Undoubtedly her af-fection for him led to the celebration with champagne for the entire audience on Oz’s last appearance on her program. Oprah has told him she wants the show to focus on people, and that is what he is doing. From left, Dr. Phil McGraw, ﬁ  nancial advisor Suze Orman, host Oprah Winfrey, Dr. Mehmet Oz, and interior designer Nate Berkus participate in The Oprah Winfrey Show live from Radio City Music Hall in New York, May 7, 2010. (AP Photo/Evan Agostini) LIVING LIFE THE OPRAH WAY 169Because of his popularity, his is considered a strong lead-in for other shows and has been drawing large numbers of viewers from the begin-ning. Attributing much of his success to the focus on any one of the ﬁ  ve most popular topics—sex, aging, weight, energy, and personal re-lationships—he notes that most people always want to understand and improve such things. Weight seems to be the leader in the number of times a subject is introduced; Oz showed a gastric bypass ﬁ  lm on one of Oprah’s programs and continues to speak of food as “a socially accept-able addiction” that must be dealt with psychologically.  Oz’s books,  You  guides to health, written with another physician, Michael Roizen, chair of Cleveland Clinic’s Wellness Institute, have had sales estimated to be about 9 million copies. The success of the best-seller,  You on a Diet,  was attributed “in no small part,” said a reporter, to Oz’s good looks and appearance in scrubs on Oprah’s show.  In addition to being listed by  Time  magazine among the world’s most inﬂ uential people, Oz has been writing for the  Chicago Sun-Times  since 2008, and in the near future will continue to write columns for  Time   magazine. Somehow, Oz continues in his major activity, though only on Thursdays, as a heart surgeon at New York Presbyterian Hospital/Columbia University Medical Center, and, if that were not enough, he supervises HealthCorps, which he started as a nonproﬁ  t in 2003, to place in high schools health educators who have recently graduated from college. It hardly needs saying that Oz is a ﬁ  rm proponent of ex-ercise and healthful foods, often doing programs about weight and fre-quently appearing with Oprah to advance health causes for children. He is a man who practices what he preaches and even dances on his shows.  Of the entire group of people whom Oprah has made famous, Bob Greene may be the closest to her personally. He has mentored her for a number of years on diet and physical health but also sees the impor-tance of spirituality for Oprah’s “Best Life” theories. But no matter how wise his philosophy and training have been, and even though Greene’s  The Best Life Diet  received the highest score in the 2007  Consumer Reports  rating of diet books, without his association with Oprah his considerable successes probably would not have occurred.  Oprah met Greene brieﬂ  y while living in Florida, and he later moved to Colorado. Shortly after beginning work at a spa in Telluride, 170 OPRAH WINFREYfortuitously he met Oprah, who owns a house in the area. The meet-ing at ﬁ  rst was one in which there was no shared interest. Oprah, then and for many years after, was self-conscious about her weight, and Greene, who knew nothing about her, didn’t even own a televi sion set. However, she became his ﬁ  rst client at the spa, and it was not long before Oprah followed Greene’s guidance in health and ﬁ  tness. His philosophy is one that he labels “getting real,” a phrase also favored by Phil McGraw. To Greene it consists of sensible eating and exer-cise. He continues as her expert in many health issues, in addition to writing about such matters in her magazine. Oprah coauthored Greene’s first book, and he later became one of the hosts on Oprah Radio XM, which formerly had been  Oprah and Friends.  His show airs on Saturdays, with other Oprah favorites hosting on other days: best friend Gayle King, mentor Maya Angelou, writer Lisa Kogan, sex therapist Dr. Laura Berman, and spiritual leader and writer Marianne Williamson.  Even though Greene entered her life as an adviser on weight, which in the past was a major topic on her show as well as in the magazine, she no longer discusses the matter at length. Over the years, her weight made her the butt of many jokes not only in the lighter sections of the news-papers, gossip columns, style sections, and humorous essays, but even in business and ﬁ  nancial news. From the time she ﬁ  rst became a television host in Chicago, the descriptions about her size were as unﬂ  attering and cruel as reporters could make them: “hefty,” “heftier,” “zaftig,” and “fat city.” Even on the Internet she was described as a virus that could expand or shrink. Tabloids seemed to ﬁ  nd more unﬂ  attering photos of her than any other paper did, even while her own magazines showed her as healthy, ﬁ  t, and gorgeous. Her clothes are fabulous—although in the early years they always seemed to exaggerate her ﬂ  aws. Her makeup is glowing, her hairdos ever changing and eye-catching. She no longer seems preoccupied with weight, and for whatever reason, most of the press no longer sees her as a target. At times she endured a formidable program combining dieting and workouts with Greene as her personal trainer. On television and in her magazines, a smiling, beautiful Oprah elegantly dressed and coifed appears. Occasionally, though, she mentions her lifetime struggle with weight and recently discussed her own story on the program with author Geneen Roth, who wrote the diet book  LIVING LIFE THE OPRAH WAY 171 Women, Food, and God.  The book is Roth’s seventh, and coincidentally she lists seven guidelines for better eating. (It seems to have gained a seal of approval inasmuch as it was listed on Oprah’s Web site.)  As recently as 2010, when Oprah and Greene went to Orlando, pa-pers praised their efforts to improve the lives of their followers. In the column “Oprah’s Guru Brings Best Life Inspiration to Orlando,” Ginger Brashinger, of  The Southwest Star,  credits Greene for providing insight about the role of food and exercise in everyone’s life. Greene’s focus was on “emotional eating,” a subject well known to Oprah, who made it a frequent subject on her show over the years.  In photos of Oprah over the 25 years in which she has been in the pub-lic eye, she is thin, thinner, fat, fatter. Often recently, she may be seen standing behind some object or sitting down, yet the self-consciousness appears to be gone, and she can laugh about weight. She spent years in her search for the magic bullet of weight loss, carrying on an obsessive search for the holy grail of the body beautiful. Although there are still a few papers that consider her struggle a topic of humor and speculate that the rest of the world does so as well, an Australian reporter ﬁ  nds some shards of sympathy, saying Oprah probably “has suffered more in-dignity” about the matter than anyone else in the public eye. 3   The question of racial discrimination also arises periodically, but Oprah chooses not to go down that road, and rarely does she have to confront the issue. When questioned about an unpleasant matter that happened in France—she was turned away at closing time from Hermes, an elegant shop in Paris—she spoke of feeling humiliated but not ready to give a label to the reason even though others implied it was racism.  Not all cultures obsess in the same way: white South Africa, for in-stance, a country in which racial issues remain a signiﬁ  cant matter, seems more interested in her weight than in her race, which might be attrib-utable to Oprah’s former preoccupations but also to the popularity of her magazine and programs in that country. Sometimes, she confesses some small matter about her appearance, like the time she had her ears pierced at age 51, done before a live audience by a plastic surgeon on her program. Her magazine always shows gorgeous and famous people who have improved something in their lives, with fantastic results. Further, she appeared on one of her Friday programs with her hair au naturel, and everybody loved it, thinking it was a weave. Oprah’s magazine does 172 OPRAH WINFREYnot discuss failures, although the tabloids are ferocious in their pursuit of any failure to be found in Oprah.  As for Oprah herself, perhaps now that she has passed her mid-50s, she accepts the fact that she cannot be a size eight. She has told inter-viewers she believes in a quote from a poster she keeps in her Chicago home; it is from the good witch Glinda in  The Wizard of Oz:  “You don’t need to be helped anymore.” One might argue those glad tidings seem to apply only to the star herself, for, as authors Weston Kosova and Pat Wingert point out, millions of her fans “regard her as an oracle.” But Kosova and Wingert also write she has a very contradictory type of per-sona: on the one hand, she’s a “down-to-earth-everywoman” and on the other “an unapproachable billionaire.” They note that she regards her-self as a teacher and a guide to better living, yet some of her advice and promotions aren’t good, and “a lot” that her frequent guests provide “is just bad.” Additionally, they state, Oprah doesn’t seem to know the difference between “gush” or nonsense and useful, worthwhile infor-mation, seeing her guests as “prophets,” with her not knowing how to differentiate. 4   For years she has had a routine to get her through her long and ardu-ous days—the early hours as well as early taping of her shows, super-vising the running of Harpo, endless meetings, and travel, which has become more frequent in recent years. An adoring public continues to follow her every move, although there are Coleridge-like voices that predicted future doom. But Oprah has usually been surefooted in her career choices, and when things do not turn out well she rarely hesi-tates to cut the string. She has done that in relationships, in business activities, even in philanthropic endeavors. Not only does she have followers around the globe, but she even has those who mimic her style on foreign television. Although China is one of the few countries that does not broadcast Oprah’s shows, there is a program in China whose host has been described as “China’s Oprah.” Chen Luyu, host of  A Date with Luyu,  explores issues that have traditionally fallen under the cen-sorship ban in her country, sexual matters that are taboo topics—lesbi-anism, transsexualism, and AIDS. Yet she has not been censored.  Being on Oprah’s program—as she was—would not have inﬂ  uenced the number of Luyu’s viewers, which run into the millions, but for other people in the entertainment business, an invitation to appear on  The  LIVING LIFE THE OPRAH WAY 173Oprah Winfrey Show  is a commercial goldmine for individuals, products, and, as all publishers know, books (a fact that everyone associated with writing, publishing, and selling books is deeply concerned about, now that Oprah is moving on to other things.) However, she will continue to be a drawing card for advertisers, as is anyone close to her.  Advertising Age  made the point that Oprah’s friend Gayle King (who also is editor-at-large for  O, The Oprah Magazine ) was given Dove’s ﬁ  rst Real Beauty Award.  Oprah’s Harpo Productions attempts to hold tight control on all things. In 2005 reporter Alessandra Stanley labeled Oprah “a self-help evangelist,” . . . “someone with a messianic sense of purpose.” 5  That de-scription seems to apply even more so today, as one follows what Oprah has called her “big life.” Talking to another writer who queried her about future shows, Oprah revealed no speciﬁ  cs about her involvement, but the messianic sense Stanley sees permeates all such discussions. Oprah wants to continue meaningful programming that will inspire people and lead them to think differently about their lives. In the past few years, her growing interest in religion and spirituality has taken many turns.  She doesn’t believe in organized religion. God, she has said, is “the life force” or “nature” or “Allah.” In her philosophy, church is in one-self. Anything is attainable if a person ﬁ  nds the connection to a higher power. Some years ago, she attended, for a short time, Trinity United Church of Christ, a South Side church in Chicago, the same one Presi-dent Obama and his family went to before he was elected. However, in the year before the election, the pastor, Reverend Jeremiah Wright, with “inﬂ  ammatory rhetoric,” created a major storm among the press, the public, and politicians. With his words, “God damn America,” Wright alienated many followers, including the future president and Oprah, whom one Canadian reporter, Ed Morrissey, called “the patron saint of suburban families.” 6  At the time, Morrissey believed both Obama and Oprah would be damaged by their association with Wright, but he sug-gested that Oprah would be the bigger loser because of the appeal she has had for the public.  His prediction, however, proved incorrect for both. The new presi-dent dissociated himself from Wright. Oprah stopped attending tradi-tional churches and wanted to separate herself from the angry messages of preachers such as Wright. Soon she began to follow a new type of 174 OPRAH WINFREYChristian spirituality, leading an anonymous friend to tell a  Newsweek  reporter, “There is the church of Oprah now,” and Oprah “has her own following.” It came at about the same time as the deluge of stories tell-ing of abuse in the Catholic Church. Among columnists admiring of Oprah, Stanley Crouch wrote on November 12, 2007, “Oprah could teach the Catholic Church about taking responsibility.” Prompted by the way Oprah took the blame for the problems at her academy in South Africa, Crouch berates the Catholic clerics—“those irresponsible men at the top of the Catholic Church who almost brought down the insti-tution here in America.” Oprah, said Crouch, is “the Mother Courage of talk television . . . a woman who uses her bully pulpit . . . in her efforts to right wrongs.” Adding the greatest praise, Crouch compares her ef-forts to those of “the battered and bleeding civil rights workers.”  Inﬂ uenced or at least “popularized by celebrities like Oprah,” public interest in self-help spirituality has taken hold in numerous places across the country. According to some, at issue is the word  spirituality.  Accord-ing to a professor at the Southern Baptist Theological Seminary, where a new doctoral program about spirituality has been introduced, the term “can mean whatever a person wants it to mean.” Alert Mohler, presi-dent of the Center for Biblical Spirituality, has stated that the term is a buzzword that can mean leaving out “God and Jesus” for the self, in a type of “cafeteria-style” religion. Spirituality differs from the experience of Christian spirituality, according to another scholar, in that the for-mer is detached and “objective,” whereas the Christian experience is focused on living within the faith. Self-help Evangelical pastors, such as Texan Joel Osteen, follow the theory of “self-betterment at home” and at work, whereas equally well-known Evangelical pastors such as Rick Warren stress that life is not about the individual but about God. And still another interpretation is given by Arthur Holder, professor and dean of the Graduate Theological Union in California; he com-pares modern spiritual seekers to the 19th-century transcendentalists Emerson and Thoreau.  T wo newspaper writers, speaking of Oprah’s “evolution,” in which she changed from being the host of a talk show to becoming “Inspirer in Chief,” refer to two books, one by assistant professor of religious stud-ies at Yale University, Katherine Lofton, the other by author Marcia Nelson. Both have written, as have others, of Oprah’s enormous inﬂ  u- LIVING LIFE THE OPRAH WAY 175ence on the book world, listing two books that have been the subject of her classes: Helen Schucman’s  A Course of Miracles  and Eckhart Tolle’s  A New Earth.  Oprah has described Tolle’s book as the best book on spirituality she’d ever read. Nonetheless, some members of the religious right have attacked Oprah’s programs and inﬂ  uence on her “students,” calling her “the devil.” However, there are also strong defenders who are well versed in the Bible and accuse the accusers of not knowing the Bible. If they had, say her supporters, they would know that Eckhart’s books speak frequently about Jesus, as well as quote the New Testament .  7   Columnists with more moderate views note Oprah’s appeal to large numbers of women, such as those who pay large amounts of money to attend one of her Live Your Best Life tours. Eugene Robinson, of the  Washington Post,  notes that it is easy to make fun of her, as he does gen-tly. But he also speaks of the rapport she has with women and the rea-sons for her appeal. Even women who have had great success in their own lives relate to Oprah because she searches “for the same things” they do. Her presentations, he writes, renew women who attend “ser-vices at the Church of Oprah, which is the church of possibility.” 8   Nevertheless, many Christian leaders call on their ﬂ  ock to “ﬂ  ee” or “just say no” to Oprah’s “doctrines.” Calling her a peddler of untruths, one of the best known voices to speak out against her is a guest col-umnist for the  Christian Post:  Chuck Colson, once a special counsel for President Richard Nixon. Colson was convicted for his role in the Watergate scandal and later converted to Evangelical Christianity. As a founder of Prison Fellowship, he has been zealous in trying to bring about prison reform, is the author of many books, and has a daily broad-cast called  Breakpoint  on 1,000 stations. He disagrees with Tolle and faults Oprah for “undercutting Christianity.” 9   With all the negative publicity, Oprah became defensive about her choices of Tolle’s books for her classes and the classes themselves, point-edly stating they were not about religion but rather to help people ex-plore their consciousness. On her Web site, Oprah writes that she keeps Tolle’s book next to her bed. Still, her statements have done little or nothing to deﬂ  ate the attacks on her. There is often a great resemblance among them, but that seems not to matter to many of her critics. Lofton, however, tempers her remarks by ﬁ  rst praising Oprah’s philanthropy, but then ﬁ  nds it is linked to commercialism. (Perhaps a similar criticism 176 OPRAH WINFREYcould be made of Tolle, whose Inspiration Cards and CDs are sold on-line.) According to Lofton, Oprah’s “imperative is not to save souls . . . [but] to [make] you want to return and consume the product.” Oprah “is a corporation” using “a religious idiom to amazing effect.” There is “an Oprah message,” says Lofton, and, it states if you buy the recom-mended product your life will change for the better.  One might ask why, then, are people so gullible when there is so much negative material written and preached about her? A writer for  The Hufﬁ ngton Post  listed seven reasons for her powerful appeal: empathy; interaction; smiles; eye contact; gestures, such as expressive hands; pos-ture, including a relaxed body; and interaction, through listening and responding. 10   Although few reporters mention it, another important factor in Oprah’s evolution came from a trip to Israel and a visit to the Holocaust Memorial Museum in Washington, DC, where she stated she came to her understanding of power and what she, “a once colored girl,” could achieve through television and all that she could do. The recognition of the failure of people to prevent tragedies and a belief in the necessity to stand up for what is right moved her even more in what she came to believe was her mission. What she has done since then clearly has expanded her many roles and sense of destiny.    Pastor Hooper at the Religious Science Church of the Desert Spiri-tual Center wrote that Oprah “is a mighty force . . . at times . . . as mighty as a river.” That force has brought people, hundreds of thou-sands of them, to unite spiritually. The Reverend Hooper builds his lectures around themes that Oprah stresses, particularly the belief that there is no one way, “no one . . . ownership of the . . . river of life.”  So many columnists and preachers have focused on Oprah’s foray into religion and spirituality that, after a time, the intent, claims, sin-cerity, and purpose of the sermons, essays, blogs—or even whether the particular writer is hawking a book—becomes unclear. Are they fol-lowing some advice from the lengthy article taken from  Advertising Age   about having a brand? Or is it the advice the writers themselves volun-teer in “How to Get Your Brand on ‘Oprah’  ”?  A month after Reverend Wright’s intemperate remarks, Oprah started the Soul Series, on XM radio online. For 10 weeks, Oprah and author Eckhart Tolle taught the material from his book,  A New Earth,  the  LIVING LIFE THE OPRAH WAY 17761st book featured on Oprah’s Book Club as well as her choice for their summer reading. It was estimated to have drawn millions of people to the programs. Those interests have led to some television programs on which well-known religious ﬁ  gures have been guests. And there have been many nonguests hostile to anything and everything Oprah stands for or advocates.  Some people—professional and otherwise—proclaim doom for her now or in the future; others ﬁ  nd reasons to hate her and proclaim that “the age of Oprah” is about to end because white women ﬁ  nally know she is black. Apparently, that sentiment is linked to being what some bloggers and other critics label “a New Age racist.” Furthermore, in contradiction to the fact that her magazine remains a popular seller, these same critics predict its failure because of her egoism, her choices of new age books such as  The Secret  and  The New Earth,  and for committing Talk show host Oprah Winfrey speaks about her trip to the Auschwitz concentration camp and the importance of Holocaust education to help combat genocide during an address at the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum in Washington, DC, October 25, 2006. (AP Photo/Charles Rex Arbogast)178 OPRAH WINFREYthe unforgivable sin of launching Dr. Phil. Because of her supposed multiple offenses against her fans, opponents predict that “Oprah wor-ship” is over. 11  If so, how does one explain the crush that came about for seat tickets to the last  Oprah Winfrey Show ?  Calling Oprah “the Jezebel of Prophecy,” a documentary ﬁ  lmmaker advertising his availability for interviews (but not interviewed by Oprah) produced a DVD,  Hebrew or the So-Called Negro,  warning of her destruc-tive effect. Another, better known, seven-minute video, “The Church of Oprah Exposed,” was produced by “Christian Groups.” Shown on YouTube, thus guaranteeing a wide audience, it describes Oprah as de-nying major beliefs of Christianity. In her saying there are multiple ways to heaven, she is seen as a dangerous cultist. Reporting about the ﬁ  lm, sponsored by the Baptist Press, is Mark Coppenger, who dislikes her religious views, calling them “the blind leading the blind”—that is, toxic New Age views. “If,” he writes, “we give our love to rivals of God,” God has every reason for “righteous indignation.” Coppenger moves from God’s indignation to his own, faulting Oprah for having her own agenda, which includes the unacceptable “cohabiting with Stedman Graham.”  Some people who are interested in Oprah’s love life report that she and Graham live together, and others claim that the two have separated. A few years ago, there was much speculation over a rumor that Oprah had removed Graham’s name from her will. The story was neither con-ﬁ  rmed nor denied, like most gossip about her private life. Oprah has refused to say what bequests are in her will or where her fortune will go after her death.    Graham, who has been Oprah’s companion for more than 20 years, appears to play a limited role nowadays in Oprah’s activities, even though the two are shown together occasionally in photographs, and more frequently during the period of the presidential nominations and election. Graham is known to be a staunch supporter of conservative Republicans, but he seemed to encourage Oprah’s activities for the Democratic candidate and appeared with her, smiling and enthusiastic, at the Chicago victory rally for the new president. News reports tell that Oprah provides funds for charitable causes in Graham’s hometown. She has donated million of dollars to Whitesboro, the small New Jersey city where Stedman grew up. However, the public are not privy to many  LIVING LIFE THE OPRAH WAY 179facts of Oprah’s personal life, and she requires staff to maintain her privacy. If private information is leaked, it is anonymous. Several years ago, the tabloid press was reporting on every sighting, but not so now, except for infrequent—and perhaps questionable—statements that Graham has other love interests, and so does Oprah, or that Graham has moved out of the apartment the two shared. Over the years, various books, magazines, and tabloids have attempted, sometimes successfully, to unearth information about the romances in Oprah’s younger days. However, Oprah will not comment on those stories and, with only a few exceptions, rarely will any past lover do so either. Although there is much less news about the couple, when there is anything to report, it does ﬁ  nd a way into papers. Even on a golf course, when Graham was promoting Athletes Without Drugs, a nonproﬁ  t organization he founded in 1985, he responded angrily to questions about Oprah’s decision to leave Chicago. He blames the city for not giving her credit for all she has done and stated that people take her for granted. Oprah had no comment about his remarks. She is not concerned with such state-ments. She follows her own judgments. However, she often repeats the Stedman Graham and Oprah Winfrey walk the red carpet at the Kennedy Center Honors, in Washington, DC, on December 5, 2010. The 2010 honorees were Merle Haggard, Jerry Herman, Bill T. Jones, Paul McCartney, and Oprah Winfrey. (AP Photo/Jacquelyn Martin)180 OPRAH WINFREYstatement that those to whom much is given have the obligation to give much to others, and her intention is just that.  Some tabloids have questioned on occasion Oprah’s sexual orienta-tion and have reported that some of her biggest fans are gay men. The same press organizations also speculate frequently on Oprah’s relation-ship to Gayle King. Their friendship has provided and seems to con-tinue to provide fodder for some reporters. Although King shares many, many activities with Oprah and has become a prominent ﬁ  gure on her own in television and radio, as well as in Oprah’s publications, both women scorn the implications of the press, and both have also stated there is no shame in anyone’s being gay. Yet, on Howard Stern’s radio program, Rosie O’Donnell once added fuel to the issue when she talked of a trip Oprah and King had taken that was “as gay as it gets.”  Unquestionably, King, like others among Oprah’s friends, has ben-eﬁ  ted from the connection to one of the most famous and richest women in the world; their friendship goes back to their days as rela-tive unknowns in Baltimore. King, who has been married and divorced twice, has two grown children. Oprah, their godmother, spoke at both their college graduations. Since their early meetings, Oprah and King have prospered, following much the same path, and the gossipy media enjoy printing information about the expensive gifts of homes Oprah has given to King—one home in Connecticut for $3.6 million and an apartment in New York for $7 million. The same report in the  New York Daily News  states that Oprah has given King a large amount of money as well. But, after all, Oprah is known to be one of the most generous people on the globe.  Perhaps the only woman who is as close to Oprah as Gayle King is Maya Angelou, the person Oprah speaks of with love and admiration and the deep connection she feels to her “mentor-mother-sister-friend.” With the rocky, unhappy, fractured relationship Oprah has with her birth mother, the reasons for the love and trust she holds for Angelou seem obvious. Despite the difference in their ages, much in their lives followed the same pattern: terrible childhoods, rape, separation and loss, betrayal. But both moved beyond all that might have destroyed them, with life stories that circle the globe.  Having declared again and again that she wants to give back to a world that has given her so much, Oprah’s charitable work is unpar- LIVING LIFE THE OPRAH WAY 181alleled. But not everything she does strikes a note of rescue. Clearly, Oprah loves to have fun, give parties, and see friends, and over the years she has held a number of spectacular events for those she holds dear, King and Angelou. She has also given gifts to her staff. She has taken those close to her on trips and on sensational cruises. She loves to surprise people, as she has done many times, with exquisite gifts. The most famous party of all, her Legends Ball (celebrating among others, Maya Angelou) in 2006, was photographed by multiple news-papers and magazines—reminiscent of, and still talked about—the Black and White Ball given in the 1970s by writer Truman Capote. The “once colored girl,” now the “queen of media,” or “the Mama” as she calls herself to her African students, is frequently shown in exquisite gowns hosting her own affair or a party for charity, perhaps to raise money for the Metropolitan Museum of Art, as she did in the spring of 2010. Escorted by designer Oscar de la Renta, naturally she was wearing one of his gowns.   Oprah Winfrey has a hug from poet Maya Angelou during the Uncommon Height Award of the National Council of Negro Women, honoring Oprah Winfrey in Washington, DC, on June 4, 2009. (AP Photo/Jose Luis Magana)182 OPRAH WINFREY Jennie Rothenberg Gritz, writing in  The Atlantic,  thinks men ﬁ  nd Oprah “troublesome,” because she has the “capacity to take over the world,” and they object to the ways that women follow Oprah, who has “invaded their homes—from kitchen to bedroom.” Apparently, or not so apparently, she tells readers, men object to the changes Oprah has wrought in marital relationships.  Rarely are the galas or pleasurable happenings the subjects of her shows. Rather, the seamier topics bring in the audience for Oprah’s pro-gram. Scandalous news may lead to a program, as with a show featuring a prominent Colorado pastor whose secret life unfolded in the papers. Founder of New Life Church in Colorado Springs and famous as the president of the National Association of Evangelicals, Ted Haggard, a married man with ﬁ  ve children, over the years had affairs with men. The ensuing scandal forced his resignation from his church, and, al-though Haggard no longer remains its minister, both he and his wife, Gayle, were on Oprah’s show, speaking of their decision to remain together. They spoke of their participation in a Christian restoration team, their work in holding weekly prayer meetings on their prop-erty. All of this became public information because of Haggard’s high standing in the religious community. It was not only the scandal and publicity that made Haggard fodder for the news industry, but also the outspoken book Gayle Haggard wrote,  Why I Stayed: The Choices I Had in My Darkest Hour.  The Haggards’ joint appearance on Oprah’s program took place shortly before the release of a documentary about Haggard, who now earns a living selling life insurance. Ted Haggard and his wife launched their new church in June 2010, but it did not have a meeting place, although they also held a “Resurrection” party. Apparently, they are not supported by any ofﬁ  cial group.  Politicians are more likely than ministers to make news with their inﬁ  delities, but, unlike Gayle Haggard, few political or pastoral wives write about them. Sometimes they appear to be tell-all, sometimes dec-orous, sometimes cautious. Political books more often are written by the husband, but both George and Laura Bush have become memoir-ists. Laura Bush’s  Spoken from the Heart  came out in 2010, shortly before Oprah interviewed her and her two daughters at the Bush ranch.  Another political wife, Jenny Sanford, former wife of the governor of South Carolina, wrote about her marital situation in  Staying True,  but  LIVING LIFE THE OPRAH WAY 183she did not appear on Oprah’s show, although the press was all over the story, even reminding a fascinated public that she was an heiress and former banker, and showing photos of the former Mrs. Sanford happily escorted by another man. Without Oprah’s golden touch, though, and no interview, the book sales were weak.  Another politician’s wife, Elizabeth Edwards, also produced a per-sonal story, called  Reconciliation,  which she talked about on Oprah’s show. Perhaps before the series of scandals that shocked and even out-raged the public, Elizabeth Edwards and her husband, North Carolina Senator John Edwards, were as well regarded and loved as the Haggards. They also tried to put a patch in their frayed marriage. Like the Haggards, they both appeared on Oprah’s program in their super-size, elegant home, where John Edwards kept appearing and disappear-ing during the talk. Perhaps the subsequent events, after the publication of Mrs. Edwards’s book and the continuing revelations about her hus-band’s sordid actions became newspaper and magazine reports with tid-bits of their private lives, caused their story to linger more salaciously than did the stories of the Haggards.  Elizabeth Edwards, whose terminal cancer was diagnosed during the time her husband was running for the presidency, became a much-admired, pitied, and sympathetic ﬁ  gure; and, if the numerous outcries of commentators and others are followed, many will forgive the sinner in Haggard but not in John Edwards. When Oprah announced that “the other woman,” Rielle Hunter, would be on her show, bloggers, in large numbers, wrote angry letters, several of them criticizing Oprah. Writer Jeff Labrecque questioned whether people wanted to know any more of the tawdry details, to which the majority of bloggers said no. Nevertheless, some few admitted to prurient interest at the same time that they voiced pity for Mrs. Edwards and annoyance with Oprah. But the show must go on, and indeed it did. As anticipated, huge num-bers of bloggers as well as news and television reports followed the ap-pearance of Hunter on Oprah’s April 30, 2010, program. Half a page of print and pictures in the  Washington Post  portray the two—Oprah and Hunter—seated across from each other in Hunter’s living room in Charlotte, North Carolina, as they discuss what the  Post ’s televi-sion critic, Lisa de Moraes, mockingly calls “Johnny Edwards’s life of integrity.” The details of the romance provided by Hunter sound much 184 OPRAH WINFREYlike a combination of a fairy tale and the old  True Confessions  magazine. De Moraes captures the essence of both, as she quotes some of Oprah’s remarks and adds some equally droll lines of her own. Oprah: “Why did you, Miss Spirituality in Alignment With the Truth . . . go along with it?” Hunter, as she explained Edwards’s situation, has him saying: “I want your help. I need your help.” With a combination of humor and scorn, De Mores, throughout her column, lets readers know, “Really, you can’t make this stuff up.”  Even the sophisticated and cynical television newspeople could not refrain from showing clips of Oprah’s interview. The generally business-like Andrea Mitchell, who normally avoids that type of news, had a segment about it on her program. The staff writers of  The Daily Buzz   described Hunter’s responses to Oprah as “wacky, new-age like refer-ences,” while the  New York Post  commented how “incredulous” Oprah often seemed.  Arts and Entertainment  was kinder in describing the event as one of Oprah’s more “provocative” interviews. Online Time  Enter-tainment  compliments Oprah as “the perfect interrogator,” noting that she is the television person with the most years of experience in ‘in-terviewing crazies.” With the title of the story “Oprah Grills Deluded Edwards Mistress Rielle,” the writer captures what Oprah intended for all watchers to see: “skepticism in [her] eyes, as Hunter provided her and her viewers “the full tour of her scenic hometown, Delusionville.”  As is characteristic of this type of scandal, a number of bloggers, before and after the Hunter interview, offered religious advice to Elizabeth Edwards; some recommended she leave her husband—a path she took eventually—and, not conﬁ  ning their hostility to John Edwards, some expressed contempt for all men who “are weak.” Sales of two books with stories about the Edwards family were on best-seller lists for some time, and the authors also appeared on numerous talk shows. The story did not disappear for weeks after Hunter’s interview with Oprah; still another one appeared in a newspaper, an interview with Hunter’s sister, Roxanne Marshall, who spoke for Hunter’s family, stating they were very upset by her behavior and her indifference to the effect on Elizabeth Edwards as well as the Edwards’s children. Mean-while, the angry anti-Hunter and John Edwards blogs continued until replaced by another scandal about other celebrities. With the death of Elizabeth Edwards, only the news about her will (leaving nothing to her husband) was circulated.  LIVING LIFE THE OPRAH WAY 185 Blogs about Oprah, her show, her activities, and certain lurid stories surrounding her or guests on her programs cover multiple pages on the Internet, whereas other stories languish. In reports of a tragic happen-ing in 2005, newspapers referred to the man responsible, James Arthur Ray, as an “Oprah approved self-help guru.” Ray, who continues to ad-vertise as a motivational speaker, was involved in the attempt to turn a group of people into so-called spiritual warriors by placing them in a sweat lodge in Sedona, Arizona. For that privilege, individuals paid $9,000 each to Ray. The purpose was to purge their bodies of sin, but the result was the death of three people (two the ﬁ  rst night and a third a week later); about a dozen (some reports say 18) became very ill and had to be hospitalized. After announcing that the deaths were not ac-cidental, authorities charged Ray with negligent homicide, but little more news of the happening was circulated.  A number of bloggers, while not defending Ray, were very critical of Oprah’s role in the event and of her relationship to Ray. The saying that “all publicity is good publicity” clearly did not apply to Oprah’s part in the tragedy, but it quickly disappeared from the news cycle, and the reason for that remains unknown.  Oprah always has professionals—lawyers and staff—to handle any-thing that threatens her image, except now Kitty Kelley’s unauthorized biography—over which Oprah has had limited control. Oprah, even though she dislikes publicity apart from her professional life, is often involved in suing or being sued. However, Kelley claims she has been kept from interviews on television programs because of Oprah’s power-ful reach. When questioned, though, about Oprah’s refusal to autho-rize the book, Kelley states she was not interested in going that route. There is no question that authorization may mean oversight and inter-ference. But Oprah’s less scandalous involvement in spiritual studies and events during the past few years has brought about more sermons, reports, praise, and condemnation than anything else to date. It re-mains to be seen what the Kelley effect does to Oprah’s image, and if there is damage, how long the aftershocks linger and whether there will be any tie-in to the spiritual part of the star’s life.  For several years, numerous religious ﬁ  gures have attacked every-thing Oprah has said or done about religion and spirituality. At McLean Bible Church in Vienna, Virginia, two Christian evangelicals, Josh McDowell and Dave Sterrett, warned a crowd of 1,500 about Oprah’s 186 OPRAH WINFREYspiritual teachings. The warning is that Oprah has created “a hodge-podge of personalized faith, which is dangerous”—views they expressed in the book they wrote together,  “O” God: A Dialogue on Truth and Oprah’s Spirituality.  In their attempt to refute her beliefs, they warn that she speaks of God in an impersonal way, telling us to look within our-selves, where we will ﬁ  nd God. Although, they claim, Oprah uses bibli-cal and Christian terms and references, they are used falsely when she speaks of Jesus and humans as part of “Ultimate Being” and “Universal Energy.” If Jesus said “I am the way, and the truth, and the life,” then “why can’t I?” The danger, the two men say, is that such belief may lead people to do as they feel rather than to follow “what is absolute truth.” They do not accuse Oprah of being anti-Christian but anti-Bible. McDowell states that Oprah ﬁ  nds meaning through the claims of people she agrees with rather than by serving “a jealous God” and that she ap-parently doesn’t really question their statements. On the one hand, he praises her “passion and commitment,” both of which are “genuine,” but, on the other hand, quarrels with her choices of Eckhart Tolle and Marianne Williamson as teachers and leaders of things spiritual. Writer Michelle Bearden states in her review of McDowell and Sterrett’s book that it won’t “make it as selection for Oprah’s book club.” The authors’ intention is to show that Oprah’s spirituality doesn’t ﬁ  t their evangelical beliefs.  Everyone knows that appearing on Oprah’s show carries cachet. How-ever, not all appearances are equal. Ministers look to achieve publicity, and perhaps followers, from being on the prized Oprah show. Michael Beckwith, founder of the Agape International Spiritual Center in Cul-ver City, California, and author of the book  Spiritual Liberation  (2009), appeared on the Oprah program in 2009. However, his claim in 2009 to a reporter at the  Atlanta Journal Constitution  that he is “Winfrey’s spiritual advisor” has not been veriﬁ  ed by Oprah, nor was it repeated in his Wikipedia biography. Beckwith is not the only person claiming to be Oprah’s spiritual advisor; the list grows and grows.  Politicians, governors present and former, wanting the publicity or not, become the subject of contrast to Oprah. Sarah Palin, former governor of Alaska and prominent Republican candidate for vice president during the 2008 election, was chosen during that time as an example to hold up against Oprah because the star was campaigning for then Senator  LIVING LIFE THE OPRAH WAY 187Obama. In an article purportedly about Obama, author Robert Bowie Johnson concentrated on his beliefs about Oprah, none of them positive. On one side, he holds up Palin as a believer in the Christian faith, a per-son who is guided by God and the Holy Spirit. But Oprah, in contrast, he claims, “mocks” such views in favor of “self-adoration.” His most damn-ing contrast between the two women speaks of their belief in creation: Palin, “in the image of God, . . . descended from Adam and Eve,” and Oprah, as evolving “by chance . . . [from] . . . primordial ooze . . . through worms, reptiles, and monkeys.” To solidify his points, he then links Oprah to “her mentor, Tolle,” because they view themselves “as God.” 12   If such harsh condemnation isn’t sufﬁ  cient to turn admirers away from Oprah, it is not for lack of critics. A Web site named Jesus-is-Savior speaks of Oprah as “the most dangerous woman in the world,” and the author of a self-published book,  Don’t Drink the Kool-Aid  (a title that refers to the tragic deaths in 1978 of hundreds of people who had belonged to a cult) warns readers of the “spell . . . [that] is over Oprah,” suggesting they too will die because of her teachings. If the reader won-ders what it is that Oprah has unleashed upon the world, her critics ﬁ  nd endless examples. One person, Jennifer Simon, writing on a site called AlterNet, states she knows that her remarks will anger Oprah’s “mob of followers.” What are those remarks, “followers” might ask? The writer answers: Oprah has an “A-list of freaks”; she hasn’t taught women to be happy at any weight; she pushes the notion that spending brings hap-piness; she has created “the monster, Dr. Phil, who legitimizes bigotry” and is “a sound bite psychologist.” He is “her fault.” But what appears to be an ongoing sin is having created a monthly magazine “more ego-tistical” than her television show. 13   Oprah is attacked frequently for her association with Dr. Phil. They blame her for whatever they dislike about Phil McGraw. Someone who calls himself “Mild-Mannered Rambler”—in something of a misno-mer—accuses her of letting loose on the world Phil, “an arrogant poor-excuse for a doctor,” an “unethical” and “self-promoting punk,” and the writer ﬁ  nally classiﬁ  es McGraw as “just plain garbage.” A reader might ask, legitimately, what accounts for the polls that show McGraw’s huge ratings.  Various doctors object not only to the advice put forth by both McGraw and Oprah, but some go further, calling many of her claims 188 OPRAH WINFREYabout medicine “ludicrous.” When  Newsweek  published a lengthy ar-ticle berating her inﬂ  uence on the public, 14  several physicians wrote letters of support for that view, one saying she supports bad medicine in her role, creating the “Oprah-ﬁ  cation of medicine.” Rather than having the necessary “critical thinking skills,” she promotes her “New Age nonsense.” 15   Of course, bloggers again jumped into that fray, some in support of the magazine and some with anti-Oprah views, even calling her a “use-ful idiot”; but others staunchly defended her as “an amazing woman” as opposed to sexists and racists of “the privileged class.” A physician who had been on her program several times in the past writes of her “as the best that humankind has to offer” and a role model for those who need to “become more civilized.” While lauding Oprah, Mark Goulston exco-riates Dr. Phil as an “opportunist” who has taken advantage of Oprah.  It was Oprah’s strong endorsement of Helen Schucman’s book,  A Course of Miracles,  as well as other books and philosophy, which turned a small ﬁ  re into a conﬂ  agration. The Schucman book was presented through daily classes on XM radio, with central thoughts being “there is no sin,” that one should not cling to ideas of “the old rugged cross,” and that everyone should consider “alternative” views of Jesus. However, it was Eckhart Tolle’s ﬁ  rst book that captured huge numbers of devotees.  The Power of Now  was translated into 33 languages, and  The New Earth,   written after that, sold faster than any of Oprah’s previous 60 book club choices. His work was taught online as free weekly 90-minute webinars to an audience of 2 million, in what one critic labeled “Oprah-Tolle Crazy”; whereas critic Roger Friedman compared Tolle to the char-acter Chauncey Gardiner (Chance), in Jerzy Kosinski’s 1971 novel and Hal Ashby’s 1979 movie  Being There.  Chauncey can neither read nor write, is a man described in various ways by different critics, one viewing him as “empty and vapid,” a blank character who speaks in meaning-less language. (Was one or more of the critics thinking of Chauncey in referring to a report that “even Oprah” [often? sometimes?] “seems to have no idea what he [Tolle] is talking about”?) Another possible in-terpretation of the story is as satire about the foolishness of those pub-lic leaders stupid enough to imbue an empty shell—Chauncey—with remarkable or even godlike abilities. Whichever the interpretation, Friedman is undoubtedly contemptuous of both Oprah and Tolle.  LIVING LIFE THE OPRAH WAY 189 Although it was Oprah who made Tolle famous, one might question the idea that she alone is entirely responsible for his overwhelming success. His books have remained on the best-seller lists of the  New York Times  despite the furor about him and his philosophy. Even the British have waded into both sides of the discussion. A lengthy article about Tolle in the Sunday newspaper the  Independent  skewers him with the description, “New Age mumbo jumbo; and no one is more jumbo with his mumbo.” But, in fairness, the writer also reports on Tolle’s popularity in addition to the views of an English professor who supports Tolle’s Eastern, Buddhist approach, calling it similar to transpersonal psychology. And, despite the numerous detractors among ministers and laypeople who ﬁ  nd his work “utter twaddle” and blame Oprah for turn-ing another self-help book “stinker into a bestseller,” there are fans for the philosopher from many areas of society, including academia and Christian circles. 16   At times it seems that Oprah does nothing but work, travel for busi-ness, give talks, appear on shows other than her own, and on and on. Even when she talks of being overworked or having no life of her own, her friend Gayle King, who may know her better than anyone else does, tells interviewers that not only does Oprah thrive on doing good, but she also loves to work.  Does Oprah resemble the ﬁ  gure in Shakespeare’s song “Who Is Silvia?” Or is the reviewer/novelist Louis Bayard close to the mark when he describes her as “a house divided: extroverted and narcissis-tic, philanthropic and close to the vest, nosily spiritual and hilariously materialistic”? 17   Who is Silvia/ what is she,  That all our swains commend her. . . . .  Is she kind. . . . . ?  For beauty lives with kindness. . . . .  Then to Silvia let us sing,  That Silvia is excelling;  She excels each mortal thing  Upon the dull earth dwelling. 190 OPRAH WINFREY NOTES     1 .      Dirk Smillie, “A Headache for Dr. Oz,”  Forbes,  16 June 2009.    2 . Frank Bruni, “Dr. DOES-IT-ALL,”  New York Times,  16 Apr. 2010.    3 . Ros Reines, “We’re All Weight Watchers,”  Sunday Telegraph  (Australia), 28 Mar. 2010.    4 .   Weston Kosova and Pat Wingert, “People Wising Up to Oprah,”  Zimbio,  June 2009.    5 .  Alessandra Stanley, “Oh, Oprah, 20 Years of Talk, Causes and Self-Improvement,”  New York Times,  15 Nov. 2005.    6 .       ABC News, 13 Mar. 2008.    7 . Jeff McCord, “Is Oprah the Devil?,”  Jeff McCord’s Blog,  20 Apr. 2008.    8 . Eugene Robinson, “The Church of Oprah,”  Washington Post,  10 May 2005.    9 . Chuck Colson, “Oprah and a New Earth,”  Christian Post,   28 Apr. 2008.   10 . Jerry Weisman, “The Art and Science of Oprah Winfrey,”  Huff-ington Post,  29 Feb. 2009.   11 . Anita Creamer, “America Finally Has an Oprah Overload,” www.freepublic.com/focus.   12 . Robert Bowie Johnson, “Sarah Palin’s and Oprah’s Spiritual Beliefs Contrast Starkly,”  Christian News,  15 Sept. 2008.   13 . Jennifer Simon, “10 Good Reasons You Should Hate Oprah Winfrey,” Nerve.com, Jan. 2010.   14 .   Weston Kosova, “Live Your Best Life Ever!,”  Newsweek,  30 May 2009.   15 . The response to the  Newsweek  article was by Dr. David Garski and was originally published in  Science-Based Medicine  on June 7, 2009 .    16 .   Ether Walker, “Eckhart Tolle: This Man Could Change Your Life,”  Independent,  21 June 2008.   17 . Louis Bayard, review of  Oprah: A Biography,  by Kitty Kelley,  Washington Post,  Book World, 15 Apr. 2010.  