293Chapter 40
Barcelona
Conversation with Leo Messi
Twenty-four years are very few. The past is just over the 
shoulder, the future still seems far away. It is soon, too soon, 
to weigh things up and it is difficult to look forwards to see 
what the coming days will bring. But you can always try. Leo Messi agrees.
Sitting at a desk in a lounge in the bowels of the Nou 
Camp, he seems almost like a schoolboy who is about to do his homework in class. A mobile on the table is his only 
aide.
Let’s begin.
What are the most difficult moments you have endured in your 
life?‘Moving country from Argentina to Spain. I left my home-
town, my friends, my people. The first few years here were 
tough. There were times when my father and I were in Barcelona and the rest of the family was in Rosario. We were 
suffering. I missed Matías, Rodrigo, my little sister and my 
mother. I used to cry alone in my house so that my father wouldn’t see.’
And the happiest moments?
‘The titles I won with Barcelona and with Argentina.’294 Messi
And the Ballon d’Or trophies?
‘The individual awards make the people I love happy, they 
make up for the sacrifices that my family has made. But 
the titles which make an entire town or country happy are 
worth much more. It’s incredible, incomparable.’
But now you are the king of the world.
‘I’m the same guy and I’m lucky to be part of a great team.’
Could you possibly have imagined what the last few incredible 
years would bring?
‘I would never have predicted all this. Not in my wildest dreams did I think that things would turn out so well.’
Let’s go back to the past: what is your first good footballing 
memory?
‘It was at the beginning, at Grandoli, we were playing in the 
Afi league against Amanecer. They said they were the best, the champions. My whole family was in the stands. And I scored four goals, one of which was very good.’
Why do you love football so much?
‘I don’t know. I first took a liking to it as a child, like all chil-
dren do, and I still enjoy it a lot.’
How did you acquire such confidence with the ball, how did you 
learn all those tricks you know how to do?
‘By spending every moment with a football. When I was lit-tle I would stand all on my own on a corner and kick the 
ball around continuously. But I don’t study certain moves. I 
don’t invent feints, or anything like that. I just play the way it comes out. I don’t think about it.’Barcelona  295
Who was the one who determined your love of football?
‘My grandmother Celia took me to the ground the first 
time. She was a very important person, very special to all 
of us. She was such a good person. I remember Sundays at her house being something of a party. My brother Rodrigo 
and my cousin have been role models. And my father also 
supported me a lot.’
Has it been difficult to get to where you are today?
‘All kids want to be footballers, but in order to make it you need to work hard and make a lot of sacrifices. And 
you have to go through some very tough times, like when 
I decided to stay in Barcelona … It was my decision. No 
one forced me to make it. My parents asked me many times 
what I wanted to do. I wanted to stay in the youth academy 
because I knew that that was my chance to be a footballer. I was very responsible from a very young age.’
How have the growth problems and your height affected your 
development?
‘I was a child, I didn’t really have any idea of what was hap-
pening to me, apart from the injections in my legs every night. But, being smaller, I have learned to control the ball 
better on the ground, be more agile and faster than the big-
ger players in order to keep the ball.’
Which games throughout your career conjure up the best memories?
‘That one against Chelsea in the Champions League, the derby against Real Madrid when I scored three goals and, of 
course, the final of the Under 20 World Cup and the semi-
final against Brazil in Beijing.’296 Messi
The most beautiful goals?
‘If I had to choose now, I would say the one in Rome and 
the one against Estudiantes.’
And the one against Getafe?
‘True, that one was also great.’
Is the one against Getafe the best goal you have scored in your life?
‘Yes, it could be, but there were a couple of others when I was little, when I was ten or eleven years old and played 
for Newell’s, which were similar. We have them on video at 
home.’
At around that age, when they asked you who your favourite 
player was, you responded: ‘My brother Rodrigo and my cousin Maxi.’ Have you ever had a football idol?
‘No, I have never had a favourite player, or an idol. When I 
got a bit older I started to like Aimar, I admired his playing style. When I played against him at Valencia, I finally got to 
ask him for his shirt.’
And Maradona?
‘He’s the greatest.’
Did you see him play during his stint with Newell’s in Rosario?
‘I was very young, I was six years old. I went to a match the 
day that Maradona made his debut. But I don’t remember it.’
Is it true that your father bought you a video of Maradona’s best 
moments?
‘I have seen Diego’s goals many times, but I don’t remem-
ber who gave me the video.’Barcelona  297
What do you make of it when everyone compares you with 
Maradona and maintains that you’re his successor?
‘It makes me very happy, because I still haven’t done any-
thing, I need to keep growing and learning. Every day I try to improve, to become a better footballer. And besides, 
Diego is unique, there will never be another.’
It’s the most obvious answer. Let’s move onto another 
topic.
What advice did Maradona give you?
‘He told me to keep doing what I’m doing, always to enjoy 
football and to look after myself, because it’s a short career and if you want to improve throughout it and make it last as 
long as possible, you always have to be in good shape.’
Let’s leave him aside and go back to the Getafe goal for a moment. 
Some people say that that goal changed you. Is that true?
‘It could be that previously I played more respectfully, I was more inhibited in front of my team-mates, and bit by bit I 
was starting to go out there and play the way I like to play.’
Everyone talks about the way you play … How would you define 
it? Try to answer, even though it’s a question you hate.
‘It’s complicated talking about oneself, it’s better to let oth-ers do the talking. What can I say? That I like to be behind 
the strikers, create opportunities, find the goal whenever I 
can.’
What is your best skill?
‘Maybe my variation of pace.’298 Messi
Another tiresome question: about tension. It seems strange that you 
virtually don’t feel it.
‘When I go onto the pitch I am not interested in the opposi-tion, nor in who’s marking me. I try to do well, enjoy myself 
and make a good contribution to my team.’
FC Barcelona?
‘I have been here for eleven years. I feel happy here. They 
took a chance on me when I was thirteen, I wanted to make it into the first team and I did. I wanted to win many titles 
with this team and I did. But I never forget that I am just 
one person, without the help of my team-mates I couldn’t do anything.’
The Argentine team?
‘Wearing the national shirt is something really great. 
Although I live thousands of miles away, I would like to be 
at all the games and bring a lot of happiness to my people. What a shame that it wasn’t to be in South Africa.’
Unfulfilled goal: would you like to play football in Argentina?
‘I would enjoy playing for a club in my country. But that’s a 
while away …’
The telephone rings.
Pause.
It is a glorious day outside. Clear skies and an almost 
summery temperature, although according to the calendar 
it is winter. The grass gleams a shiny green. At the edge of 
the pitch, the tourists are taking a break in their tour of the stadium in order to pose for photos with life-size card-
board cutouts of their idols. A Japanese couple arrive. They 
choose Messi and she is delighted because she is the same height as him, she can put her arm around his neck.Barcelona  299
Inside, the phone call has finished. We can return to our 
conversation.
How do you find living with fame?
‘I don’t think about that. I think about being able to keep 
on playing, that’s what I like the most. I live the same life 
as always. The only thing is that if I want to go out with my family in Rosario, I can’t.’
Doesn’t it bother you when people stop you in the street, asking for 
autographs, photos, kisses?
‘No. There are people who spend hours waiting just to have 
a photo with me. It’s only fair to give them some time.’
Is it true, as those who know you well say, that the fame has not 
gone to your head?‘It’s true. I have my feet firmly on the ground and I never 
forget where I came from.’
And the money hasn’t changed your life?
‘It’s the same as always. We’re not people who waste money 
on luxury items.’
Do you like the advertising?
‘I enjoy it, I like doing it.’
Changing the subject, let’s talk about your first mentors.
‘I learnt a lot from Guillermo Hoyos [his coach with the youth B team], he was very important to me. I did every-
thing I could to move up the ranks.’
And your life mentors?
‘My father, my family, my brother Rodrigo have always 
advised me and helped me in every way possible.’300 Messi
You made a special dedication – ‘I love you, Dad’ – the day 
you scored your first goal on Argentine soil, at the Monumental 
stadium with the national team.‘I had promised, and he deserved it.’
What is your relationship like?
‘Very good. We have spent a lot of time together here. We’re 
mates, we’re friends, although we have our ups and downs. 
Sometimes, he gets worried over little things, he starts to bother me and it annoys me …’
Do you argue over contracts and investments?
‘He always consults me, but he handles everything. I play 
the football.’
And what does your father think of the football?
‘Ever since I was little, after a match, he tells me, “you played 
well” or “you played badly”, but he doesn’t get involved in the rest …’
Aside from forging a brilliant career, your mother hopes that sooner 
or later you’ll have a family.
‘She’s always telling me that. What matters to her is that 
I’m happy, but I’m still too young to think about having a family.’
But you have a girlfriend now?
‘Yes.’
He blushes tomato-red.
And what about the shyness?
‘It’s better, I’ve changed …’Barcelona  301
From whom do you get your bashfulness?
‘Matías is like me, my dad also used to be like that … My 
mother and Rodrigo are different …’
What do you enjoy most in life aside from football?
‘Being with my family and friends.’
Try to picture yourself in fifteen or twenty years’ time. How do you 
see yourself?
‘Living in Rosario with my family … always close to my family.’
Family means everything to you, doesn’t it?
‘I owe a lot to my parents and my siblings. If they are OK, 
so am I.’
Let’s take a test: here are some of the questions La Capital 
asked you when you were thirteen years old. Let’s see how you’ve 
changed. Favourite book?‘Maradona’s book (Yo soy el Diego [I am the Diego]), I started it 
but I never finished it. I’m not much of a reader …’
Eight years ago you said the Bible. Are you religious?
‘I don’t practise, but I believe in God.’
Are you superstitious?
‘No.’
Favourite CD?
‘Argentine cumbia style music, but I don’t know which group 
to choose.’302 Messi
Favourite film?
‘El hijo de la novia [Son of the Bride] and Nueve reinas [Nine 
Queens]. Ricardo Darín is my favourite actor. My grand-
mother looked a lot like the protagonist in El hijo de la novia, 
she used to do things that she also does and she also had 
Alzheimer’s.’
Aims?
‘To win many more titles.’
You really like winning.
‘When you win it makes you happy, when you lose you always feel bad and you spend your time thinking about where and 
how you went wrong. Ever since I was really little I have 
never liked to lose.’
A dream?
‘To be world champion with Argentina.’
The phone rings again: it’s Jorge, his father.
They are expecting him home for dinner. The whole 
family has come from Rosario: Celia, María Sol and his 
uncle and aunt, Claudio and Marcela.
In tracksuit trousers and a white hoodie with trainers, 
Leo Messi walks through the stadium hallway to the lift which leads to the car park. One last goodbye before he 
heads home, to his family.
I wonder what delicious things Celia and aunt Marcela 
have made today?303Career record
Personal summary
Full name: Lionel Andrés Messi
Place and Date of Birth: Rosario, Santa Fe, Argentina, 
24 June 1987
Parents: Jorge and Celia
Sister: María Sol
Brothers: Matías and Rodrigo
Height: 169 cm
Weight: 67 kg
Early career
As a junior, played for Grandoli and Newell’s Old Boys 
in Rosario
At thirteen years old, scouted by Barcelona
Barcelona
First team debut: 16 November 2003 v FC Porto (away)
La Liga debut: 16 October 2004 v RCD Espanyol (away)
First goal: 1 May 2005 v Albacete (home)
Appearances (until 29 May 2011)
Liga 177 Goals 119
Copa del Rey 26 Goals 17
Europe 61 Goals 41304 Messi
Argentina
Debut: 17 August 2005 v Hungary (away)
First goal: 1 March 2006 v Croatia (away)
Caps 60 Goals 18 (up to 29 May 2011)
Appearances
Under 20 World Cup 2005
World Cup 2006
World Cup 2010
Copa América 2007
Copa América 2011
Summer Olympics 2008
Honours won
Barcelona
Liga: 5
2004–05, 2005–06, 2008–09, 2009–10, 2010–11
Copa del Rey: 1
2008–09
Supercopa de España: 5
2005, 2006, 2009, 2010, 2011
UEFA Champions League: 3
2005–06, 2008–09, 2010–11
UEFA Super Cup: 2
2009, 2011
FIFA Club World Cup: 1
2009
Argentina national team
Under 20 World Cup 2005
Olympic gold medal, Beijing 2008Career record  305
Individual honours
FIFA Ballon d’Or (European Player of the Year) 2010
Golden Boot 2010
Ballon d’Or (European Player of the Year) 2009
FIFA World Player of the Year 2009
Onze d’Or 2009
Alfredo Di Stéfano trophy 2008–09
UEFA Champions League Top Scorer 2008–09
UEFA Club Forward of the Year 2008–09
UEFA Club Footballer of the Year 2008–09
LFP Best Player 2008–09
European Player of the Year (second place) 2008
FIFA World Player of the Year (second place) 2008
Under 21 European Footballer of the Year 2007
European Player of the Year (third place) 2007
FIFA World Player (second place) 2007
European FIFA Under 20 World Cup Top Scorer 2005
FIFA Under 20 World Cup Player of the Tournament 2005
Copa América Young Player of the Tournament 2007
Player of the Year, Argentina 2005, 2007
FIFPro Special Young Player of the Year 2006–07, 2007–08
FIFPro World Young Player of the Year 2005–06, 
2006–07, 2007–08
World Soccer Young Player of the Year 2005–06, 
2006–07, 2007–08
Premio Don Balón (Best Foreign Player in La Liga) 
2006–07, 2008–09
EFE Trophy (Best Ibero-American Player in La Liga) 
2006–07, 2008–09
FIFPro World XI 2006–07, 2007–08, 2008–09307Bibliography
Apo, Alejandro, Y el fútbol contó un cuento (Buenos Aires: 
Alfaguara, 2007)
Beha, Oliviero and Di Caro, Andrea, Indagine sul calcio 
(Milan: Bur, 2006)
Brera, Gianni, Incontri e invettive (Milan: Longanesi, 1974)
Fontanarrosa, Roberto, Puro fútbol (Buenos Aires: 
Ediciones de la Flor, 2000)
Frieros, Toni, Leo Messi, el tesoro del Barça (Barcelona: 
Edecasa, 2006)
Galdeano, Arnau, Estimat Messi (Barcelona: Empúries, 2007)
Galeano, Eduardo, El fútbol a sol y sombra (Madrid: Siglo 
XXI de España Editores, 1995)
Grosso, Cristian, Futbolistas con historia(s) (Buenos Aires: 
Ediciones Al Arco, 2007)
Hugo, Víctor and Perfumo, Roberto, Hablemos de fútbol 
(Buenos Aires: Planeta, 2006)
Luque, Xavier and Finestres, Jordi, El caso Di Stéfano 
(Barcelona: Península, 2006)
Maradona, Diego Armando, Yo soy el Diego (Barcelona: 
Planeta, 2001)
Sebreli, Juan José, La era del fútbol (Buenos Aires: 
Debolsillo, 2005)
Toro, Carlos, Anécdotas del fútbol (Madrid: La Esfera de 
los Libros, 2004)
Valdano, Jorge, El miedo escénico y otras hierbas (Madrid: 
Aguilar, 2002)
Vargas, Walter, Fútbol Delivery (Buenos Aires: Ediciones 
Al Arco, 2007)308 Messi
Magazines
El Gráfico, Buenos Aires
Don Balón, Barcelona
Newspapers
SpainEl País
El Mundo
La VanguardiaEl Periódico de Catalunya
Marca
AsSport
Mundo Deportivo
Argentina
La Nación
ClarínÉpocaOlé
La Capital
UK
The Times
Guardian
Italy
Corriere della SeraGazzetta dello Sport
Corriere dello Sport
Yearbooks
Guía de la Liga 2005 (Marca Magazines)
Guía de la Liga 2006 (Marca Magazines)Bibliography  309
Guía de la Liga 2007 (Marca Magazines)
Guía de la Liga 2008 (Marca Magazines)
Guía de la Liga 2009 (Marca Magazines)
Guía de la Liga 2010 (Marca Magazines)
TV channels
Canal +TyC
Fox TV
TV3
Websites
www.fifa.comwww.uefa.com
www.afa.com.ar
www.gloriosonewells.com.arwww.nob.com.ar
www.rosariocentral.com
www.fcbarcelona.comwww.youtube.com
www.lionelmessi.org
www.liomessi.wordpress.comwww.messiadictos.com311Acknowledgements
Thanks to Leo Messi and to his family: Jorge, Celia, Rodrigo 
and Marcela.
And, in order of appearance, thanks to Laure Merle 
d’Aubigné, Bernat Puigtobella, Fèlix Riera, Montserrat Molons, Marcela Martínez, Claudio Martínez, Julio 
Lagos, Diego Torres, Fernando Solanas, Asier del Horno, 
Pablo Zabaleta, Hugo Tocalli, Pancho Ferraro, Carlos Garaycochea, Carlos Bilardo, Manuel Giménez, Dolores 
García, Fernando Niembro, Claudio Codina, Mariano 
Bereznicki, Diego Schwarzstein, Cintia Arellano, Salvador Aparicio, Ernesto Vecchio, Adrián Coria, Horacio del 
Prado, Roberto Perfumo, Alfio Basile, Santiago Segurola, 
Cristina Cubero, José Miguel Terés, Gianluca Zambrotta, Alex García, Charly Rexach, Josep Maria Minguella, Horacio 
Gaggioli, Frank Rijkaard, Jorge Valdano, Ton Vilalta Seco, 
Albert Torrescasana, Ignacio Iraola, Analía Romano, Oliver Pugh, Simon Flynn, Andrew Furlow, Nick Sidwell, Sarah 
Higgins, Najma Finlay and Sheli Rodney.
Dedicated to Elvira, for everything she has done and con-
tinues to do. To Lorenzo, Olmo, Alda and Tullio.