63Chapter 11
Provisional licence
6 March 2001
The photo on his first Barcelona ID badge shows him with a 
plump face and a quiff. And a smile – that was soon to disap-
pear because during the first few months of his new life on 
Catalan soil, things do not go very well for Leo. On 6 March, a few weeks after his arrival, the Federación Catalana pro-
vides him with a provisional players’ licence and the next 
day he is able to debut at the Amposta ground wearing the number 9 Blaugrana shirt (Catalan for ‘blue and claret’). 
He even scores a goal. But he is a foreigner and cannot play 
in any national competitions, which means he cannot join 
the children’s A team, which should be his team: instead 
he has to make do with the children’s B team, which plays 
in the Catalan regional league. To make matters worse, by March the teams are already formed and competing, and 
although he is good, it would be difficult – and unfair – 
to sacrifice one of the kids who has been playing since the beginning of the season in order to give Leo a place.
Another thing: Newell’s is not willing to make the nec-
essary transfer arrangements so that Barcelona can enrol him in the Real Federación Española de Fútbol (Spanish 
Football Federation).
And that’s not all – there is worse still to come. On 
21
 April a Tortosa defender tackles him hard: the result is 64 Messi
a fractured left leg. It is the first injury in Leo’s career. First 
he needs a splint, then a plaster cast and finally rehab – he 
won’t be able to play again until 6 June.
A week later it happens again. Another injury, this time 
while walking down the stairs – torn left ankle ligaments. 
Luckily this injury is less serious – he is out for three weeks.
The only good news on the medical front comes from all 
the tests and x-rays he was subjected to by the endocrinolo-gists and the club medics. After studying his medical history and growth problems thoroughly, they decide that it is pos-
sible to wean him off the growth hormone treatment very 
gradually. A personalised exercise programme and control-led diet should help the youngster achieve a normal growth 
rate. Although, ultimately, he will still have to put up with 
daily injections for a few more years.
As for the rest, his Barcelona experience has started off 
on decidedly the wrong foot. So much so that by the end of the season, between one thing and another, Leo has only played in two official fixtures and one friendly tour -
nament (excluding training matches). Add to that all the 
other problems that Leo and his family have had to face 
and things couldn’t really get much worse.
In brief: after staying at the Rallye Hotel, the Messi 
family move into an apartment on Carlos III avenue – so far so good. Adapting to the new school and new  
study programmes is more complicated. Leo is enrolled 
in the Joan XXII state school, in the Les Corts neighbour -
hood near the Nou Camp. He is still a child who has very 
little desire to study (he will not achieve level four of his 
obligatory secondary education, due to his increasingly 
numerous footballing obligations, among other reasons). Nonetheless, he does not create any problems for his teach-
ers. He is serious, polite and always remains quietly in his 
corner.Provisional licence  65
If he manages at least to deal with the situation, by con-
trast the youngest in the family, María Sol, does not manage 
to acclimatise to the new way of life.
During the Spanish summer vacation, when they reunite  
again in Rosario, the family weigh up their options and reach some decisions. Jorge and Celia (who has had to 
return early to be with her sister, who has undergone an operation) decide that María Sol and the boys should stay in 
Argentina. They ask Leo what he wants to do. Does he want 
to return to Barcelona or go back to his old life in Rosario? The boy has no doubt in his mind. He makes it clear that 
he wants to succeed in Barcelona, there is no need to worry 
about him. And so, only five months after their arrival, the family is forced to divide in two. On one side of the ocean, 
Celia, María Sol, Matías and Rodrigo; on the other, Jorge 
and Leo.
The situation becomes even more difficult than pre-
dicted for Leo, who returns to Barcelona on 20 August, now fourteen years old. Summer is over, school and training are starting again. The transfer from the Argentine Football 
Association is not forthcoming, meaning that he can only 
play in tournaments and friendlies. There is nothing he can do except put maximum effort into his training sessions 
and direct all his energy and hope into the friendlies that 
he plays. It is an attitude noticed by the coaches and his cadet B team colleagues.
Luckily, transfer season begins at the end of the year and 
continues into the beginning of 2002. In December, Leo’s father signs his second contract, which supersedes the one 
signed in May and helps straighten a few things out – at least 
from a financial point of view, given that the family situation is not too wonderful due to late payments and bureaucratic 
problems. In the course of a few years, Leo will sign six con-
tracts committing him to Barcelona FC, which, on the one 66 Messi
hand, is testament to his incredible progression as a foot-
baller; and on the other to changes in priorities and inter -
nal conflicts at the club. There are many such examples: 
from the director who gets annoyed because he has not 
been informed of the negotiations and throws the contract 
in the bin, to the one who would not stand for one kid cost-ing the club so much money. Finally, in February, the FIFA 
documents arrive, allowing the Spanish FA to arrange Leo’s 
signing. And on 17 February 2002, almost a year after his arrival in Barcelona, Leo is permitted to enter the champi-
onship. He plays against Esplugues de Llobregat at the Can 
Vidalet ground. Messi only comes on after half-time, but adds three gems to the final scoreline of 1-14. Little more 
than a month later, on 29 March, Leo wins his first Barça 
title. With much elation, they win the league thanks to a 6-0 victory over El Prat. The bad days are over and the successes 
keep coming: the Thaygen tournament in Switzerland, 
and most importantly, the Maestrelli Trophy in Pisa, Italy, from 27 April to 7 May. The B team defeats everyone from 
Inter to Chievo to Brescia, they draw with Juventus and they 
knock out Parma in the final. Leo is crowned player of the tournament and suddenly finds his voice …
‘At first we thought he was mute,’ says Arsenal captain 
Cesc Fàbregas, who was his team-mate at the time. ‘Then, thanks to PlayStation and that trip to Italy, we discovered 
that he knew how to talk.’
‘Until that moment,’ recalls Víctor Vázquez, another of 
the B-team champions, ‘he would always return to the dress-ing room, sit down in a corner, change, and leave without 
a word. In Italy he began to gain confidence.’ Particularly with Víctor, who nicknamed him ‘dwarf’. To get back at 
him, Leo would respond in lunfardo, Argentine slang. It was 
impossible to understand him. Coach Tito Vilanova agrees that the Maestrelli Trophy was an opportunity for Messi Provisional licence  67
to spend time with his team-mates, get to know them and 
overcome his shyness. ‘Because he wasn’t timid at all on the 
pitch,’ says Vilanova. ‘When he played it was like watching 
Maradona when he was his age.’
He gained not only the praise of his coach, but also the 
respect and sympathy of his peers. The 2001–02 season, which had not begun all that well, ended magnificently at home and away. In the end, victories over Madrid and 
Espanyol in the Villarreal and San Gabriel tournaments 
were the icing on the season’s cake.
By the 2002–03 season he was in the A team: 30 league 
games (he was the only player to play in every game), 36 goals (five more than Víctor, the striker), three hat-tricks, one four-goal match, and two titles (the Liga de División 
de Honor and the Copa Catalunya). And that was with-
out counting trophies like the Ladislao Kubala Memorial Trophy  , or the summer triangular tournaments.
Facts and figures help to summarise and evaluate the 
campaign begun by Leo at his mere fifteen years. He meas-
ures 1.62 metres, weighs 55 kilos and is the smallest on the 
team (the tallest, Gerard Piqué, measures 1.91m), although 
not quite the youngest (Ramón Massó Vallmajó does not turn fifteen until October). But he is a fundamental part 
of this talented team, led by Álex García. The only time 
he is unable to shine is during the Campeonato de España Cup. Neither he nor Frank Songo’o – son of Jacques, the 
ex-Cameroon  goalkeeper from Metz and Deportivo de La 
Coruña – is able to play (although he still celebrates the vic-
tory with the others), because the rules state that only those 
born in Spain or with a Spanish ID card can play in this par -
ticular tournament. An issue which causes many problems 
and headaches in years to come.