183Chapter 30
Disappointment
15 July 2007
Sadness and anger. These feelings and many more occupy 
Messi’s thoughts and words in the middle of June. The rea-
son is simple: Barcelona haven’t won the titles they were hop-
ing to take home. From eight possible titles, they have had to make do with the Spanish Super Cup – nothing more. A par -
ticularly poor outcome. And for someone like the Flea, who thinks only of winning, he cannot but feel bad about it. And think about how ‘we started well. Then we were knocked out 
of the Champions League too early. Then, when we thought 
we had got past the most difficult part, we went out of the Copa del Rey. If you add it all up, it’s painful,’ he explains 
in an interview with France Football. He doesn’t speak of the 
league, the hardest blow to deal with. In February, it seemed as if the Blaugrana had it in the bag and that the persecution 
of Capello’s Real Madrid was nothing more than a dream to 
keep the championship alive and to have something to say to the media. However, it wasn’t to be: points lost in the final 
moments, particularly against Betis and Espanyol, end up 
gifting the title to the Whites. Why not give a financial incen-tive to Mallorca, Madrid’s rivals in the last fixture on 17 June 
at the Bernabéu? (It is common practice in Spain to reward 
teams who beat your local rivals.) Messi sees nothing wrong with it if it helps them win, but despite the Argentine’s good 
intentions and expectations, the miracle, which seemed 184 Messi
possible  in the 65th minute, is not forthcoming in the end. 
And so, the last chance to save the season disappears, leav-
ing only disappointment. In short, nothing has turned out 
as expected and ‘the hero is left without a prize’, as the El 
País headline reads. Because in fact, on an individual level, 
it has been a positive season for Messi. The Argentine has played an indisputable starring role in many magical nights: 
it was he who momentarily thwarted Real Madrid’s incon-
sistencies with his famous hat-trick. Then came the Foot of Maradona and the Hand of God II, wonders and tricks 
that did not amount to anything. The goals scored and the 
award for best foreign Liga player are nothing more than a meagre consolation prize.
Luckily, football doesn’t stop. Awaiting him are the 
national team and the Copa América and, with them, the chance to recover from the blow he has suffered. And the 
possibility of being in the starting line-up in an important 
tournament, not simply part of the squad, as happened to him in the Germany World Cup.
Alfio ‘el Coco’ Basile, the selector who has assumed José 
Pekerman’s post, is counting on him. He knows that the Flea has a huge amount to contribute to the national team and that he has a fundamental role to play in his plans for the 
team. He does not want to repeat his predecessor’s errors. 
He calls him up for the European mini-tour, in Berne and Barcelona, where they will face Switzerland and Algeria, 
with a view to playing him in the continental champion-
ship which will take place in Venezuela, where the whole world is convinced that Messi will play the leading role. In 
a poll on the tournament’s official website, Leo is winning 
by a considerable margin (33 per cent of the votes), beat-ing the Chilean Matías Fernández and the Venezuelan Juan 
Arango. Brazilian Real Madrid player Robinho, who will 
eventually be chosen as best player and will be awarded the Disappointment  185
title of highest goal scorer, with six goals, is bottom of the 
list with only eight per cent of the votes.
On 24 June in Maracaibo, four days before Argentina’s 
opening match against the United States, Messi celebrates his twentieth birthday and the media wheedle out of him an 
obvious wish: ‘To win the Copa América and be the highest 
goal scorer.’ Argentina has not won it since 1993, making the pressure and expectations enormous. The expectations 
placed on Messi are so high that, in contrast to what hap-
pened in Germany, both the squad and the coach fuss over him. Coco even provides him with a mentor: ‘La Brujita’ 
Juan Sebastián Verón. The 32-year-old ex-Boca, Sampdoria, 
Parma, Inter, Lazio, Manchester United and Chelsea player, who has had newfound success with his first love, Estudiantes 
de la Plata (an Argentine team), offers advice to the twenty-
year-old Messi both on and off the pitch, and defends him against accusations that he is an arrogant soloist. ‘Messi is 
reserved. He doesn’t hang out in a group drinking mate. 
He prefers to play PlayStation. To me it’s like he’s my lit-tle brother, who I have to take care of. I have to keep him 
safe!’ he explains in El País. And in fact, Messi does need 
taking care of because Messimania has been unleashed in Venezuela. It’s madness, the kid can’t take a step without 
being surrounded by hordes of fans, shirts with his name 
on are selling like hotcakes to adults and children alike, and on the pitch he barely has to touch the ball to get a stand-
ing ovation, even when he misses. If he is not in the starting 
line-up, as happens in the game against Paraguay, within ten minutes the annoyed crowd are calling his name.
It is a blind love, which reaches its peak at the Lara de 
Barquisimeto stadium. Messi is walking towards the dressing room tunnel, tired and distracted, when out of the blue he 
sees a girl. Leo has seen that she is about to throw herself off 
the stands – worried, he waves his arms and shouts: ‘Stop, 186 Messi
what are you doing …?’ The love-struck twenty-something  
doesn’t listen to reason and jumps. Luckily she falls on 
her feet. Soldiers and security guards pounce on her, but before they can take her away she manages to embrace her 
idol and plant two kisses on him. Leo looks decidedly per -
plexed, as does Simon, the referee, who grabs him by the 
arm demanding an explanation, convinced that it was some 
kind of attack.
‘It was unbelievable. I was signalling to her not to jump 
and she ended up jumping anyway. I swear I didn’t know what to do,’ he will later confess to Clarín. ‘It was at least a 
four-metre drop. She could have killed herself, and on top of that they got her out of there pretty quickly without even 
seeing if the poor girl was okay or not.’
The incident happens on 8 July, in the quarter-finals. 
Argentina have just beaten Peru 4-0, and in the 61st minute Messi has scored that longed-for goal. He did not score in 
the previous matches, against the United States, Colombia and Paraguay, although he has been decisive in mobilis-
ing and transforming the Albiceleste machine. Like in the 
debut against the Americans, when he serves the ball up on a plate for Crespo to score his second goal, or during the 
25 minutes in which he plays in the second half of Paraguay-
Argentina (Basile wants to rest him for the quarters), when 
he brings a bit of spice to an otherwise boring game. But 
he was still missing the goal, and scoring it against the 
Peruvians is a weight off his shoulders. And in the semi-final against Mexico in Puerto Ordaz, he re-establishes his posi-
tion, creating another masterpiece. According to the com-
mentators, ‘They should pack up and go home’. ‘That’s what geniuses do,’ says Basile. ‘Shall we pack up and leave? 
What more do we need? Why should we continue after hav-
ing seen that goal?’ The commentators of Tyc Sports, an Argentine TV channel, agree with Coco. And that’s not all. Disappointment  187
Here’s little Carlos Tévez: ‘What Messi did was brilliant. He 
didn’t have many clear opportunities to score, but the first 
ball he got was an incredible goal.’ Mascherano: ‘It was one 
of those moments of genius that we’ve come to expect from him. Nothing he does surprises me any more. He’s extraor -
dinary.’ Cambiasso: ‘It was a stunning goal.’ Heinze: ‘There are no words to describe Messi’s goal.’ In essence, a goal that ended up taking its place among all the clips of the 
Flea’s best goals posted on the Internet.
But what has he managed to pull out of his hat this time? 
Let’s see the replay. In the 60th minute Heinze, who scored the goal that put them ahead, passes to Cambiasso. The 
Inter player, with two defenders closing in on him, returns it to Heinze who looks for the shot from his own half; Tévez 
receives it outside the box with his back to the goalkeeper. 
He controls it on his chest, plays it down, turns and passes to Messi who is off, quick as a flash. He gets into the box, 
lifts his head, sees the goalie and sends the ball through the 
air with incredible grace. A perfect arc, a chip which beats Sánchez, the desperate goalie, who jumps backwards and 
stretches out a gloved hand, but doesn’t even manage to get 
a finger to the ball, which curls in under the crossbar. Leo watches the ball until the net billows, then he runs towards 
the corner flag to celebrate with the Argentine fans. Verón, 
his mentor, is the first to reach him, the boy jumps on his neck while from the dugout Coco throws up his arms, 
applauds and laughs delightedly.
‘Did you feel they should have packed up and gone 
home after your masterpiece?’ ‘No, stop it, stop it. It was a beautiful goal, nothing more. The important thing is 
that it helped Argentina get to the final.’ That is Messi’s response to the question from La Nación the following day. 
But they push him. ‘Do you think it was the most amazing 
goal of your career?’ ‘Maybe, I don’t know, I have scored a 188 Messi
few good ones, like the one against Getafe. The truth is I 
haven’t really seen it on TV. Everyone says it was really good: 
I saw the goalie come off his line and I took the chance. It turned out well, didn’t it?’
Same old Messi, unshakable in his modesty. Although 
he claims the rights to his dream: that of beating Brazil in the final. Leo had said since the beginning that he wanted 
to play against Brazil, and his wish has been granted. He 
wants to put that 3-0 from a friendly at Wembley the previ-ous September behind him.
His friend Ronaldinho will not be there, which Leo says 
is just as well; neither will Kaká. In any case, although they have lost the opening match against Mexico and only man-
aged to win the semi-final against Uruguay on penalties, the 
Green and Golds are still tough rivals to beat. Moreover, finals are a different story – you can never be certain what 
will happen. Something that does become painfully cer -
tain is that Argentine dreams are buried with a resounding 
3-0 thanks to the beast Júlio Baptista, Albiceleste captain 
Ayala’s own goal, and Daniel Alves. They corner the elegant 
team and they do it well. At the José Romero stadium in Maracaibo, Argentina make no impact, it’s as if they don’t 
exist. And Messi? ‘He did little to change history,’ says Clarín. 
‘With neither frenzy nor football, Leo ended up being fenced in by his Brazilian marker and remained trapped 
in his labyrinth.’ The images are more revealing than com-
mentaries or critiques. Messi sitting on the pitch with a lost look in his eyes; Dady, the physio, shaking his head at him 
in a consolatory gesture; FIFA president Joseph Blatter pre-
senting him with his medal, and Messi coming down from the stands only to take it off and hold it in his fist. He has 
been chosen as the best young player of the Copa América. 
But what good is that … in the wake of this new disappoint-
ment, there is nothing but anger and sadness.