51Chapter 9
Across the pond
17 September 2000
English Spanish (Spain) Spanish (Argentina)
goalie portero arquero
bus autobús colectivo
Danish pastry bollo factura
biro bolígrafo birome
flip-flops chanclas de dedo ojotas
apartment piso departamento
skirt falda pollera
round (in shape) esférico redonda
t-shirt camiseta remera
coat abrigo sobretodo
… and in Spain, the word coger means ‘to get’ or ‘to catch’, 
while in Argentina it means something altogether more vulgar, which is best left unmentioned.
They say that the same language is spoken in Spain and 
Argentina and, in effect, the language of both countries 
is castellano – Castilian, denoting standardised Spanish – 
but the differences are numerous, and not just in terms 
of the meaning of particular words or expressions of slang 
(charming or otherwise). It is a question of different ways of 
life and, on occasion, different ways of understanding life. Almost all Argentine families have some Spanish or Italian 52 Messi
ancestors, but more than a century after great-grandfather 
left the Iberian peninsula, or the Italian boot, becoming 
a gallego (slang for Spaniard) or a tano (slang for Italian), 
things have changed significantly. History has opened up a chasm, creating profoundly different cultures, such that 
today, if one abandons the current path and returns to the country of origin, adapting is no mean feat. It is always a 
difficult challenge: more so if the one who must face it is 
a boy of barely thirteen. It requires a lot of willpower to leave behind one’s childhood, one’s hometown, school, 
friends, the team that you love, the Malvinas and Bella Vista 
grounds, and part of your own family. And, above all, with-out any guarantees for the future.
Leo Messi and his father Jorge leave Rosario for Barcelona 
on 16 September 2000.
Let us take a step back and find out why father and son are 
embarking on an Aerolíneas Argentinas transatlantic flight, how they came to the decision to try their luck on Catalan soil, and what they are expecting from their journey.
At thirteen years of age Leo is already a well-known fig-
ure in youth football. The newspapers dedicate double -page 
spreads to him, he is talked about in the minor leagues, and even in Buenos Aires his game has been very positively eval-
uated by River Plate. Two years previously, Fabián Basualdo, 
former defender for both Newell’s and River, represented Leo for a number of months, attempting to direct his career 
as well as possible, until the Messi family realised that it was 
unnecessary for someone so young to have an agent. But one fine day in 2000, Martín Montero and Fabián Soldini, 
of Marka – a company with Rosario headquarters dedicated 
to the buying and selling of players – introduce themselves at number 525, Estado de Israel. Lionel’s father Jorge does 
not want to speak about these people, because as the story 
unfolds it is revealed that they did nothing to help his son Across the pond  53
– in fact they did rather the opposite … such that there are 
lawsuits and appeals in various court cases even today. Legal 
disputes aside, let us continue with the story.
Montero and Soldini want to represent Lionel. They are 
convinced that the young lad could have a bright future with any great team, be it in Italy or Spain, from Inter to 
Milan, from Real Madrid to Barcelona. They make assur -
ances that they have contacts and friends in high places. 
The Messis do not succumb easily to empty promises. Until 
the boy manages to land a trial in Europe, no one is going to take care of the bills.
It did not seem to be an impossibility, given the precedent 
set by Leandro Depetris, the boy who had gone to Europe to train with the Milan youth team. The only thing to do 
was to see if these friendships and contacts were not simply 
a ruse. They were not: in August 2000, Montero and Soldini call Horacio Gaggioli, one of their associates in Barcelona. 
Gaggioli, a Rosarino who has been buying up real estate 
in Barcelona since the 1970s, works with the football agent Josep Maria Minguella, Barça shareholder number 2292, 
transfer advisor to then president Joan Gaspart, and future 
candidate in the elections that resulted in Joan Laporta becoming club president.
‘I saw a home video of the lad; Horacio, Martin and 
Fabían assured me that it was worth me taking a look. So I called Charly, who is a good friend of mine,’ recalls 
Minguella.
‘He told me about a really good kid … Something like 
Maradona. I thought he was talking about a boy of eighteen or nineteen – when they told me his age I was surprised,’ 
adds Carles (also known as Charly) Rexach, who was the technical director of FC Barcelona at the time. ‘He’d have 
to be absolutely phenomenal for us to take an interest. It 
wasn’t club policy to sign kids from outside Catalonia, let 54 Messi
alone a non-EU player. They assured me there was no one 
else like him. I travelled quite a lot in South America, but 
we decided to bring him to Barcelona to train with us over a few weeks so that the coaches at the club could have the 
chance to watch him at their leisure. That was the best solu-
tion; it was better for him to come to Spain with his family when it suited him than for us to plan a trip to Argentina. 
Anything could have happened – he could have been ill, or 
unable to play that week … For us to go over there would have been unhelpful.’
And so on Sunday 17 September 2000, Lionel arrives 
in the capital of Catalonia accompanied by his father and Fabián Soldini. Horacio Gaggioli is waiting for them at 
El Prat airport to take them to the Plaza Hotel, in the Plaza 
de España at the foot of Montjuïc, where years later Leo would debut with the first team in the Olympic stadium. 
The city can be seen from the windows of the hotel: if things 
go well, if there is a place for him at Barça, this will be his new home. There will be a house, money, a job for his father 
and maybe even a team for his older brother, Rodrigo.
It seems strange that an entire family should put all their 
faith in a thirteen-year-old boy. Before they got married,  
Celia and Jorge had already thought of emigrating to 
Australia – they wanted a new life in a new world. Things were not bad, but they knew they could not achieve much 
more. Their life in Argentina could not change for the 
better. They were looking for a new opportunity for their children, and Leo could receive his medical treatment in 
Barcelona and continue to improve his football at a great 
club, as his talent deserved. But it was not an easy decision. The Messis asked themselves time and again whether or 
not they were doing the right thing. Before leaving, they 
gathered the family around the table and asked each one of them what they wanted to do, making it clear that if Across the pond  55
even one of them did not want to go, they would all stay in 
Rosario.
The trial is arranged for the afternoon of Monday 18 
September. Leo is stunned by all the sporting facilities. He makes them take a photo of him by one of the gates of the 
Miniestadi (the reserve and youth team stadium), just like 
the multitude of tourists who visit the Nou Camp every day. Then he goes into the dressing room to change and joins 
the youth teams on the second and third grounds. During 
the course of a week he trains and plays a short match with children his age. Jorge watches in silence from the stands, 
just as he always used to do at the Rosario grounds. Not 
wanting to disappoint his father, Leo scores five goals and another, which is disallowed, all in a single match. Dad had 
promised to take him to buy a tracksuit if he managed to 
score six. In the end he has to keep his promise.
All the coaches who see him comment that the Argentine 
kid plays very well, but it is Rexach who must make the deci-sion regarding his future. Charly is on the other side of the world, in Sydney, Australia, where the Olympic Games are 
taking place. He has gone to observe the football tourna-
ment, which will conclude with a Spain-Cameroon final, eventually won on penalties by the Africans. And so, Leo’s 
stay in Barcelona is extended until his return, scheduled for 
2 October. The matter has been left up in the air and needs to be resolved as soon as possible, so a match is organised 
between cadets, aged fourteen–fifteen, and first-year stu-
dents at the Miniestadi third ground on Tuesday 3 October at 5.00pm. Charly wants to see how Leo fares against older 
lads.
‘I was coming straight from a meal and I arrived at the 
ground five minutes late. The two teams were already play-ing,’ recounts Rexach. ‘I had to run halfway round the pitch 
to get to the bench where the coaches were. It took me seven 56 Messi
or eight minutes to get all the way round. By the time I sat 
down on the bench I had already made my decision. I said 
to Rifé and Migueli [the youth team coaches]: “We have to sign him. Now.” What had I seen? A kid who was very 
small, but different, with incredible self-confidence, agile, 
fast, technically polished, who could run flat out with the ball, and who was capable of swerving round whoever stood 
in his way. It wasn’t difficult to spot it; his talents, which are 
now known to everyone, were more noticeable at thirteen. There are footballers who need a team in order to shine 
– not him. To those who tell me that I was the one who dis-
covered Messi, I always reply: if a Martian had seen him play they would have realised that he was very special.’
The boss has agreed; the deal is done. Two days later, Leo 
and his father are on a flight to Buenos Aires. They return home happy. Via a third party, Charly Rexach has assured 
them that they will soon be invited back to Barcelona so 
that the details of the contract can be formalised. To this day, Jorge does not know Charly personally, although he 
agrees that the fact that his son plays for Barcelona is thanks 
to the coach’s stubbornness.
The adventure on the other side of the Atlantic has gone 
well. But in the final stages things do not turn out to be so easy. There are still many difficulties to overcome. Today, Rexach – who is known as the Pedralbes Kid, one of the 
most emblematic figures of Barcelona FC – recalls all the 
issues precisely, over a coffee in the bar of the Princesa Sofía Hotel, a stone’s throw from the Nou Camp.
‘First of all, he was foreign, and the law doesn’t allow 
a foreign child to play in any national league. A consid-erable handicap. Second, he was a kid. He could end up 
not becoming a Barcelona player, whether due to his own 
choice, injury, or age. Third, what are his parents going to do? We’d have to find work for them if they moved to Across the pond  57
Spain. And finally, the boy has a growth problem, he needs 
treatment.’ Rexach explains that he weighed up the pros 
and the cons, and he was convinced that they had to take a 
risk no matter what ‘and sign him, because he’s so good’. Nonetheless, not everyone at the club is so convinced and 
when the moment comes to make a decision, questions arise. 
Some see Leo as being too small and scrawny and think that this is just about a nifty little player. Charly responds imme-
diately to such objections: ‘Bring me all the nifty little play-
ers, I want them all in my team.’ Even the club president, Joan Gaspart, wants an explanation of the matter, asking if 
it is worth them taking on the responsibility of the family of 
a thirteen-year-old boy. And Charly says yes, it is a necessary risk. Meanwhile, time ticks on. October and November pass 
by without the anticipated decision having been reached. 
On 4 December Minguella calls Rexach. They meet in the restaurant of the Pompey Real Tennis Society, in Montjuïc. 
Horacio Gaggioli – who at that time represented the Messi 
family – is also present. He is the most insistent: ‘Charly, we’ve got this far. Either you play him or the boy goes else-
where …’ Gaggioli remembers adding: ‘I wasn’t bluffing. 
We had already begun talks with Real Madrid.’
‘They didn’t trust me, they didn’t trust Barcelona. They 
wanted a written agreement or that was the end of the nego-tiations,’ says Rexach. ‘I knew for sure that I couldn’t let that kid slip through our fingers, so I grabbed a paper napkin 
and wrote something to the effect that the club promised to 
sign Leo Messi if the agreed conditions were met. I signed it and I gave it to him.’
Both Minguella and Gaggioli also signed the paper nap-
kin (a relic which has been conserved with care), an agree-ment of honour that is, nonetheless, insufficient. Before 
packing all their bags and leaving for Barcelona, the Messis 
want some guarantees. Starting with the cost of the journey  58 Messi
and extending to the house and a job for Jorge, who will 
have to leave his job at Acindar in order to follow his son 
and the rest of the family. Charly Rexach works hard to resolve the problems, but it is not easy. ‘At the beginning 
we couldn’t discuss a contract. He was a kid who was going 
to play youth football, but it was a signing that had to be made, and we made it.’
On 8 January 2001 a final agreement is reached in Via 
Veneto, another Barcelona restaurant. Joan Lacueva, then director of professional football, meets with youth acad-
emy coordinator Joaquím Rifé, who is looking towards the 
future and wants the club to make an effort to woo Messi. And he asks for a report from the enthusiastic Rexach, who 
simply writes that Messi is incredible. Two letters are there-
fore written to Jorge Messi: one from Charly, who confirms the sporting agreement made with the family in Barcelona, 
and the other from Lacueva regarding the financial terms. 
In it he includes details of the house they are to rent, the school, and the 7 million pesetas (approximately equivalent 
to £40,000) the footballer’s father would receive as remu-
neration for a position at the club, which is as good a way as any of remunerating the footballer himself, who would only 
have been entitled to a study grant.
The letter is enough to convince the Messis to pack their 
bags. On 15 February 2001, in the depths of the Barcelona winter, the entire family touches down at the Catalan 
airport.