123Chapter 21
Supersonic aesthetic
Conversation with Santiago Segurola, 
Marca journalist
‘The essence of football is contained in the body of a little player, 
an eighteen-year-old boy who could pass by unnoticed on any 
given street. His name is Leo Messi and there is every reason to 
believe that we are in the presence of an exceptional player, the most brilliant to appear in recent years.’ Those are the first lines 
of your article the day after Chelsea-Barcelona. Why did Lionel 
impress you so much?‘Because that performance contained all the elements that 
fascinate spectators and encourage you to contemplate 
the wonder that is football. Because it didn’t seem like a match for an eighteen-year-old boy who had spent very lit-
tle time at the top. In that match, before Barça appeared, 
Messi appeared – he was surprising, skilful, speedy, intelli-gent, and he showed great courage. It was a boy who made 
the difference in that match. He amazed the crowds. His 
performance was one of the greatest I have ever seen in my life.’
And have you seen many players?
‘I saw Maradona when he was at the height of his career, I 
saw Raúl on his debut … but none of the players that I’ve 
seen play were as powerful or as brave.’124 Messi
What was his most impressive attribute?
‘Speed, without a doubt. Nowadays in football everyone 
wants to be fast, but speed leads to collisions. Messi amazes 
me in the way that he knows how to make so many decisions 
at such high speed without getting it wrong … Perhaps he 
doesn’t have the imagination of Ronaldinho or the other great Brazilians, perhaps he doesn’t have the vision or the 
game plan of a Maradona, but he has a supersonic aesthetic.’
Any other qualities?
‘He is the only player capable of winning a match from 
anywhere on the pitch. He proved that against Zaragoza. He was halfway up the pitch, with his back to the goal, and 
he ended up scoring. He has the most extraordinary turn 
I have ever seen, more electric than Maradona’s. He can dodge, he can “one-two”, and he can finish … He is the 
product of a new global academy of youth team players. He 
represents an interesting model: his Argentine roots are continuously apparent and, at the same time, he belongs to a culture and a style of play that is profoundly “Barcelonan”. 
He is an example of the magnificent work that Barcelona 
has done with its youth academy since the Bosman ruling.’
How has Messi changed since that match?
‘He hasn’t changed, he has just become more important. Now Messi is the footballing leader of Barça and he has to 
lead his national team as well.’
Looking into our crystal ball: what do the coming years hold?
‘What concerns me is the possibility of Messi losing speed. 
What will happen when time erodes his tenacity and his velocity? I don’t know … Will he end up like Ronaldo, 
who became a specialist in having six good moments per 
match and a 20-metre sprint? It’s difficult to predict and it’s Supersonic aesthetic  125
difficult  to say what effect all the merchandising will have 
on him. Publicity has often been known to confuse players. 
It obliges them to be the best in the world at every possible 
second. And that’s not possible. A great player has to know how to choose his moments.’
So in the end the real dangers are the advertising and becoming 
a diva?
‘I think that these players aren’t prepared for the extreme 
tension generated by the press, the critics, the success, the fame, the celebrity, the travelling, the commercial demands 
of the sponsors. These things can be distracting, they can let 
you get comfortable in your daily routine of match-playing . 
Yes, footballers need to know that it’s like being hit by a 
truck and it’s a hard knock to take. Much harder than a few 
kicks from Asier del Horno at Stamford Bridge.’