127Chapter 22
Difficult, very difficult
Conversation with Asier del Horno
Defender, born 19 January 1981 in Barakaldo (Vizcaya). 
Height: 1.81m. Weight: 72 kilos. Debut: 9 September 2000, 
Deportivo-Athletic Bilbao 2-0. Sporting career: 1999–2005 at 
Athletic, 2005–06 at Chelsea, 2006–07 at Valencia, 2007–08 at Athletic, 2008–2010 at Valencia, 2010 at Real Valladolid, 
2010–11 at Levante UD. Ten caps with the Spanish national 
team. Titles: one Premier League (2005–06), and FA Community Shield (2005). That’s how his CV reads, but the 
ex-Chelsea left back has many more things to say.
What happened at the 2005–06 Champions League final sixteen 
Chelsea-Barcelona match at Stamford Bridge?
‘It was a special match, given what had happened the previ-ous year. The atmosphere was tense. Everyone could feel 
it. We were quietly confident. Mourinho had prepared us 
for every detail of the encounter, trying to block every pos-sible Barça manoeuvre. In the midfield we had people like 
Makelele, Lampard and Essien, who protected the defence 
but Messi kept on getting through. I came face to face with him two or three times and I tried to stop him with all my 
skills and experience.’128 Messi
Did Messi surprise you? Perhaps you weren’t expecting to come 
face to face with a kid like that?
‘In every match there’s always one player, the one you least 
expect, who makes you suffer.’
In the 31st minute, you gave him a kick that merited a yellow 
card. What had the Argentine done to you?
‘Nothing, it was an incident during the game and I don’t 
remember the details.’
Is Messi one of those forwards who provokes the defence?
‘No, he doesn’t provoke. He doesn’t say anything. There are many provocations in football between defenders and 
forwards, but that’s not his style.’
Moving on to the 36th minute of the first half …
‘Messi had nutmegged Robben just by the corner flag. I 
tried to stop him and he went past me. He started to roll around on the ground and they sent me off. Messi was sharp, he was smart, it looked like it was an incredible tackle 
and in reality it was nothing …’
So José Mourinho was right when he declared after the match that 
‘Leo Messi put on an act, and a good one’?
‘Lionel exaggerated, without a doubt.’
Leaving the past aside, let’s talk about Messi’s characteristics as 
seen from the point of view of a left back.‘The key thing about Messi is that he drives the ball forward 
very well, quickly and with the ball always glued to his boot. 
His speed gives him time to change direction, surprising whoever is marking him at that particular moment.’Difficult, very difficult  129
How can Messi be stopped?
‘It’s complicated. It’s difficult, very difficult. Depending 
on the situation you’re in, given his divine inspiration … 
Playing on the opposite touchline, when he dodges into the centre, it’s difficult to stop him. He has speed, he has 
skills … argh, he’s a real problem for any defender.’
Any advice for your colleagues?
‘I wouldn’t know … I can only say that defenders need to 
keep tightly in line, be aggressive, be speedy and hold the position well.’