29Chapter 5
Red and black
21 March 1994
Raúl: ‘I’ve always been surrounded by good Argentines 
like Valdano, who gave me my debut at Real Madrid, or 
Redondo, or the team-mates with whom I have shared a 
dressing room. I have a great relationship with all of them. I wish I could go to Argentina sometime soon and enjoy 
some football over there. I want to see a Boca or a River 
match.’
‘Or Newell’s,’ adds Lionel Messi in a low voice.
‘The Flea’ does not miss a single opportunity to reaf-
firm his red-and-black passion. To the extent that even 
at a publicity event in conversation with the former Real 
Madrid captain – now number 7 at FC Shalke 04 – he ends 
up bringing up the team he loves. It is to be expected – Newell’s is a family love. His father Jorge played there from 
the age of thirteen until he began his military service. A 
midfielder with a great eye for the game, more defensive than attacking, although he never made it to professional 
level. Rodrigo joined their football school aged seven and 
Matías followed in his footsteps.
Leo arrives directly from Grandoli in early 1994. The 
club scouts know about him. They have asked his brothers to bring him along to find out if he really is extraordinary, which is how the youngest Messi brother ends up playing 
eight games in as many different formations in the minor 30 Messi
leagues, during afternoons and evenings over the course 
of almost a month for the club. It is an intense test and 
he does not disappoint. The Newell’s coaches think he is 
phenomenal  and recommend him for the Escuela de Fútbol 
Malvinas (Malvinas School of Football), which nurtures par -
ticularly young players. He is not yet seven years old. The club’s directors have to consult with the parents first, but 
given their family passion for football there is no problem.
‘The father came to see me and said to me: “I’m going to  
take him to Newell’s,”’ recalls Salvador Aparicio, the old Gran-doli coach. ‘What could I say to him? Well … take him then!’
And so, on 21 March 1994, Lionel Andrés Messi, ID 
number 992312, becomes a member of Club Atlético Newell’s Old Boys.
Newell’s and Rosario Central are the two rival clubs 
who divide the passion of the Rosarinos (people from 
Rosario). The Club Atlético Rosario Central was founded 
on 24 December 1889 as the Central Argentine Railway Athletic Club. It was founded by the English workers who were employed on the railway line. Its first president was 
Colin Bain Calder. Later, with the merging of the Ferrocarril 
Central Argentino and the Buenos Aires Railway companies in 1903, the club’s name changed. From then on it was to 
be the Club Atlético Rosario Central. Its colours: blue and 
gold. Great players have worn that shirt, like Mario Kempes, Luciano Figueroa, José Chamot, Cristian González, Roberto 
Abbondanzieri, Roberto Bonano, César Delgado, Daniel 
Díaz, Daniel Pedro Killer, Juan Antonio Pizzi and César Luis Menotti, to name just a few. Two notable fans? Ernesto 
‘Che’ Guevara, who was born in Rosario on 14 June 1928 
and whose first home was an apartment at 480 Entre Ríos street. A few blocks away, there is a Ricardo Carpani mural 
in his memory, in the city’s Plaza de la Cooperación. And 
the unforgettable Roberto ‘El Negro’ Fontanarrosa, one of Red and black  31
Argentina’s greatest football  cartoonists and writers, among 
other things, who sadly passed away in 2007.
Newell’s was founded on 3 November 1903 by the teach-
ers, students and alumni of the Argentine Commercial 
Anglican school that Kent-born Isaac Newell founded in 
Rosario in 1884. According to legend, it was he who intro-
duced the first leather ball and the official football rules into the Latin American country. The students at his school 
– among them his son Claudio, the club’s promoter – began 
to play ball and created the club. From there the name Newell’s Old Boys was born, in honour of the father and 
the school. Its colours: black and red.
One of the things that makes the hackles stand up on the 
back of the necks of their Rosario Central ‘cousins’ is hav-ing seen Diego Armando Maradona wearing the club’s shirt, 
albeit only for five official matches and two friendlies. It was 1993 and the ‘Golden Boy’ was back from Europe, where 
he had begun in Barcelona, moved to Napoli and ended 
up finally at Sevilla. Aside from Diego there are many other illustrious names, from Gabriel Batistuta to Jorge Valdano, 
from Abel Balbo to Maxi Rodríguez, from Sergio Almirón to 
Mauricio Pochettino, from Juan Simón to Roberto Sensini, from Jorge Griffa to Walter Samuel, from Américo Gallego to 
‘Tata’ Martino. The nickname given to the fans? The lepers. 
Strange, but true. A derogatory epithet that ends up becoming a strong and recognised symbol. This deserves an explanation, 
and indeed one is offered by a Newell’s fan website which is 
dedicated to more than 100 years of footballing history.
According to what our grandparents told us – which coin-
cides with what is claimed to be popular legend – many years ago the women’s beneficiary committee of the Carrasco Hospital wanted to arrange a charity match in aid of ‘Hansen’s disease’, commonly known as leprosy. 32 Messi
The match was to be played between Rosario’s two biggest 
teams, so the authorities of both clubs were approached for their approval in order for the match to go ahead. Newell’s immediately accepted the invitation, but it was met with a flat rejection by the Central team, making this historical event the first sign of trouble with the Gold and Blues. So it was that Central became the city scoundrels, and this was the main reason for mocking on the part of the Red and Blacks, who gloated over their time-honoured rivals. The Central crowd argued that if Newell’s were so interested in playing this particular game, it must be because they were lepers – and it was from here onwards that the Newell’s fans became known as ‘the lepers’ and those of their Central rivals as ‘the scoundrels’. Even though this has become the most widespread version of the story over the years, and perhaps is the only true ver -
sion of the facts, it is worth pointing out that some of the older Rosario generation recount a different explanation of why, according to them, the Newell’s fans were always known as the lepers, even before the founding of the club in the early twentieth century, when it was no more than a Rosario educational establishment. According to their ver -
sion, the issue centres around the fact that in those days it was unusual for houses in the Rosario neighbourhoods to be separated by big dividing walls, which meant that people could talk to their neighbours simply by standing on tiptoe or by standing on a bench next to the aforemen-tioned wall. On the other hand, in those days, this meant that leprosy devastated a substantial part of the popula-tion, and Rosario was no exception. This illness, which dates back to biblical times, has always been characterised by the fact that no matter who the sufferer was, they were quarantined out of sight and out of contact with others. Perhaps for this reason, when passing in the vicinity  of Red and black  33
Mr Isaac Newell’s school and upon noting the enormous 
and apparently impenetrable wall that surrounded it, peo-ple were inclined to comment that all the leprosy victims must surely be quarantined out of sight behind it. And so, according to these particular folk, the Newell’s Old Boys have been known ever since as the lepers.
It is a nickname that will also be associated with Lionel when 
Rosario’s La Capital newspaper interviews him for the first 
time. But that is still six years away, six more minor leagues and almost 500 goals before Messi will be accorded the hon-our of appearing in the local press.
Faded red-and-black murals. ‘The force of the lepers’ 
written on a fist painted on the fence, the work of some hooligan fans. Above the railings is the banner: ‘Escuela de 
Fútbol Malvinas Newell’s Old Boys’. The pitch is in a sorry 
state, but the children playing there are unfazed. The club’s coaches have come to hold trials so they have to do well at 
all costs. Next to the dressing rooms, a rusty bed lies aban-
doned in a corner. On the other side, along the Vera Mujica avenue, there are another two pitches in the same state 
of abandon. Someone comments that the income made 
from season tickets and ticket sales, and in particular from the sale of so many players to foreign clubs, has not been 
invested here, in the school where the younger generations 
are trained. It’s patently obvious. Although the truth is that it was not much different when Lionel played his first sea-
son in his red-and-black shirt. Perhaps back then there was 
simply more enthusiasm – more people who worked hard and less money going into the directors’ pockets. But let us 
leave that to one side and talk about that year that started 
so well and ended with a 3-0 defeat against Tiro Suizo. The boys lost the title, but they learned from their mistakes, 
given that in the following four seasons they suffered one 34 Messi
defeat, this time at the hands of their training mates, the 
Newell’s C team. Thanks to that unstoppable run, the team 
ended up earning the club the glorious name la Máquina del ’87 – the ’87 Machine. The greatest source of satisfac-
tion for Leo was a dolphin, the trophy won at the Cantolao 
international tournament held in Lima, Peru, in 1996. More than 25 teams from Argentina, Chile, Ecuador and 
Colombia participated. But in the end it was Newell’s who 
emerged triumphant. And little Messi captured the atten-tion of the media with, among other things, his tricks with 
the ball. During training and before matches, he would 
play ‘keepy-uppy’ for his own amusement. It is a skill of his that even the club’s most senior directors appreciate, to the 
point that he is soon asked on various occasions to enter -
tain the public during the half-time break of the first team’s 
matches. They would announce Messi’s name over the 
speakers and he would go down through the stands doing 
tricks and then position himself in the centre of the pitch, where he would perform wonders with the ball. It is a half-
time that many lepers still remember – their first image of 
the boy who would one day become Leo Messi.
‘He was something special,’ recalls Ernesto Vecchio, 
Messi’s second coach at Newell’s, from among old American cars in his mechanic’s workshop. ‘He had wisdom, he could sprint, his passes were spot on, he played for his team-mates, 
but he was capable of going past half the opposing team. 
Once on the Malvinas first pitch, the goalie passed him the ball in defence and he ran the length of the pitch and went 
on to score an incredible goal. He didn’t need to be taught 
a thing. What can you teach to a Maradona or a Pelé? There are only very tiny things for a coach to correct.’
There are so many memories of those two years, from 
age nine to eleven, when Vecchio coached Leo. Like the Balcarce tournament, for example, where the Newell’s ’87 Red and black  35
team knocked out teams like Boca, Independiente and 
San Lorenzo. Lautaro Formica, a defender in that particu-
lar team, maintains that they had nothing to do because 
‘the ball never came back in our direction. I remember that Rodas and Messi created havoc between them. Once 
Messi had the ball, the opposition would get out of the way. 
Sometimes those of us at the back got quite bored.’
Gustavo Ariel Rodas, aka Billy, the other star of that team, 
is the antithesis of Leo. Or, to put it another way, the proof that possessing a natural talent does not guarantee suc-cess. Billy, an attacking midfielder from the ’86 team with 
extraordinary technical abilities, is also from Rosario but 
was born in a shanty town. At fourteen he was a substitute in the Newell’s first team and he had his first child. Before 
his sixteenth birthday he debuted in the first division and 
everyone predicted a bright future. Today, at 22 and with two children to call his own, he is lost to oblivion. ‘It hap-
pens to many players who come from the slums, from pov-
erty,’ explains Vecchio. ‘Football helps them escape their misery, but afterwards, if it doesn’t suit them, they return 
to the slum, they fall into alcohol, drug use, desperation. 
Education is the definitive difference. In Leo’s case, he has a father and mother who have supported him and helped 
him become what he is today. I believe very strongly in family 
environment as one of the factors in a footballer’s success.’ Ernesto Vecchio still has time for one more anecdote, the 
most juicy of all: ‘We were playing against Torito, a club from 
our league. Leo was sick and I didn’t want to make him play. I kept him on the bench. There were only a few minutes 
left before the final whistle and we were losing 1-0, so I went 
over to Leo and I said: “Do you fancy playing?” He said yes. He warmed up and just before he went on I yelled to him: 
“Win me the match!” And he did – in five minutes he netted 
two goals and turned the score around.’ Nothing out of the 36 Messi
ordinary  seeing as, between championships, tournaments 
and friendlies, the Flea scored around 100 goals a season.
In 2000, the tenth league is the last that thirteen-year-old 
Leo plays in with the ’87 Machine, under the direction of 
Adrián Coria. They win it at the Bella Vista ground, where 
the first team trains. And it is then that, on 3 September, just two weeks before his departure for Barcelona, La 
Capital prints the first interview, a double-page spread: 
‘Lionel Andrés Messi, a little leper who’s a real handful.’ The introduction goes something like this: ‘He is a tenth-
division player and he is the team’s playmaker. As a boy he 
is not only one of the most promising junior lepers, but he also has a huge future ahead of him, because, despite his 
height, he can go past one, past two, beat all the defenders 
and score goals, but above all, he has fun with the ball.’
And next, a barrage of questions. Here are just a few of 
his answers:
Idols: my father and my godfather Claudio
Favourite players: my brother and my cousinFavourite team: Newell’sHobby: listening to musicFavourite book: the BibleFavourite film: Baby’s Day OutPossible career: PE teacherObjectives: to finish secondary schoolAims: to make it into the first teamHappiest moment: when we became champions of the 
tenth league
Saddest moment: when my grandmother passed awayA dream: to play in the Newell’s first teamA memory: when my grandmother first took me to play 
football
Humility: is something a human being should never loseWhat Newell’s means: everything, the best.