193Chapter 32
Bronze and silver
17 December 2007
Let’s try and get our heads around the numbers: one goal 
in eight matches in his first season with the first team; seven 
goals in 23 fixtures in the 2005–06 season; fifteen goals in 
31 matches between the league and the Champions League in the 2006–07 season; eight goals in the first slew of fix-
tures at the beginning of the 2007–08 season; 21 goals in 
22 matches since he scored the hat-trick against Real Madrid in March 2007. But the figures do not do justice to Leo’s 
progression. Instead let’s take a look at the headlines:
‘Messi is worth the whole team’ – El País, 20/09/07
‘Messi plays Messiah’ – Marca, 23/09/07‘Messi dominates’ – El Mundo, 23/09/07‘Messi’s got guts’ – El Periódico, 27/09/07‘Messi was worth the entrance fee’ – La Vanguardia, 
30/09/07
‘Messi is king of La Liga’ – Marca, 08/10/07‘Messi’s irresistible rise’ – Sport, 09/10/07‘Messi does the mambo’ – Mundo Deportivo, 09/10/07‘Messi starts to do what Maradona did before him’ – As, 
18/10/07
And it’s not just the headlines on every page which cele-
brate the moment of glory, the divinely inspired play, ‘the 194 Messi
brilliance and inspiration’ of the Argentine ‘who turns 
everything  he touches to gold’. The comments of the 
coaches, the rival teams, the football experts, both Spanish and Argentine, and the studies also document his explo-
sion. There is talk of a ‘footballer without limits’, and it is 
stated that, given his mindset, Messi is capable of ‘taking risks and directing the game’. There is talk of his extreme 
running speed: 4.5 strides per second, which beats the 4.4 
of Asafa Powell, the speedy Jamaican who set a 100-metre world record of 9.74 seconds in Rieti (Italy) on 9 September 
2007. There are discussions regarding his low centre of grav-
ity, which allow him to control and drive the ball forward with characteristic ease. Comparisons with the number 10 
are made continually.
In an exclusive interview in Marca, Diego does not argue 
with any of this; he simply explains that ‘if Rijkaard puts Messi on the bench, Laporta will throw him out’. And after 
his team’s harsh defeat at the Nou Camp, Zaragoza coach Víctor Fernández says what everyone is thinking: ‘Messi could be the best in the world.’
As though besieged by an avalanche, the compliments 
swirl around Messi from September to November. And since it’s not long before the nominations for France Football’s 
Ballon d’Or and the FIFA World Player, the hopes and the 
voting predictions become more and more outspoken. ‘Messi is close behind Kaká,’ writes La Vanguardia. ‘Messi is 
a candidate for the Ballon d’Or. His performance and goals 
for Barça and Argentina make him a favourite,’ announces Marca. It is a full-blown campaign in favour of the Flea, 
although everyone is conscious of the fact that Kaká is the 
favourite and probably already has the prestigious award in the bag. But either way, it is better to campaign, and give 
some impetus to the Argentine’s cause. In the meantime, 
while awaiting the verdict, Messi is awarded the Bravo, the Bronze and silver  195
prize given by Italian sports magazine Guerin Sportivo to the 
best Under 21 in the European championships. Leo is the 
first Argentine and third Barcelona player to win it, after 
Guardiola and Ronaldo. It is 25 November. Just one week later, Ricardo Izecson Dos Santos Leite, ‘Kaká’ (a nickname 
given to him by his brother), lifts the Ballon d’Or. Messi is 
in third place. Bronze, with 255 votes. Cristiano Ronaldo is just ahead of him with 22 more votes, while Kaká has 
received no fewer than 444 votes.
The Brazilian, who is a member of the Reborn in Christ 
Church and a fervent evangelist, gives thanks to God ‘for being lucky enough to be able to dedicate myself to this pro-
fession’. He believes that Milan’s Champions League victory and his position as highest goal scorer are what helped him 
triumph over his opponents. Of Leo, he says: ‘He represents 
ability and control of the ball. He is young and full of tal-ent, I think he is very good.’ The difference between them? 
It’s simple, explains Kaká, ‘Messi hasn’t won any important 
titles this season, not La Liga, nor the Champions League, and I think that has counted against him.’
It is the same story fifteen days later at the FIFA World 
Player Gala 2007. With just one difference, which makes one of the top players extremely nervous. Kaká takes gold 
again with 1,047 votes, best player of 2007 according to his 
colleagues; but Leo moves up to silver (504 votes), overtak-ing Cristiano Ronaldo who, with 426 votes, has to make do 
with the bronze.
It is amusing seeing what happens in the room. The 
presenter announces Messi in second place and Ronaldo in third. The two of them stand up at the same time in the 
front row of the stalls in order to go up on stage. Messi but-tons his jacket. It is the first time he has ever worn a suit 
and he looks decidedly unaccustomed to such attire. FIFA 
president Joseph Blatter and Pelé do the honours on the 196 Messi
Zurich Opera House stage. Cristiano Ronaldo is the first 
to shake hands all round. He nods to O Rei and, without 
hesitation, picks up the second place silver trophy. Blatter has to motion to him and insist: ‘Messi, it’s for Messi.’ The 
presenter repeats the result of the votes and asks them to 
switch trophies. An uncomfortable moment smoothed over by the presenter with a ‘you did very well but you just missed 
it’, to Cristiano Ronaldo.
The two of them change places for the photo and the 
ceremony continues without any problem.
‘Blatter said that that one was for me; then, when I 
went to pick it up, it turned out that the other one was for 
Cristiano and this one was for me,’ Leo comments at a press 
conference later. When asked how he feels, he replies: ‘The 
truth is that I feel happy, all those people who voted, they gave me this prize … Before it all happened I said that it 
was already wonderful just to be in the top three, so I’m 
very happy. It was all new to me, so I was just taking it in and enjoying it.’
Leo Messi shouldn’t even have been there. The injury he 
picked up the previous Saturday at Mestalla had threatened his attendance at the gala. Then, at the last minute, the doc-
tors give him a good report, so the Blaugrana expedition 
leaves for Zurich, headed up by Joan Laporta, who receives the FIFA Fair Play Award on behalf of FC Barcelona. Jorge 
and Rodrigo go along to keep Leo company.
Two days later in Barcelona, the father and brother find 
time to talk about their trip to Switzerland, the prizes, and various other things related to the champion they know 
so well. Is there disappointment that he missed out on the gold? ‘Just the fact that he is second and third in the world at 
twenty years of age, means Leo is already a footballing icon. 
He still has time to make it to number one if he continues like this,’ says Jorge, sipping a cup of tea. ‘In all honesty, Bronze and silver  197
did you ever imagine that your son would get to this level?’ 
‘No, I never imagined he would go so far. I was betting on 
Rodrigo, who was a good striker. He grew up at Newell’s, he 
played with Central Córdoba, he played as a reserve in the first division, he had a motorbike accident that kept him 
out for a year, he trialled in Chile, and then I brought him 
here to see if he could find a Spanish or another European team.’
‘The difference,’ comments his older brother Rodrigo, 
‘is that Leo has an attribute that I didn’t have: he has a lot of willpower, he has made a huge number of sacrifices to 
get to where he is. I didn’t have as much willpower. I’m a 
lot more lazy.’ But who instilled Leo with such a passion for football? ‘I was never one of those frustrated footballers 
who wants their kids to be champions at all costs. I never 
aspired to that. It was my mother-in-law who used to take Rodrigo and Leo to play, not me,’ declares Jorge. ‘Yes, it’s 
true that I coached him for a year at Grandoli, but I wasn’t 
his teacher. I enjoyed watching him play.’
So then where does his passion come from? ‘Back when 
I used to play, I loved football,’ says Jorge. ‘I woke up in the morning and went to bed at night thinking about football, maybe that has been passed down to Leo.’
‘When my brother was five or six years old,’ explains 
Rodrigo, ‘there was no other present that could make him as happy as a football could. He was crazy about football like 
all the kids. But he knew how to be faithful to his childhood 
passion and he’s pursued his dream. Because his happiness was, and still is, tied up with football.’ And what does the job 
involve for a factory-worker-turned-football-agent father? 
‘For his own benefit I have to protect him from the expecta-tions of interested parties who could harm him. There are 
people who seem trustworthy but actually they’re criminals. 
The world is full of them. It’s not easy, I have had to learn, 198 Messi
I have made mistakes, and bit by bit I have straightened out 
any issues along the way.’ How is the father-son relation-
ship? ‘Good, apart from the generational difference, which creates a barrier. I try not to smother him too much, that’s 
what he needs. I prefer him to be surrounded by youngsters 
his own age, his brothers, his friends. I don’t want my son to think: he’s always around. If he needs advice I give it to 
him, if not … I try not to get involved in anything. I tell him 
things and I can see that he often takes it on board. Money? Contracts? We almost never talk about those things, we chat 
more about football, the football here and the Argentine 
teams, like a get-together between friends.’
And how are things going with the older brother? ‘I was 
by Leo’s side during the first few years here, in Barcelona. They weren’t easy years, we used to get very bored,’ explains Rodrigo. ‘They were sad times, we would spend them watch-
ing films or playing PlayStation. Then, bit by bit, his life 
changed, and so did mine. Every so often he likes to get off the pitch and go out to eat. In terms of nightlife? He 
doesn’t like going out that much. I used to like going out, 
he would rather get a drink and have a chat. He spends a lot of time with us. He looks after Agustín a lot, my oldest 
child, who is turning five, and he loves my little girl, who was 
born in 2006. He also likes the meals that my wife Florencia makes – her roast chicken and empanadas could rival my 
mother’s.’
A question for the head of the family: does all that 
money change a player and his family? ‘We don’t have luxu-ries, we still haven’t finished the house in Rosario. Leo has 
a chalet here in Castelldefels: two floors, four bedrooms, a garden and a small pool. We live just as we did before, but 
people look at us and think we’ve changed; on the contrary, 
they are the ones who have changed. They look at us dif-ferently … they envy a boy who has done well. The money Bronze and silver  199
that Leo earns is put away safely so that he and his family 
shouldn’t have any problems in the future.’
The last question, that has to be asked, is about his son’s 
future. ‘I think it will be good. He’ll keep developing, he’ll be even better.’ Better than Maradona? ‘Diego was one of a 
kind. Leo is different, these are different times; I hope he 
comes close to the number 10’s level, in terms of the techni-cal qualities he displayed and the results he achieved.’