69Chapter 12
Puyol’s mask
Conversation with Álex García
The appointment is at the Nou Camp ice rink. The young 
professionals are playing. On the other side of the glass sep-
arating the cafeteria and the sports facilities there are some 
difficult exercises and one or two rather inelegant collisions. Álex García knows one of those exercises very well, albeit on 
a very different type of surface. At 42, he has a career as a 
midfield goal-scorer under his belt (he debuted in blue and claret on 5 December 1990, in the most famous team of all, 
the Dream Team), as well as nine years as a coach for the 
Barça youth team (where he coached Messi for an entire season). He currently coaches at Dinamo Tbilisi.
Let’s go back to the 2002–03 championship.
‘It was my second year as an A-team coach. I had a very 
talented group of kids. I had Cesc Fàbregas, Piqué, Víctor 
Vázquez and Leo …’
What was he like?
‘Very receptive, always attentive to everything, quiet, shy, reserved, with great class. He was a different type of player, 
when he got the ball he was unstoppable, he had a devas-
tating sidestep. He would get annoyed on the pitch if you didn’t pass it to him, or if he didn’t do as well as he wanted, 
but he never argued over a referee’s decision or over a foul.’70 Messi
And what was he like with the rest of the group?
‘Well, they looked after him a lot, they defended him because 
he was like their little brother and because the opposition 
always pounded him, so Piqué or Víctor would always be by 
his side. Everyone knew he was important to the team, that 
at any moment Leo could seal a match.’
And has he ever had any problems with you?
‘No, he really hasn’t. I knew that he was far from home, from his family, that he lived here with his father. I could 
imagine his nostalgia; sometimes I asked him about it, but 
he acted like nothing bothered him. He held everything inside. At fifteen years, Leo already knew what he wanted, 
he was conscious of the fact that he had an opportunity at 
Barça, he knew what it meant to make a sacrifice – both his sacrifice and his family’s, and he didn’t want to waste the 
opportunity he had been given. In terms of football, the 
only thing that displeased him – he never said anything but you could see it in his face – was playing out of position. I moved him all over the pitch so that he could develop all his 
skills. It was almost a given in the youth teams. So I played 
him as a midfielder, sometimes as a centre forward, or on the right or left wing. But he didn’t like it. Within a few min-
utes he would drift towards the centre behind the strikers. 
You couldn’t stop him.’
What can you teach to a kid like that?
‘I think he has introduced us to the street football style, “playground football”, as they say in Argentina – the dodge, 
the feint. We in turn have tried to instil in him our attack-
ing kind of football, the Barça kind – getting the ball a lot, playing  as hard as we can, going forward in only two or three 
touches, driving the ball towards the centre of the pitch and Puyol’s mask  71
then pushing forward through the opposition’s half. Every 
player should be able to show off his talent.’
The best memory of that year …
‘There are many images of Leo going round in my head 
but the most incredible story is definitely the one about the 
mask.’
Let’s hear it.
‘It was the last game of the league: Barça-Espanyol at the Miniestadi. We only needed a draw to become champions. 
We were winning 1-0, when all of a sudden Leo clashed 
with a parakeet [Espanyol] defender. He lost conscious-ness momentarily and he was taken to hospital in an ambu-
lance. They said he had a fractured cheekbone. Two weeks’ 
recovery. He couldn’t play in the Copa Catalunya, which was only two weeks later. The news saddened the whole 
team, who had just beaten Espanyol 3-1 and been crowned 
champions. Well … the first week passes and in the second the Barcelona medics tell us that Leo can train if he wears 
a protective mask. Two months earlier, first-team member 
Carles Puyol had suffered a similar injury and he had opted to wear facial protection rather than undergo surgery. We 
went to find the mask to see if Messi could use it. The med-
ics agreed to it and allowed him to play in the final on 4 May wearing the mask.’
What happened in the final?
‘The match begins and after two plays I can see that Leo is 
lifting up the mask a little bit. It doesn’t fit him, he can’t see. 
After two minutes he comes over to the bench and yells at me: “Here’s the mask, boss,” and he throws it at me. “Leo, 
if you take it off I have to take you off the pitch,” I tell him. 72 Messi
“I could get into a lot of trouble, and you …” “No, please 
coach, leave me on a little bit longer,” he says. In five min-
utes he gets the ball twice and scores two goals. The first time he gets it in the middle of the pitch and dodges round 
the goalie; the second one is a cross from the touchline 
from Frank Songo’o, which he finishes beautifully. We were 3-0 up at the end of the first half and I said to him: “You’ve 
done what you had to do for your team, you can rest on the 
bench now.”’
It’s a lovely story. But tell me truthfully, did you ever imagine that 
Leo would make it this far?‘Not so quickly, no. I was convinced that Messi had a lot of 
talent and that he’d make it to the first team – but an explo-
sion like that? No. Everything has happened very quickly. That’s why I believe that if he doesn’t suffer from any seri-
ous injuries, Leo will leave his mark on a whole era.’