17Chapter 3
The smallest of them all
A summer afternoon in 1992
The Grandoli ground is almost bare. A lot of earth and only 
a few spots of green near the touchline. The goalposts are in 
a terrible state, as is the fence, as is the building that houses 
the showers and dressing rooms. The neighbourhood itself is not much better: makeshift carwashes at every junction 
along Gutiérrez avenue, used-tyre salesmen, signs declaring 
‘metals bought here’ – in other words scrap metals; there is even a piece of cardboard advertising dog-grooming ser -
vices. And in the background: the popular construction towers, which appear abandoned although they are not; low, little houses, which have lost their charm of yesteryear; 
vegetation growing between the cracks in the asphalt; rub-
bish cooking in the heat; men and old folk with nothing to do; kids on bikes that are too small for them. ‘People 
have changed around here,’ say the oldest of the old folk, 
adding: ‘At night it’s scary to walk these streets.’ The delin-quents have moved in.
At three in the afternoon there is hardly a soul about. 
The football pitch is deserted. The kids from the neighbour -
ing schools, who come to play sports at the Abanderado 
Mariano Grandoli Physical Education Centre number eight 
(named after a volunteer in the 1865 war who gave his life for his country), have already left and the footballers 
don’t arrive before five o’clock. The only person around is 18 Messi
a teacher, in a white t-shirt, blue tracksuit and trainers. He 
points the way, 150 metres or so, towards the home of señor 
Aparicio, Lionel Messi’s first coach.
Aparicio opens the door with wet hands – he is preparing 
a meal for his blind wife, Claudia, but he invites his guest 
to enter and make himself comfortable. Four armchairs, an enormous white dog and a certain musty odour occupy 
a sparse lounge dominated by an old television. Salvador 
Ricardo Aparicio is 78 years old, with four children, eight grand children and four great-grandchildren; he has a worn 
face, with the shadow of a moustache, his body twisted like barbed wire, his voice and hands shaky. He has worked his whole life on the railways. As a youngster he wore  
the number 4 shirt for Club Fortín and, more than 30 years ago, he coached children on Grandoli’s 7.5 by 40 metre pitch.
He has nurtured hundreds and hundreds of children, 
including Rodrigo and Matías. The eldest Messi was a speedy and powerful centre forward; the second played in defence. Grandmother Celia accompanied them to training 
every Tuesday and Thursday. And one summer afternoon, 
Leo came with them.
‘I needed one more to complete the ’86 team [of chil-
dren born in 1986]. I was waiting for the final player with the shirt in my hands while the others were warming up. But he didn’t show up and there was this little kid kicking 
the ball against the stands. The cogs were turning and I 
said to myself, damn … I don’t know if he knows how to play but … So I went to speak to the grandmother, who was 
really into football, and I said to her: “Lend him to me.” She 
wanted to see him on the pitch. She had asked me many times to let him try out. On many occasions she would tell 
me about all the little guy’s talents. The mother, or the aunt, 
I can’t remember which, didn’t want him to play: “He’s so The smallest of them all  19
small, the others are all huge.” To reassure her I told her: 
“I’ll stand him over here, and if they attack him I’ll stop the 
game and take him off.”’
So goes señor Aparicio’s story, but the Messi-Cuccittini 
family have a different version of events: ‘It was Celia who forced Apa to put him on when he was one short. The coach 
didn’t like the idea because he was so small. But his grand-mother insisted, saying: “Put him on and you’ll see how well 
the little boy plays.” “OK,” replied Apa, “but I’m putting 
him near the touchline so that when he cries you can take him off yourself.”’
Regarding what happens next there are no disagree-
ments. Let’s return to the old coach’s narrative: ‘Well … I gave him the shirt and he put it on. The first ball came his 
way, he looked at it and … nothing.’
Don Apa, as he’s known around here, gets up from his 
chair and mimics little Messi’s surprised expression, then sits back down and explains: ‘He’s left-footed, that’s why he 
didn’t get to the ball.’ He continues: ‘The second it came to his left foot, he latched onto it, and went past one guy, 
then another and another. I was yelling at him: “Kick it, kick 
it.” He was terrified someone would hurt him but he kept going and going. I don’t remember if he scored the goal – I 
had never seen anything like it. I said to myself: “That one’s 
never coming off.” And I never took him off.’
Señor Aparicio disappears into the other room and 
returns with a plastic bag. He rummages through the mem-ories of a lifetime. Finally he finds the photo he is looking for: a green pitch, a team of kids wearing red shirts and, 
standing just in front of a rather younger-looking Aparicio, 
the smallest of them all: the white trousers almost reaching his armpits, the shirt too large, the expression very serious, 
bowlegged. It’s Lionel; he looks like a little bird, like a flea, 
as his brother Rodrigo used to call him.20 Messi
‘He was born in ’87 and he played with the ’86 team. He 
was the smallest in stature and the youngest, but he really 
stood out. And they punished him hard, but he was a dis-tinctive player, with supernatural talent. He was born know-
ing how to play. When we would go to a game, people would 
pile in to see him. When he got the ball he destroyed it. He was unbelievable, they couldn’t stop him. He scored four 
or five goals a game. He scored one, against the Club de 
Amanecer, which was the kind you see in adverts. I remem-ber it well: he went past everyone, including the keeper. 
What was his playing style? The same as it is now – free. 
What was he like? He was a serious kid, he always stayed quietly by his grandmother’s side. He never complained. 
If they hurt him he would cry sometimes but he would get 
up and keep running. That’s why I argue with everyone, I defend him, when they say that he’s too much of a soloist, 
or that he’s nothing special, or that he’s greedy.’
His wife calls him from the next room; señor Aparicio 
disappears and returns to recount more memories.
Like that video that he can’t seem to find, with some of 
the child prodigy’s games – ‘I used to show it to the kids to 
teach them what you can do with a ball at your feet’. Or the 
first time Leo returned from Spain and he went to visit him. 
‘When they saw me it was madness. I went in the morning and when I returned it was one o’clock the next morning. 
We spent the whole time chatting about what football was 
like over there in Spain.’ Or that time when the neighbour -
hood organised a party in Lionel’s honour. They wanted 
to present him with a plaque at the Grandoli ground, but 
in the end Leo couldn’t go. He called later to say ‘Thanks, maybe next time.’
The old football teacher holds no bitterness; on the con-
trary, he speaks with much affection about the little boy he coached all those years ago.The smallest of them all  21
‘When I saw on TV the first goal he scored in a Barcelona 
shirt I started to cry. My daughter Genoveva, who was in the 
other room, asked: “What’s wrong dad?” “Nothing,” I said, 
“it’s emotional.”’
Aparicio pulls another gem from his plastic bag. Another 
photo of the little blond boy, shirt too big, legs too short; in his hand he is holding a trophy, the first he ever won. It’s almost as big as he is.
Leo is not yet five years old. And in the Grandoli ground 
he is already starting to experience the taste of goals and success. In the second year, he is even lucky enough to have 
his old man as his coach. Jorge accepts the offer from the 
club’s directors and takes charge of the ’87 team. They play against Alfi, one of their many fixtures across the city. And 
they win everything: ‘But everything, everything: the cham-
pionship, the tournaments, the friendlies …’ recalls Jorge Messi, with more of a paternal pride than that of a coach.
Apart from football, there is school. Leo goes to school 
number 66, General Las Heras, at 4800 Buenos Aires street. He is accompanied by either his mother Celia, his 
aunt Marcela, or by the neighbour Silvia Arellano, mother 
of Cintia, his best friend. They go on foot, making their way across the open country or skirting the edges of the 
football fields on the grounds of the army barracks of the 
Communications Batallion 121. In little more than ten min-utes they are at the door.
Today, when approaching the entrance, the youngest 
class can be seen absorbed in drawing. Two of them are wearing Messi shirts. In the enormous covered pavilion, 
some kids in white kit are playing a match with incredible 
concentration. There are goals – what’s missing is the ball – a bundle of brown paper held together with tape serving 
instead. They move at a giddying pace, without taking too 
much notice of the harsh grey gravel – slaloming, feinting, 22 Messi
dribbling. Among the players is Bruno Biancucchi, Leo’s 
cousin. Sweating profusely and red from the effort, his char -
coal-black hair matted against his face, wearing a white-and-
pink-striped earring, his companions soon mark him out 
as the best. The press has already dedicated a substantial 
number of articles to hailing him as Leo’s successor. His coaches say that he weaves really well, that he has the same 
talent as his cousin. And, like him, he is shy. The only thing 
he says is that he envies his cousin’s initiative and ability to score goals. Bruno is also a striker and he would like to wear 
a Barça shirt one day.
A circle of children has gathered. They all want to give 
their opinion about the boy who until a few years ago went to their school. For Pablo, age eleven, there is no doubt 
whatsoever: ‘He has what it takes to be the best in the world. Better than Maradona. The thing I like best about him is his 
speed, he’s incredible.’ Something is worrying Agustín, age 
nine – something that concerns many of his fellow country-men – ‘Maradona started out at Argentino Juniors, Messi … 
at Barça’. Without question, too far away from here. Even 
the girls, who are more embarrassed, end up joining the group. And here, opinion is divided. Some think he’s good-
looking, others think he is too short.
It’s break time, and under a crooked old piece of wood – 
an ancient tree – the little pupils chase one another around. Leo used to dodge round the enormous trunk running after 
paper or plastic balls. For him, the most wonderful memo-ries of those years are precisely those games with whatever 
object found its way between his feet. He has no problem 
admitting that he didn’t enjoy studying.
And Mónica Dómina, his teacher from first to third grade, 
confirms that fact: ‘No, Leo didn’t do so well in his studies, but his work was of an acceptable level. At the beginning he had difficulty reading, so I advised his mother to take him The smallest of them all  23
to a speech therapist. In the other subjects he managed to 
improve little by little, although he didn’t obtain wonder -
ful results. He was a quiet child, sweet and shy, one of the shyest students I have seen in my entire teaching career. If you didn’t address him, he would sit silently at his desk, at 
the back of the classroom. The older children competed 
with him in order to play in Rosario’s inter-school tourna-ments. He was good, of course – he used to win trophies 
and medals; but I never heard him boast about playing well 
and scoring goals.’