143Chapter 24
Positive discrimination
Conversation with Jorge Valdano
When he is asked how he wants to be introduced, he replies, 
‘ex-footballer’. This despite the fact that he was the Real 
Madrid general director; and aside from winning one world 
championship in an Argentine shirt, he has been many other things in his lifetime: coach, sporting director, writer, 
commentator. Words are without a doubt among his best 
weaponry; metaphor is his indispensable tool; he considers analysis a pleasure.
Let’s talk about Messi, a footballer who started out at Newell’s, 
like you. Let’s begin at the 2006 World Cup. An entire nation had 
pinned their hopes on him and instead he didn’t even set foot on 
the pitch in the decisive match. Why?‘Pekerman is a man who knows talent when he sees it and 
he has never kept it hidden away. We can try to imagine 
that there was some problem we don’t know about, prob-ably a physical issue. Maybe he wasn’t at his peak. That said, 
I’m with those who thought it was a shame that Argentina 
collapsed without Messi. In the last match many things hap-pened: Abbondanzieri was injured, Riquelme got tired, 
Argentina were 1-0 up – all factors that penalised Messi. The 
match seemed under control. Germany were not getting anywhere, but the truth is that in their desperation to equal-
ise Messi could have taken advantage of the opposition ’s 144 Messi
disorder to score another goal. But these are all specula-
tions, I prefer to deduce that Pekerman’s thoughts are 
worth more than mine because he was dealing with the facts 
on the ground.’
And while we’re on the topic, there has been much talk about 
Messi’s youth, his maturity, the etiquette of Argentine football and 
the dressing room …
‘Maradona played in his first World Cup when he was 21 and it was not a happy experience. He was not entirely 
mature enough yet. With Messi there was positive discrimi-
nation: we were thinking that if he had played he would have turned the match around …’
Now that we have dealt with that topic, let’s talk about Messi and 
Maradona.
‘Maradona’s game was more nuanced. Diego could finish 
but he could also be the strategist. Messi is more intense than that. With his assets, his physical, mental and techni-cal speed, he is always tempted to go for the goal. Diego 
sometimes used to put his foot on the accelerator, whereas 
Messi lives with the pedal to the floor. It’s a youthful sin. As Menotti used to say, he needs to learn to be Joe Bloggs, 
a “Jack of all trades”. He can’t always be Messi, because if 
you’re continually explosive then the opposition will have their guard up constantly and it’s more difficult to surprise 
them. Their similarities? The same thing happens with Leo 
that used to happen with Maradona, he’s an individual who carries such weight that he can manage without the team. 
He’s not like Zidane or Platini, who need the team around 
them in order to display their collective intelligence. Messi needs his team-mates to pass him the ball, after that he does 
the rest on his own. Their differences? Physicality. Diego 
came to Napoli eight kilos heavier and he was still a decisive Positive discrimination  145
influence . Messi’s game requires him to be explosive, so it is 
imperative he stays in perfect shape. Look at the injuries he 
has sustained: it seems like his muscles break him because 
of the amount they require of him.’
What do you think of Messi today?
‘He has matured. He has a natural ability to deal with the competition. He gives the impression of being happy when-
ever he has the ball at his feet – he is not conditioned by 
context, nor by the expectation he has generated. And that is the mark of a great player, not getting stage fright. At 
the crossroads of his career, where you can really measure 
the limits of his personality, he has given us some astound-ing performances. We’re dealing with someone who plays 
incredibly attractive football, and who, even with three men 
marking him, with his back to the goal and hemmed in at the corner flag, can be dangerous.’
What will his future hold?
‘I would have liked to have had his future … he has every 
reason to become the first great player of the twenty-first century. The twentieth century was carved out by Pelé, Maradona, Cruyff, Di Stéfano. He could dominate this dec-
ade, along with Cristiano Ronaldo. He’s in the best possi-
ble position. Mother Nature has given him all the tools he needs. Now, he must take charge of that talent. He has an 
advantage: he looks at himself with a certain sense of dis-
tance. In addition, the off-pitch Leo doesn’t make the head-lines – that only happens when the ball is at his feet. That’s 
another difference between him and Maradona. Diego was 
doubly attractive: on the one hand as a footballer and on the other as the rebel, the provocateur. He was always a vol-
cano on the edge of erupting.’