175Chapter 28
A long career ahead of him
Conversation with Frank Rijkaard
An ashtray, a packet of tobacco, a can of Pepsi and he begins 
to talk. The former Barcelona coach is relaxed, he has no 
urgent appointments and he willingly speaks at length, dis-
cussing the little boy who debuted with the first team on 16 October 2003.
You played impassioned games with Milan against the Napoli of 
Maradona, and you were Messi’s coach for five years. In short, 
you are the best placed to resolve the issue: ‘Is Leo the new Diego?’
‘I have many memories of Maradona – those clashes with Napoli, in the Italian championship, they were historic; but 
when Diego played in Italy at 26, 27 years of age, he was 
already made. Messi is still very young, he has his whole career ahead of him. I understand why many people com-
pare Leo to Diego. They are both Argentine, they’re both 
little and they both have great qualities, but comparisons are always complicated. Back then, Maradona represented foot-
ball. It’s clear that he was, and is, football. Leo is a unique 
footballer, but in order to compare him to Maradona we will have to wait until the end of his career.’
And what about that goal against Getafe?
‘I have seen a lot of football, many great players and many 
more goals … I have to say that Leo’s goal against Getafe 176 Messi
was one of the most spectacular that I have seen. It was a 
genuine work of art. I remember that after it happened I 
felt immensely happy for him, for the team, for the crowd; 
but, in all honesty, I wasn’t that surprised.’
Why?
‘Because you see it every day in training, when he’s playing, 
you know that he can do incredible things and he’s capable 
of doing things like that.’
Were you therefore not surprised by the discussion about the 
similarities to Maradona’s goal in the 1986 Mexico World Cup?‘I thought it might happen. Because it’s true that they are 
quite alike, although I think Leo accelerates even more 
than Maradona. Thousands of clips of the two goals were posted on the Internet, and I’ve seen at least another twenty 
similar ones.’
Let’s return to Leo’s debut with the first team.
‘Leo was already talented when he was at the youth academy, 
but you have to reserve judgement. You have to wait and 
see because the transition into the first team is fundamen-tal. It’s the real test. Well, Leo surprised all of us because 
instead of encountering difficulties, his skills improved by 
playing with great footballers. In the Gamper [trophy], against Juve, everyone  realised what the boy was worth.’
What are his characteristics, his qualities?‘It doesn’t matter if he is playing in front of ten spectators 
or 100,000. Leo is the same as always, he always feels secure 
and has the same desire to win. He is the boy who says: “Give me the ball, I want to play, I want to be creative, I want to 
show my talents.” And when he gets it, it’s a difficult task to 
stop him without fouling him. He is extremely fast, he has A long career ahead of him  177
great ball control, an exquisite touch and he can dribble 
in a way rarely seen throughout the footballing world. And 
let’s not forget, he’s explosive, and although he’s not very 
tall, he is very strong. You can see it when he clashes with the opposition – it’s not easy to knock him down.’
How has he changed over the years?
‘When he debuted he was a very well balanced person, 
calm, respectful and very shy. Over time, he has changed a 
lot, but without losing these attributes. Now he is more sure of himself, he is conscious of being an important player in 
the team. Everyone values him and he is perfectly aware 
of it. His attitude has not changed, but he is not the silent boy he was all those years ago. He is funnier, he likes to 
joke around when he is with his team-mates or surrounded 
by people he knows … I have to say that from day one the team has behaved very well towards him, the group has 
accepted him. Sylvinho, Deco, Ronaldinho, they’ve helped 
and advised him. Great players always recognise a special player.’
What kind of relationship did you have with Leo?
‘I care about him a lot. At the beginning, I felt he needed 
my sympathy and support, because of his age. Later on I 
saw that he needed it less: he knows what his options are, he knows how the footballing world works. He has assumed 
many responsibilities and he will assume many more, for his 
team-mates, his club, and the shareholders. He is already mature enough to do so because he has developed as a per -
son and as a footballer, he has experienced some wonderful moments, and some very difficult ones.’178 Messi
Like when he was injured against Chelsea and you hugged him as 
if you were his father?
‘To me it was a natural thing to do. I felt his suffering, I knew how important it was to him to play in that match. Getting 
injured is unbearable. The only thing I could do was con-
sole him, and say: “Don’t worry, you’ll be better soon.” It was a very emotional moment, very beautiful, although it 
wasn’t nice at all. But you have to deal with these things in 
your career. They are the things that make you grow, that motivate you to keep playing, to make it to the top.’
Tell us some advice, or the most important advice, you gave Leo.
‘Finish the action: shoot, or cross it, don’t keep dribbling. 
Because there is more of a risk of losing the ball or getting 
injured. You can’t dribble for 90 minutes, nor can you drib-ble past ten men and the goalkeeper in every match. You 
can do it once a year, not every Sunday. That’s the advice I 
gave him years ago and it seems that he took it on board. He demonstrated as much this season: in many games he 
has scored one or two goals, or given a team-mate an assist. 
In short, he has improved his football and he is showing his maturity. He needed to, because Leo sees a lot more than 
others do on the pitch. He can achieve more than others. 
What he can’t do is wear himself out pointlessly, not pace himself and not make a difference.’
Rijkaard lights another cigarette and then, continuing 
his train of thought, adds:
‘There is a sense that Maradona used to transmit, and 
now Messi also transmits, the joy of playing. They are two people who have fun with a football. It seems that they are always asking for the ball … and they’re saying “Let’s play”.’