255Chapter 37
Floods of tears
3 July 2010
It’s the 89th minute. Germany are on the attack. Miroslav 
Klose’s efforts lead to the final goal, bringing the scoreline 
to 4-0. From the opponent’s half, Messi keeps running. 
He reaches the halfway line, pauses for a moment with his hands on his hips, then sags and leans his hands on his 
knees. He feels like crying. The Argentine number 10 has 
lost his spark – head down, at a loss, disbelieving. Klose runs past him, jubilant.
At referee Ravshan Irmatov’s final whistle, Lionel heads 
down to the dressing room. Juan Sebastián ‘La Brujita’ Verón and Argentina’s fitness coach Fernando Signorini 
try to console him, Diego Armando Maradona gives him a 
hug and a kiss – but he is inconsolable. It’s the Pelusa who later emphasises what Leo’s tears mean when speaking at 
the press conference. ‘Anyone who claims he isn’t proud to 
play for his country is just plain stupid,’ he snaps.
‘It was very hard to see Messi in such a state in the dress-
ing room,’ explains Signorini. ‘Some people might think that he has no right to be like that as he has so much going for him in his life, but that’s why I bring in boys like him. 
They’re earning millions of dollars but they’re in floods 
of tears in the dressing room – it shows just how much it means to them inside.’256 Messi
That’s how Messi’s World Cup ends, with tears of frustra-
tion, pain and a sense of powerlessness. He leaves South 
Africa feeling empty, without having scored a single goal. 
He has failed to live up to the hopes of the Argentine 
fans – the dream that he would rival Maradona’s achieve-
ments in the 1986 Mexico World Cup. And he has failed to cement his reputation within the Albiceleste. He is leaving 
‘his’ World Cup without having shown his true self. Messi 
the Ballon d’Or winner. Messi, Barcelona’s brightest star. But now he is just another fallen star like Wayne Rooney, 
Cristiano Ronaldo, Kaká or Franck Ribéry. It’s a sad conclu-
sion to a story that began so differently …
Forty-seven goals shine like 47 jewels in the crown of 
Lionel’s 2009–10 season. He has won the Golden Boot, the honour reserved for Europe’s highest goal scorer. No one has come close to matching his achievements. He has left 
the strikers in the Spanish, English, German and Italian 
leagues in the dust. Gonzalo Higuaín has 27, Didier Drogba 29, Arjen Robben 23, and Antonio Di Natale has scored 29.
In La Liga, Messi has played better than anyone else 
and better than ever – he has beaten all his previous scores since he joined the first team six years ago. He is the top scorer, with nine double goals and four hat-tricks. And with 
34 league goals he has equalled Ronaldo’s 1996–97 figure. 
He has also broken a record at Barça HQ: he is the young-est player in the Catalan club’s history to score more than 
100 league goals, and he has outstripped strikers such as 
Rivaldo, Romario and Eto’o.
They are 34 important goals which help win the league. 
Barça takes the title on the final match day of the season thanks to a definitive whitewash – 4-0 against Valladolid with two from Messi. They have reclaimed the title after a duel 
to the bitter end with Cristiano Ronaldo’s Real Madrid. The 
Blaugrana have racked up 99 points out of a possible 114, Floods of tears  257
another La Liga record. They have fought a lively, magnifi-
cent championship, scoring 98 goals and conceding just 
24. They have beaten Florentino Pérez’s Whites at both the 
Nou Camp and the Bernabéu. And Lionel has surpassed 
Cristiano Ronaldo, the 2008 Ballon d’Or, the most expen-
sive player in footballing history and star of Florentino’s team. The kid from Rosario has made it to the top, winning 
four league titles in six seasons. But above all, he has grown 
in maturity and has demonstrated an inner sense of calm as a person and as a footballer.
‘He’s no longer trying to make the play of the century 
every time he gets the ball. He passes it more and he mixes it up,’ explains Tito Vilanova, Pep Guardiola’s right hand 
man. ‘He has grown as a team player. He does a lot more 
damage and it’s much more difficult to stop him now.’
It has been a spectacular season for Lionel, with just two 
setbacks. The first is on 13 January 2010 against Sevilla at the Ramón Sánchez Pizjuán stadium. Barcelona are playing like a dream, at the top of their game, creating countless chances – but Palop blocks everything and they only man-
age to get one past him. Thanks to a first leg scoreline of 
1-2 at the Nou Camp, Sevilla knock the Blaugrana out of the Copa del Rey. It’s the first time Barça have let a title get 
away in the whole of Guardiola’s reign. Messi is distraught. 
Words of comfort from his teammates and his Argentine friend Gaby Milito fall on deaf ears.
‘A different person would have said, “Never mind, I’m 
the world champion, I’ve still got La Liga!”’ explained Guardiola. ‘But not him. He was the most upset out of 
everyone.’
The second setback occurs on 28 April 2010 at the Nou 
Camp. Following on from a fantastic defensive effort and a perfect game in Milan, José Mourinho’s Inter succeed 
in knocking Barça out of the Champions League. The 258 Messi
European champions are out in the semi-final and they 
won’t be going to the much coveted final at the Bernabéu. 
The comeback that the fans have been dreaming about is 
not to be. They are left with a consolation goal from Piqué 
in the 84th minute which does nothing to dent the 3-1 
scoreline from the San Siro match. It is not enough to earn them their ticket to Madrid.
Barcelona’s efforts are crushed by Inter’s eleven men – 
and even by ten men after Motta’s sending off. The same Messi who had scored four goals against Wenger’s Arsenal 
has not managed a single goal against any team managed 
by Mourinho – Chelsea or Inter. His performance is not exactly noteworthy, but Guardiola still defends him. ‘There 
is no reason to criticise him. They had six defending so he 
always had two men on him, regardless of whether he was in the middle or on the wing.’ Defending the whole team, 
he says: ‘They have nothing to apologise for after the game 
they’ve played. I’m very proud of all of them.’ His message to the locals is clear: he is sorry he cannot lead them to Madrid and he promises to try again next year. But for now, 
he assures them that ‘we’ll pick ourselves up and carry on’.
And they do. On 16 May, the whole town chants, ‘We 
are the champions, Barça are the champions.’ During the title celebrations, Lionel grabs the microphone and yells, 
‘Come on Argentina, you sons of bitches!’ The blue and claret fans clap and cheer. They want him to play well for his 
country. And so does the whole of Argentina.
‘We’ve all dreamed of lifting the World Cup. Not because 
it makes you a more important player, but simply because there is nothing more beautiful in the world. I left the 2006 
World Cup in tears after that defeat by Germany. I hope to leave South Africa crying too – but this time crying tears of 
joy,’ declares Lionel at Ezeiza airport in Buenos Aires where 
he has touched down for the national team’s training camp.Floods of tears  259
He adds: ‘Playing with the national team is completely 
different from playing in Barcelona because of the lack of 
time to train and practise. That’s not to say that the inter -
national teams are worse – they’re the best in the world – but we don’t have much time to work, everything happens 
very quickly. Two days, and then a game. When we’re all together, in a group and with plenty of time, then it’s differ -
ent. When we go to the tournament we’ll keep ourselves to ourselves and stay calm and reserved. We’re not the favour -
ites, and that’s good because that means we can create big 
surprises.’
This time, the Flea commands all the attention from the 
media as well as from fans from all over the world. Even the Cuban leader Fidel Castro, who has not appeared in 
public for four years due to serious illness, weighs in on Lionel’s genius. In an article entitled ‘On the Threshold of 
Tragedy’ – dedicated to denouncing imperialist scandals in 
the United States – he writes that the Argentine striker ‘is as quick as a bolt of lightning and fires the ball with incredible speed, with both his feet and his head’.
In Argentina, Lionel scores points in the eternal com-
parison with Maradona, despite the fact that many of his compatriots’ hearts still beat for Diego. If Messi could 
be explosive for Argentina and lift the cup the fans have 
been dreaming about since 1986, then perhaps he would escape the Pelusa’s shadow once and for all. Maradona-
Messi, Messi-Maradona … the relationship appears to have 
found stability after all the back and forth, all the criticism and contradictory statements, and all the references to the 
Oedipus complex.
Since Diego’s arrival in the Albiceleste dugout, Lionel 
has played eleven games and has only scored three goals. His worst moment with the team is on 14 October 2009, 
when he is accused of not celebrating Mario Bolatti’s goal 260 Messi
against Uruguay which seals Argentina’s place in South 
Africa. His mother, Celia, has to intervene to defend her 
son. ‘He is extremely hurt when people speak badly about 
him. Why are they always out to get him? It really affects 
him and he finds it difficult to get over.’
And Lionel does not deal well with crises, as his Barcelona 
team-mates are well aware. But he gets no support from Maradona. Fed up, he calls the selector to tell him that he 
doesn’t want to play for the Albiceleste anymore. Realising the gravity of the situation, Diego heads over to Barcelona. 
There, the two of them speak openly for the first time. The 
coach tells him not to worry, that things will be different from here onwards. And in that moment, the relationship 
between Leo and Diego is transformed.
Diego starts to indulge his protégé, and before the final 
pre-World Cup friendly against Canada, on Argentine soil, he affirms: ‘I don’t know what people think of Leo, but I 
can tell you what I think of him. I think he is the best in the world. And he’s Argentine. I’ve already told the boys: “If Leo gets the ball, we’ll have plenty of chances.” I’m trying 
to get it into their heads that they’re a team. And that we 
need Messi to play the way he does at Barça. Messi knows that his team-mates want him to be the cherry on the cake. 
He needs to lead them. We don’t want him there as a soloist 
– not in training and not on the pitch. When we’re playing, they can’t pass it to me anymore … so if they don’t pass it to 
Messi, then we’re getting it wrong.’
The Pelusa looks out for him, he vouches for him, he 
confides in him, but at the same time he is cautious, in light of his own experiences. ‘Messi has a lot more support 
than I had before the Mexico World Cup in 1986,’ explains Maradona. ‘But you just have to play the game. In Mexico 
I was on the attack, I was taking control of the ball and the 
team. I got things going and my team-mates followed me. Floods of tears  261
I’ve explained it to Leo so that he can do the same in South 
Africa, and he gets it. We’ve talked about it a lot and I try to 
make sure he’s okay.’
At the start of the training camp, he tells the group lead-
ers to ‘make Messi feel like the best’. And to ensure he is well 
taken care of, he puts him in a room with ‘La Brujita’ Verón – who was Lionel’s mentor in the 2007 Copa América. The 
two players get on well. ‘I keep an eye on them,’ concedes 
Maradona in an interview with Argentine newspaper Clarín. ‘La Brujita is a football buff – he knows a lot more than Leo. 
But they get engrossed in conversation and the Gaucho is 
enchanted, it’s lovely to see.’
When Lionel speaks, it’s clear that he is calm and content, 
ready to play and ready to make waves. And the first group match against Nigeria is fast approaching. At the pre-match press conference, Maradona gifts the media the following 
day’s headline: ‘Argentina is still a Rolls-Royce – but now it’s 
driven by Messi.’ And, as if it were no big deal, he tells him to be a fantastic leader and the best player of all time.
On Saturday 12 June at Johannesburg’s Ellis Park, Lionel 
is the subject of a flurry of attention and compliments. He is the best in Argentina. He lights up the Albiceleste’s game, he understands the needs of the team and he is the most 
active member of the Argentine attack. He does every-
thing: he plays in the hole, he’s on the wing, he’s a striker, he puts in crosses. He creates the most chances in front of 
goal (wasted by Tévez and Higuaín), he is the most enthu-
siastic, and he takes the most shots at goal – eight. Four are on target, but the goals are denied by Nigeria’s miracle-
worker goalkeeper Vincent Enyeama, who also plays for 
Lille Olympic Sporting Club in France. His outstanding performance will later earn him man of the match.
‘I have to thank God and Messi for this trophy, because 
my saves were the work of God,’ Enyeama says afterwards. 262 Messi
‘I believe in God and despite studying Messi’s Liga goals 
extensively, I wouldn’t have been able to do anything with-
out God’s help. Secondly, I have to say that if I hadn’t come 
face to face with the best player in the world, then I would 
not have received this recognition.’
At the end of the match, won by a header from Gabriel 
Heinze, Maradona rushes over to Messi and lifts him up in his arms. He squeezes him tight against his Tarantino-
worthy suit and tie, and kisses him energetically. The Pelusa is the only manager in World Cup history to kiss his players 
after every game and every substitution, but his two kisses to 
Messi are a tribute, in recognition of what he has done for the whole team.
‘Messi was on the ball all day. When he has the ball he 
has fun, and while he’s having fun he entertains us all,’ Diego remarks at the press conference later, while munch-
ing on an apple. The Pelusa is not the only one singing the 
Flea’s praises. The Argentine and Spanish press are unani-mous: Lionel has played better than the rest of the team and he has led his team to victory – a victory which should 
have been greater. The consensus is that the position in the 
hole behind the forwards that Maradona has created for the Rosarino is working well, and it is closer to the ideal 
formation used in Diego’s own heyday. The problems in 
defence and midfield have not gone unnoticed by the pun-dits – and nor have the changes made by the selector, which 
created difficulties for the team in the final minutes. But at 
least they are through to the second round thanks to the victory – and Messi.
Argentina wakes up happy the following day. And on 
13 June, accompanied by Gonzalo Higuaín, Lionel enters the press room in the Argentine camp in Pretoria with the 
same calm demeanour as always. ‘It was a good match. I 
had a lot of freedom of movement and I was really well Floods of tears  263
supported  by my team mates. I had a lot more touches. I was 
shooting from slightly further back than before, and I pre-
ferred that because I still had the option of going forward.’
The press ask him about the possible ‘Messidependence’ 
of the Argentine team. He replies: ‘This team doesn’t 
depend on me. On the contrary, I’m the one who depends on the midfielders getting me the ball.’ As always, not a hint 
of superstar attitude. ‘I’m just one member of the team,’ he 
says, and it’s clear that in this particular team he feels happy. ‘I feel as comfortable here as I do in Barcelona,’ he confirms, 
adding: ‘I knew that without the pressure of qualifiers we 
would play better. I really enjoyed myself against Nigeria.’
Things have certainly changed, and the past is far 
behind now, as he explains to TyC Sports: ‘In the national team I hadn’t been myself. I wasn’t playing the way I was at Barcelona, and it was noticeable. But I always had Diego’s 
support and everything changed thanks to my team-mates’ 
belief in me. I put the qualifiers out of my mind and I knew that we could start afresh at the World Cup. I had to take advantage of that. Now that I’m here I’m going to show eve-
ryone what I’m made of and I just have to keep doing that. 
I would love for everyone in Argentina to feel about me the way they do in Barcelona. I have to keep proving myself, but 
thank God I’m on the right track.’
So much so that even after the whole squad has had a 
chance to shine, it’s clear that the Barcelona player is still the most valuable. No one has played better than the Flea. 
And the show continues. Against South Korea he excels in the hole, up front, and as general playmaker. Maradona posi-
tions him in front of Mascherano, the sweeper in midfield, 
and behind the battalion: Maxi, Tévez, Higuaín and di María.
The Flea organises the game, he gets the ball moving, 
he takes the free kicks and corners, and he gifts stunning passes to the strikers. He has a hand in each of Argentina’s 264 Messi
four goals. He takes the free kick which Park Chu-Young 
puts in his own net; he crosses for ‘Pipita’ Higuaín’s first 
goal; then he zigzags between the Korean defenders, shoots, 
Jung blocks the goal with his foot, his second attempt is just 
wide of the post but Pipita picks it up for his second goal. 
And to finish it off, he sets up the perfect assist for Kun, who then gives Pipita his hat-trick – scored right in front 
of the tournament organisers. Argentina goes from being 
condemned to ridicule to being one of the favourites.
According to Spanish newspaper El País, Messi is becom-
ing ‘another Xavi’. He hasn’t hit the jackpot in terms of goals, but everyone is convinced that it will happen even-tually, or rather, he’ll get fed up with the status quo. The 
one who is most sure is Maradona. He is hoping that in the 
Greece match in Polokwane on 22 June he will see a similar performance to his own against the Greeks in the United 
States in 1994 – his last Albiceleste game before being sent 
home from the World Cup for failing a drug test. With the last sixteen almost within reach, Diego sends out his reserve team. But Leo is still playing because, explains the selector, 
‘to have a player of his level and to leave him on the bench 
would be a sin … a sin against the team, against the crowd and against ourselves’.
The Pelusa has a big surprise in store for his number 
10, which he tells him the day before in his room. Messi is overjoyed. He will be wearing the captain’s armband for 
the first time. After a tough match hampered by the cold 
at the Peter Mokaba stadium in Polokwane, Argentina beat Greece 2-0 and claim their place in the last sixteen with 
three group-stage victories. The captain has endured the 
close marking of Papastathopoulos. The number 19 has stuck to Messi like glue the entire game. And whenever 
Lionel has managed to dodge away from him, he finds 
himself  surrounded by another three white shirts. From the Floods of tears  265
dugout, Maradona is pained to see them continually foul-
ing his student – he hates seeing him so held back. Only 
after Demichelis’s goal, Lionel manages to burst free, find 
some space and show what he is made of. He leaves two 
men behind him and takes a fierce left-footed shot which 
hits the post. In the 88th minute he goes to the right, plays a one-two with di María and shoots towards the far post. 
Tzorvas blocks it, and veteran old-timer Martín Palermo 
takes advantage of the rebound to seal the game and make Maradona extremely happy.
On 24 June, it is Lionel’s 23rd birthday. ‘I have got to 
where I am today because of everything Diego has taught me,’ he declares. ‘I am flattered,’ replies Maradona, ‘but 
Leo is where he is today because he wants to be. You can see 
how happy he is. He’s enjoying himself. He wants to play. To everyone who complained that Messi wasn’t singing along 
and that he looked sad – who likes to lose? We lost in the 
knockout stages. Now everything has turned around and making Messi happy is something everyone is proud to do. Not least his team-mates.’ He continues to sing his praises: 
‘At this World Cup, there is no one worth even 30 per cent 
of what Leo is worth. No one can match him.’
The last sixteen. Argentina versus Mexico, 27 June, 
Soccer City stadium in Johannesburg. Messi loses his bet with Maradona – he doesn’t score a single goal. ‘I have to score two against Germany or that’s it,’ jokes the number 
10 at the end of the match. Argentina beat Javier Aguirre’s 
men 3-1 with minimal effort, after Tévez opens with a goal which looks offside. ‘I thought they were going to disallow 
it because they were looking at the replay, but luckily they 
ruled it as a goal,’ says Messi, who set up the pass which the ‘Apache’ Tévez headed into the net.
It is not an easy game for Lionel. He looks uncomfort-
able. He is obliged to keep going back to the centre circle to 266 Messi
get into the game. The Albiceleste midfield is not working 
well and the Flea has to take charge, running too far away 
from the area where he could be doing the most damage. It 
once again sparks debate about the number 10’s position, 
the midfielders, and Maradona’s choice of formation. ‘The 
national team has reached the quarter finals, but their best player is having difficulty shining just as he did in the first 
group match. Is he playing where he can make the best 
impact? Does he have enough support?’ asks Clarín. The Argentine newspaper calls for changes in the midfield to 
free up Messi so that he doesn’t have to run so far from the 
goal, because they certainly can’t bench the best player in the world.
The Germany game is next. The German national team 
has beaten Fabio Capello’s English team. Led by Joachim Löw, they are a well-oiled machine with a signature style of 
fresh and entertaining football, thanks to technical play-
ers like Müeller, Özil, Khedira and Cross. It’s a team which evokes good and bad memories for the Argentines. The 3-2 win in the final of the 1986 Mexico World Cup, Maradona’s 
tears after losing the 1990 final in Italy, and the defeat on 
penalties in the quarter finals in 2006. This time, there will only be bad memories. Germany crushes the Argentines’ 
hopes with a definitive win, demonstrating fantastic team-
work. It is a collective triumph led by Schweinsteiger against Albiceleste individuals who have little more than dreams, 
enthusiasm and tactical disorder to show for themselves.
Maradona’s tactical gamble, which had been hailed as 
revolutionary, fails Messi again and again, just when it mat-ters most. It is fifteen minutes before he even touches the 
ball. He tries to organise and direct the play, but apart from a few runs which go nowhere, the odd tackle, and a couple 
of misguided shots, there is very little of note, except to say 
that Schweinsteiger and his team-mates have managed to Floods of tears  267
stop him without having to foul him once. Stuck far away 
from the goal, Lionel loses the ball twelve times and doesn’t 
manage to get it back. He is despairing the fact that on the 
few occasions when he does manage to break free from the 
Germans, his team-mates don’t manage to feed him the 
ball. He is left in no man’s land, foundering fast.
His World Cup score sheet is dismal. He has played 
five matches, he has taken more shots than anyone – 30 times, twelve on target and two off the post – but he has had no luck. And that’s not the worst part. Since the first 
match against Nigeria, his status has taken a beating bit by 
bit. Everyone had been making him out to be Superman, capable of anything, but against Germany he is just another 
footballer. Who or what is to blame for this disaster? Is it 
the players who didn’t know how to respond and create a memorable game? Or was it the position behind the strik-
ers that Maradona created which left Messi too far from the 
box? Or perhaps it was Diego’s 4-1-5 formation in general – a daring move but useless against the Germans. In the end the lack of central midfielder gets the blame, as this would 
have created the best playing conditions for Lionel.
The following day, the headlines in the Argentine press 
tell the story:
‘World Cup humiliation for the national team. The worst 
tour since 1974’ – Clarín‘Germany crushes Argentina’ – La Nación‘No goals or glory for Messi’ – Olé‘Tears for Messi and Argentina’ – Perfil
After the match, Maradona calls it ‘the hardest moment in 
my life, a real blow’. But Messi says nothing, he can only 
shed tears. A few days later, a few lines appear on a Mandarin 
blog called Tencent apparently quoting Messi: ‘I feel really 268 Messi
awful, I want to go home. We played badly, we failed to live 
up to everyone’s expectations, and now we have to start all 
over again.’
When Barça team-mate Andrés Iniesta scores the goal 
which clinches Spain’s first World Cup victory, Lionel is far 
away from South Africa. He is photographed by the paparazzi on the beaches of Rio de Janeiro with his girlfriend, not far 
from where the 2014 World Cup will be held. When it rolls 
around Lionel will be 26, the same age Maradona was in 1986 when he became king. Who knows … perhaps that’s 
when he will finally get his crown.