131Chapter 23
Not even a single minute
30 June 2006
There are others who are considered the big stars. 
Ronaldinho, more than anyone else; according to com-
mentators and fans, he will be the one who will shine the 
most. Many predict he will be crowned best World Cup player and highest goal scorer. Because – among other 
reasons – according to the majority of the world’s coaches, 
players, newspapers and TV channels, Brazil is favourite to take home the title. Betting on Barça’s number 10 is easy 
and logical. He has just had a spectacular season: Ballon 
d’Or, Liga and Champions League winner. The only thing that remains in order to crown him king is his second world 
title. Here is the list of potential candidates: fellow Brazilian 
Ronaldo, from whom everyone expects the umpteenth res-urrection; David Beckham, the pop star of football; Zidane 
– facing the final challenge of his career. They are closely 
followed by the likes of Figo, Ballack, Torres, Van Nistelrooy and Del Piero.
In terms of Argentina, the name on everyone’s lips is Juan 
Román Riquelme. Twenty-eight years old, born in Buenos Aires, an attacking midfielder, he plays for Villarreal and as 
yet has no World Cup on his CV, but selector José Pekerman 
has put his trust in him.
The Albiceleste have been built around him and their 
game largely depends on Riquelme having a good day.  132 Messi
He is a silent footballer, charged with the responsibility of 
leading the team. He needs to be solid, he needs to play 
imaginatively and make magic, he needs to move between 
the lines and get the crucial passes to the strikers. And 
Messi? Well … Messi is in the running in the category of 
medium-level stars, or rather, promising youngsters. He has been dubbed the new Maradona and the World Cup should 
be his chance to surprise the whole world at just eighteen 
years of age, after establishing himself on the international scene at Stamford Bridge.
Along with the Portuguese Cristiano Ronaldo and the 
Ecuadorian Luis Valencia, fans have included him in the list of six candidates from whom the best young World Cup 
player will be chosen (the other three, nominated by FIFA, 
are Cesc Fàbregas, the Swiss player Tranquillo Barnetta and the German Thomas Podolski). The title was inaugu-
rated on 1 January 1985. The player in question will have 
to distinguish himself on pitches throughout Germany in terms of style, charisma, clean play and a passion for foot-ball. The Argentines want to see Messi in the starting line-
up and they have pinned all their hopes on him; they want 
to see confirmation of all the amazing stories that are told across Europe about the heir to Maradona – and they want 
that confirmation in the shape of a national shirt. Since the 
days of the Pibe de Oro (Maradona’s nickname, golden boy) they have dreamt of a different player, a spectacular, 
magical player, whom they could love and worship the way 
they did – and still do – Diego. When it came down to it, it was Maradona himself who, a few months previously, asked 
that the number 10 shirt be given to Messi – a shirt number 
which the Argentine Federation had retired in his honour.
Leo may have grown up far from his native country, but 
in the last few months he has returned home in order to recover from the injury he received against Chelsea. He has Not even a single minute  133
had time to get some exposure, give interviews and shoot 
some ad hoc adverts for the World Cup. Both multinational 
and Argentine companies have bet on him in order to ben-
efit from the effects of a global stage. Not least, German sporting brand Adidas, who have plastered entire buildings 
from Rome to Buenos Aires via Berlin with enormous post-
ers of his face. On the eve of the World Cup, at least in terms of publicity, he is definitely beating his team-mates 
by miles. He undoubtedly has the highest level of media 
coverage of any Albiceleste player. But such publicity can generate jealousy – yet another obstacle in the youngster’s 
path to being accepted in Pekerman’s team.
He has recently been invited into the group, thanks 
to his success in the Under 20 World Cup. His debut with the main national team is on 17 August 2005. It is during 
a friendly against Hungary in Budapest, at the stadium dedicated to Ferenc Puskás. He comes on for Maxi López 
in the 65th minute. And he is on the pitch for little more 
than 40 seconds. On his second touch, he dribbles the ball past Vanczák. The Hungarian grabs him by his brand-new 
number 18 shirt; Messi lifts his arm and pushes him back. 
Bam! He catches the defender full in the face. German ref-eree Markus Merk is in no doubt. He elbowed him. And he 
pulls out the red card in front of the disbelieving Argentines. 
Sent off in his first match. Not the scenario that Leo had imagined. He is to spend the rest of the match crying. His 
coach and team-mates think the referee’s decision is exces-
sive, but their words of consolation are in vain.
After an unfortunate debut, there are other matches that 
offer an opportunity to move on and get into sync with the squad. But it is not easy. As is already obvious, Messi is shy. He hardly speaks to his team-mates, or the staff. There is no 
shortage of anecdotes illustrating this, like the time during 
training in Madrid when the boss invites the whole squad 134 Messi
to a barbecue – an Argentine social ritual par excellence – 
in order to encourage group bonding. Leo does not open 
his mouth, not even to ask for some meat. It is a silence that is apparent and worrying to the others. And Messi does 
not even emerge from his silence in order to conform to 
expected formalities. At Christmas, for example, when all the Argentine players go over to visit the manager after 
spending time with their families, Messi does not show up. 
And the AFA are often unable to locate him.
The lad adheres neither to the team hierarchy, nor to 
the unwritten rules that are essential to Argentine football. He is not a rebel, he does not behave badly, and he does not do it intentionally, it’s just the way he is. In the training 
sessions before his debut with the main national team, for 
example, he finds himself face to face with Gabriel Heinze. He faces up to him one, two, three, four times, repeatedly 
giving him the cold shoulder. Heinze, now an Olympique 
de Marseille defender, is reaching boiling point and is about to avenge his wounded pride. Pekerman has to inter -
vene to save the little guy’s skin, and the honour of one of his players. It is a scene that will be repeated with others in Nüremberg, the Argentine team’s base over in Germany. 
The least one could say about the young Barcelona foot-
baller is that he is shameless. And without ignoring the issue of unwritten rules, which are steeped in history, it has to be 
said that Messi is young – too young. To draw parallels yet 
again, at eighteen years of age, despite being an emerging figure, Maradona was not even selected by César Bilardo for 
the 1978 World Cup. Messi is in Germany, but it should be 
remembered that no Argentine player since the 1930s has played in the final stages of the competition at only eight-
een years old. The lesson that has had to be learned by men 
who have sat ‘willingly’ on the bench is that it is necessary to protect newly emerging talents at all costs – the weight of Not even a single minute  135
defeat must not be allowed to rest on their shoulders. There 
is actually a risk of harming them. And in these cases, his-
tory carries a lot of weight.
So too does the injury of 7 March. Messi is seemingly 
completely recovered; he has already played various friend-lies before the World Cup; but there are those in the dress-
ing room who say his muscles are still bothering him. In terms of his state of mind, he is happy in the lead-up to his 
first World Cup. In his pre-tournament statements he reaf-
firms what everyone has been saying: the Brazilians, with his friend Ronaldinho up ahead, are the favourites, but ‘we 
also have a good team. And the national team is made up 
of many great players. Of course we are going to take it one step at a time, one game at a time. And there will be excel-
lent opponents and every match will be very complicated. 
But I believe that Argentina can win the World Cup.’
The Albiceleste is in Group C, known from the beginning 
as the group of death: Ivory Coast, Serbia and Montenegro and Holland. It will not be an easy ride, especially with the disaster of the Korean and Japanese World Cup weighing 
on their minds.
Saturday 10 June at 9.00pm in Hamburg sees the first 
match against the Ivory Coast. During a training session five days earlier, Messi suffered a contusion, making it difficult 
for him to play. The manager’s idea is to pace him, allowing him to go on later in the competition, apart from anything 
because they are not convinced he is 100 per cent fit. In 
fact, they state: ‘We cannot promise anything that could cre-ate expectations. In each successive training session we have 
seen improvement and a return to form. And he is getting 
better bit by bit. We are grateful for the effort he has made to be here with us.’ On the bench he goes. From his ‘privi-
leged’ vantage point Lionel watches as Crespo scores his 30th 
Albiceleste goal with his usual opportunism. He watches as 136 Messi
Riquelme, in a moment of divine inspiration, looks into the 
stands and sends the ball exactly where it needed to go. And 
he sees the unmarked ‘Conejo’ Saviola punish Tizie with his first touch. He watches as the ‘Elephants’ (Ivory Coast) fight 
back and try to create chances without getting a goal – they 
only manage it towards the end, thanks to Drogba as usual – penetrating the Argentine defence, led by the impecca-
ble Ayala. The result: 2-1. The Albiceleste look promising, 
even without Leo. Commenting on the game, Pekerman remarks: ‘To me, football is always the same. I have expec-
tations of this squad from an analytical point of view, not 
based solely on desire. We put up a great performance in terms of defence in our first match, holding off dangerous 
Ivory Coast players. True, we lacked presence. But the good 
thing is that we never lost our nerve.’ It does not take much reading between the lines to realise that he is satisfied with 
how things have gone, which is obvious given that, in the 
second match against Serbia and Montenegro – which con-cerns him, despite the fact that they have lost to Holland 
– he has no intention of changing his teamsheet, except 
to put Lucho González in place of Esteban Cambiasso. In short, at the Gelsenkirchen stadium on 16 June, Messi is 
on the bench again. He has Carlos Tévez to keep him com-
pany, and 65 minutes to witness three goals and wonder how many he could score. Then he is on his feet, in his 
fluorescent outfit, warming up along the touchline. The 
warm-up is a promising sign. He returns to the dugout, fol-lowing gestures and instructions, and finally assistant coach 
Hugo Tocalli lets him put on the blue number 19 shirt. His 
World Cup debut comes in the 74th minute. He comes on for Maxi Rodríguez, joining the game at the same time as 
Carlos Tévez, the other youngster on the team.
In the stands, Maradona lifts his arms in the air, screaming 
and cheering along with the thousands of Argentine fans. Not even a single minute  137
They sing: ‘Olé, olé olé olé, Me-ssiiiii, Me-ssiiiii!’ Someone 
holds up a poster with the Flea’s face next to the World Cup 
trophy. Underneath it says: ‘This is my dream.’ Others wave 
a placard that reads: ‘He’s Argentine and he’s the Messiah.’ The demand of one little girl brandishing a placard – ‘José, 
let Messi play (please)’ – is finally answered.
Up until now the Albiceleste have been playing well, no 
complaints, but when the Flea comes on things change: the number 19 forces a team who were starting to rest on their 
laurels to wake up, he gets them moving again, he makes them start accelerating more and more. They pass him the 
ball and he’s off like a shot, with the sole objective of mak-
ing it to the opponents’ goal. He creates quite a spectacle as he skips along. A free kick is taken quickly and Leo is 
onto it, zooming along on the left-hand side of the penalty 
area. He reaches the line, lifts his head and slides the ball in front of the goalposts in a perfect position for Crespo who, 
anticipating the Serbian defence, stretches out his foot and 
takes the total number of goals to four. In the 87th minute Tévez passes to Crespo, who passes back to Tévez who, after 
having scored the fifth goal, shows his generosity by sending 
the ball down to Messi, who is motoring up the right wing. He gets past the defender and scores the sixth goal, sliding 
the ball between the post and the goalkeeper’s hand. Then 
he pauses to point to the player who gifted him the goal. Crespo rushes over to hug him, the crowd goes wild.
This time it is a fantastic World Cup debut, although as 
usual the man in question plays it down: ‘I wasn’t think-ing about my debut. I was thinking about winning a match 
that I really wanted to play in. In all honesty I still haven’t 
thought about the fact that I’m now a World Cup player and that I fulfilled a dream today.’ And now? Now Pekerman 
has a decision to make, a dilemma to resolve. ‘His country 
wants him to play Messi from the start. And not to wait until 138 Messi
the 74th minute. And the press, who see what sells, want 
it too. And, my dear friends, what press and what country 
wouldn’t want it?’ writes Pep Guardiola in El País. ‘Only he 
(Pekerman) knows what he is going to do with this gen-
ius. No one doubts that Messi will give him the same over 
90 minutes that he gives in fifteen. Yesterday was like that sweetie that a mother keeps hidden in her bag, well hidden, 
ready to give to her child when he won’t stop crying. And it 
always works, even if only for fifteen minutes.’
At the end of the day the decision is not so difficult, the 
hot potato burns less because the last match in Group C against Holland is insignificant. Both teams have already qualified for the last sixteen, now they are just playing for 
first position in the group. Pekerman can kill two birds 
with one stone: Tévez and Messi in the starting line-up, Saviola and Crespo rested to avoid any yellow cards that 
could mean missing the next match. In the end, everyone 
is happy – especially those who want to see the little genius 
from Rosario play again.
On 21 June at the Waldstadion in Frankfurt, Lionel is 
awaited by Johan Cruyff, Michel Platini, Franz Beckenbauer and, of course, Diego Armando Maradona, dressed inevita-
bly in his Albiceleste shirt. In other words, the crème de la 
crème of World Cup football.
Leo is the last to disembark from the team bus, iPod 
headphones in his ears, the last to change, after having a look at the pitch and chatting with fellow Barcelona play-ers from the orange-clad team (Van Bronckhorst and Van 
Bommel) and the last to start his warm-up. When the time 
comes to go on the pitch, he waits respectfully in line. On his feet, he is wearing a pair of Adidas boots designed espe-
cially for his World Cup appearance. On them is his name, 
the sun from the Argentine flag, the phrase ‘The Hand of God’ and a date: 22 June 1986. The following day it will be Not even a single minute  139
twenty years since Diego scored two goals against England 
in the 1986 World Cup, one with the hand and one with the 
foot.
Expectation is mounting in the stands. What wonders 
will Lionel have for them this time? If he wreaked havoc in fifteen minutes, who knows what he will do in 90. And even 
if this isn’t his night, the effect of his presence on the pitch is almost palpable. In the first half he plays along the right 
wing, marked by Tim de Cler. He has eleven touches, losing 
the ball once and making seven good passes. In the second half he switches to the left wing, where he is marked by Kew 
Jaliens. In 23 minutes he only gets three touches, only one 
of which is played the way it should be. In the 69th minute Pekerman substitutes him for Julio Cruz. There is very little 
of note: an inoffensive left-footed kick and one or two bril-
liant passes – one deep to Cambiasso, intercepted with diffi-culty by Van Der Saar, an incredible ball to Maxi Rodríguez 
and a beautiful ‘one-two’ with Riquelme with a final shot 
that ends up going just wide.
It was the most highly anticipated match of the first stage 
of the World Cup, a clash between two powerful teams with many great precedents (the 1978 final being among those that stand out), which, nonetheless, was disappointing. 
Some journalists maliciously imply that the number 19’s 
rather ordinary performance will give Pekerman the perfect excuse to put him back on the bench. And back he goes.
On 24 June, his nineteenth birthday, he is back to being 
a spectator for 84 long minutes. And this time Argentina are not doing well: Mexico, coached by the Argentine Ricardo 
La Volpe, have pushed them against the ropes. When Messi 
comes on for Saviola, the score is 1-1. The game is head-ing into extra time. And it is then that the boy from Barça 
changes the team’s rhythm, he gives it the necessary depth 
and sends the ball from foot to foot, building up to an 140 Messi
amazing  Maxi Rodríguez goal. Albeit with more difficulties 
than anticipated, Argentina have made it into the quarter-
finals.
In Berlin, on 30 June, they face host team Germany. 
There are 120 minutes of play, of which Leo Messi plays not even a single minute. It is a mystery, the polemic of a match that ends with Argentina losing on penalties (4-2, after a 1-1 
scoreline at the end of extra time).
Let us rewind the film of that decisive match, in order to 
understand how it is that the player who could have played a crucial role in winning the World Cup ended up on the bench.
Pekerman replaces Saviola with Tévez in the starting 
line-up, and Lucho González also starts. Two players who work well with the team – no complaints there. Pekerman 
is forced to make his first substitution in the 71st minute, when Pato Abbondanzieri is injured in a skirmish with the 
giant Germans. Leo Franco comes on in his place. The 
next to come off is Riquelme – ‘he was tired’, says the boss. Cambiasso replaces him. The manager is trying to achieve a 
balance, or rather, he is trying to bolt the door and defend 
the scoreline. Argentina are winning 1-0 thanks to a header from Ayala, but the players are continually trapped in 
their own half and they blame the Germans for the hard 
blows they receive. In the 79th minute the final substitu-tion is made with Cruz coming on for Crespo, just moments 
before Klose heads in the equaliser. To rectify the situation 
would have required speed, skill and creativity, which Cruz does not possess and which Tévez can no longer muster 
due to tiredness after playing for the length of the match. 
Essentially, they needed Messi. Popular consensus seems to be that if he had come on, Argentina would have sealed the 
match before it got to the penalty shoot-out stage. He would 
have taken charge of transforming the situation.Not even a single minute  141
Why didn’t Pekerman send him on? Why did he choose 
Cruz over him? ‘In that moment we needed a striker in the 
box and that’s not Messi,’ he explains in the press room 
after the tears, after the fight between Oliver Bierhoff, Frings and Cruz, and before announcing his resignation. 
‘We were always considering him [Messi] as a good option, 
I knew we could count on him,’ says the manager. A state-ment reinforced by his comment that ‘Argentina may have 
had alternatives, but we could not instigate them’. Hugo 
Tocalli today confirms that version. ‘In order to counteract Germany’s play in the air it was important to send on Cruz. 
We were winning 1-0 in a match we were controlling well, in 
which we had dominated, and then Abbondanzieri’s unfor -
tunate injury ruined all our plans.’ But his explanations 
do not convince anyone, and one by one various theories 
emerge on the topic:
1. Mistake: Pekerman simply got it wrong. He misinter -
preted the game, he made a hurried decision and he made 
the change when he should not have done so.
2. Mystery: Only the manager will ever know the truth and 
it will go down in Argentine footballing history as one of its many secrets, like Rattín’s sending off in England in ’66, 
Maradona’s drug-taking in the United States in ’94, or the 
red card against Ortega in France in ’98.3. Bad advice: Pekerman let himself be influenced by the 
heavyweights in the dressing room, who were annoyed by 
Messi dominating the media spotlight. In other words, Messi says he wants to play and this irritates team leaders 
like Juan Román Riquelme and the captain, Fabián Ayala, 
who ensure their feelings do not go unnoticed and call him to order at a press conference. They are the ones who con-
vince the coach to leave Messi out of the starting eleven.142 Messi
4. Etiquette and values: Pekerman could not erase or ignore 
etiquette, values and players who had earned their right to 
be on the pitch over many years.
Whatever happens, no one will ever know which of these 
theories is correct. José Pekerman remains silent and does not revisit the subject. A year later, in an interview with 
sports magazine Marca, when they ask: ‘What happened 
with Messi? Wasn’t there some sort of dispute over him?’ he replies: ‘I am proud of him and I was the one who included 
him in the Under 20 team when no one knew who he was. 
In Argentina the problem is that we have so much faith that just a little bit of Messi gets us very excitable. And people 
were expecting Messi to be the great Maradona of this World 
Cup. And he was just taking his first steps with Argentina, a great team. I hope this experience will serve him well in 
the future.’
And Leo Messi? He also stays silent on the topic. That 
night in Berlin he is one of the few who does not appear before the cameras and microphones. It is not only due to 
his disappointment over being knocked out of the tourna-ment, but also because he is angry at what some of the press 
are saying about his behaviour during the penalty shoot-
out. ‘They said things like that I didn’t care if we went out – which could not be further from the truth. If anyone had 
been inside the dressing room,’ he confesses in an inter -
view with Mundo Deportivo five days later, ‘they would have 
realised what I was feeling at that moment.’ He will not be drawn on the issue of Pekerman giving him so little in the 
way of opportunities. ‘He decided that was the way it was going to be … He did it that way because it had been work-
ing. Players like Saviola and Crespo had been doing really 
well, and that’s that.’
That’s that. Time to turn the page.