83Chapter 15
Videotape
29 June 2004
Hugo Tocalli tells the following tale: ‘They brought me a 
videotape of a boy who was playing in Barcelona. I really 
liked what he could do, but … in those sorts of cases I’m 
always worried that the tape is from some footballing agent. Besides, the kid was very young … So I said to myself, no … 
I’ll wait a while. I go off to Finland with the Under 17s and 
when I get back I find out more about this player. Everyone has told me great things about him. I go and see Grondona 
(Julio Grondona, the president of the AFA – the Argentine 
Football Association), and I schedule an opportunity to see the kid, in two friendlies, against Paraguay and Uruguay.’
The kid was Leo Messi, an unknown from the other side 
of the Atlantic. And the famous tape that was sent to Tocalli (who was then responsible for the Federación Argentina 
youth division), came from Claudio Vivas, assistant to 
Marcelo ‘el Loco’ (‘Crazy’) Bielsa, who at the time was man-ager of the Argentine national team, and currently coaches 
at Athletic Bilbao. Vivas, at that time an ex-Newell ’s player 
and coach, had been curious about this fellow Rosarino, 
an ex-leper like himself, whom he had met many years 
previously at the Escuela de Fútbol Malvinas, and who was 
now making waves in Europe. So curious, in fact, that he decided to submit a tape of some of his fellow countryman’s 
best moments for the coach’s judgement.84 Messi
It works, and the two proposed friendlies are subse-
quently organised in order to see him in action. The first 
request sent to Barcelona at the beginning of May has his 
name spelt incorrectly, asking for them to spare ‘Leonel 
Mecci’ some time to come over to Argentina; the request is 
politely rejected. He has Copa del Rey commitments. The end of June is more suitable. The AFA are in a hurry to see 
him play. Leo has lived in Spain for three years, he plays in 
the Barça youth leagues, and there is a risk of losing him and seeing him in a Furia Roja (Red Fury – Spanish national) 
shirt. It is not such a remote possibility given that only a 
year earlier during the Copa de España in Albacete, Under 16 coach Ginés Menéndez had offered Leo the chance to 
play for Spain. ‘No thank you’ was the reply he received. 
Despite living on the Iberian peninsula, Leo feels deeply Argentine. But who knows, perhaps after some insistence, 
the kid might change his mind? Either way, it is better to 
pre-empt the Spanish Football Federation.
‘He arrived one Monday to train with the Under 20s,’ 
recalls Tocalli. ‘He was a very shy kid, he didn’t know any-
one and no one knew him.’ While his team-mates – the 
likes of Pablo Zabaleta, Oscar Ustari, Ezequiel Garay – had already made names for themselves in the local champion-
ship, he has not. He stays in a corner of the dressing room 
at the Argentino Juniors stadium, hardly uttering a word. When the moment arrives to train and play ball, his atti-
tude changes. Suddenly he is not as timid as perhaps he 
first seemed. The boss likes him – he values his ability and speed, but he does not come across too strong.
The match against Paraguay is on 29 June. Leo is not 
starting, partly because of his age, partly out of respect to the team, and also because they do not want to put too 
much pressure on him. In the second half, in the 50th 
minute, when the Argentines are already winning 3-0, Videotape  85
Tocalli approaches him. He puts a hand on his shoulder 
and says to him: ‘Go with the trainer, who is heading down 
to the pitch.’ Surprised and excited, the Flea bursts onto 
the pitch wearing the sky-blue-and-white shirt for the first time. And he shows what he can do: he picks off his oppo-
nents and scores a goal.
‘You could see it in the way he played,’ says Tocalli. ‘If 
he was good in training, on the pitch he was something else.’ The friendly ends 8-0 and the youngster has seriously 
impressed the coaches. So much so that, that very night, Tocalli receives a call from his friend and youth coach pred-
ecessor, José Pekerman. ‘He asked me where I had found 
the boy. He thought he was fantastic. “You’re going to start him in the next match against Uruguay, right?” he asked 
me.’ But no. In the match against Uruguay, in Colonia, he is 
not in the starting line-up. When he comes on, however, he surprises everyone again. The next day, Sunday 4 July, the 
Buenos Aires sports magazine Olé writes: ‘Young Messi is 
the real deal. He scored two goals, four assists, and was the one to watch in the 4-1 victory over Uruguay.’
Leo’s double trial has been a definitive success. He has 
really impressed them. And now Tocalli has no doubts about including him in the squad for the FIFA Under 20 World 
Cup qualifiers in South America the following January.
A bit of trivia: aside from Mauro Andrés Zanotti who 
plays in Ternana, Italy, Messi is the only ‘foreigner’; he is also the youngest in the group. While he has just turned 
seventeen, the others are aged between eighteen and 20 and have extensive experience at all levels of the Argentine 
championship.
Time for the South American qualifiers. They are played 
in Colombia – in Armenia, Manizales and Pereira, cities along the central southern Andes, in the so-called ‘coffee-
growing region’, far from Bogotá, the capital. They are 86 Messi
played at high altitude – from 1,650 metres in Armenia, to 
2,500 in Manizales – and the Argentines do not find it par -
ticularly easy to acclimatise.
Messi debuts against Venezuela on 12 January 2005 at 
the Centenario de Armenia stadium. As usual, he is not 
in the starting line-up, but is on the bench. He comes on fifteen minutes after half-time to replace Ezequiel Lavezzi, 
who today is a tattoo-sporting Napoli centre forward. At 
that moment the Albiceleste are winning 1-0. Thanks to Leo, eight minutes later the scoreboard reads 2-0. The 
match finishes 3-0. The Venezuelan defeat is incontest-
able and Messi’s contribution is significant. The scenario is repeated at the Palogrande stadium in Manizales, this 
time against Bolivia. At the beginning of the second half, 
the boss sends the number 18 on in place of Barrientos in order to form a more attacking line-up. ‘And after five min-
utes, Messi showed everyone that he is first-class material,’ 
writes the Argentine newspaper Época. ‘He latched onto the ball halfway up the pitch, made an unstoppable run and 
crossed it into the back of the net. An excellent shot that 
must surely be in the running for the title of best goal of the entire Under 20 South American championship. And in the 
twelfth minute, Messi made it 3-0.’
Two days later comes the clash with Peru, and for  
the first time Messi is in the starting line-up. He will  
only start in three matches; for all the others Hugo Tocalli 
will put him on in the second half. Why? ‘That was my decision,’ says Tocalli, justifying himself. ‘The boy still 
hadn’t got into the rhythm of the entire team, he was used 
to playing in the Barça youth leagues, he didn’t have the same intensity that’s needed to play in South America … 
they were very demanding matches. And to add to that his  
opponents were from the ’85 leagues and two years make  
a big difference at that age. So I decided to use him with  Videotape  87
caution so as not to tire him out or give him too much 
responsibility.’
It is a choice that yields good results which are obvious 
by the last match, against Brazil in Manizales on 6 February. Messi comes on for Neri Cardoso in the 65th minute. Ten 
minutes later he makes the most of a pass from Barrientos 
and seals a 2-1 victory with a smooth shot into the back of the net, his first goal against the eternal rivals. At the end of the 
run, Argentina qualifies in third place for the FIFA Under 
20 World Cup in Holland, behind Colombia and Brazil. Messi has scored five goals – the second highest goal-scorer 
after the Colombian Hugo Rodallega, who netted eleven. 
Rodallega is a nineteen-year-old who makes no concessions, be it on the pitch or in stirring up rivalries: ‘I’m undoubt-
edly better than Messi,’ he declares, ‘but the big difference 
is that he plays for Barcelona and I play for Quindío.’ Leo responds with humility: ‘I have nothing to say, I play for the 
team.’ And FIFA rightfully counts him among the eleven 
best players in South America – an accolade that helps to win over the selector.
‘I loved him,’ confesses Tocalli. ‘I loved his change of 
pace from zero to a hundred in no time at all, his trick of dodging past his opponent, his ability to move extremely 
fast with the ball still glued to his foot. He demonstrated 
that, despite his stature, he was able to score many goals; he had a very good left foot and he would strike the ball well.’
For Hugo Tocalli, however, the match against Brazil 
was his last as the Under 20s coach. Pekerman, who has just been named manager of the Argentine national team, 
wants him by his side as a full-time assistant in the run-up to 
the Germany World Cup. Francisco ‘Pancho’ Ferraro takes over the reins of the Under 20 team due to play in Holland 
in June. During the final four months in the lead-up to the 
trip to Europe, Pancho alters his team. In come Agüero – 88 Messi
today a much sought-after striker for Manchester City (who 
played back then for Independiente, an Argentine team) 
– and Gago (who was then at Boca Juniors and today plays for Roma); out go Boselli and Zanotti. At the last minute 
he has to replace José Sousa, from Estudiantes de La Plata, 
who has fractured his left hand. Likewise, he ends up hav-ing to replace many other players, just as his predecessors 
have had to do, as those who are committed to starting 
with their various Argentine teams are unable to play. Messi becomes a key figure on the team: he has just won 
the league with Barcelona and everyone is expecting him 
to reach his full potential in Holland. One thing for sure is that the Argentine team is one of the favourites to win 
the tournament. They are going for their fifth title in this 
competition. They won three out of four times (in Qatar in 1995, in Malaysia in 1997 and in Argentina in 2001), all 
under Pekerman’s reign, and let’s not forget the 1979 vic-
tory in Japan, where Diego Maradona was the protagonist.
It is Saturday 11 June: they are playing the United States 
at the FC Twente stadium in Enschede. Surprise! Messi is not in the starting line-up, he is on the bench and the Albiceleste lose 1-0.
It’s a bad start to the tournament but Leo keeps every-
body calm: ‘I’m in a very good state of mind and I think I’m up for playing for 90 minutes, but I have to respect the 
coach’s decisions.’ He adds: ‘The team will pick up the pace 
because we have some good players. We have everything we need to qualify.’ He is spot on and he proves it on 14 June 
against Egypt. This time he is in the starting line-up. He 
scores the first goal, weakening the African defence, leaving Zabaleta to seal the scoreline definitively. The third match 
against Germany is a tricky one: it decides who goes into the 
last sixteen. The Germans have one point more than the Argentines, so a draw will suffice for them to go through. Videotape  89
But Messi makes his mark. He gets the ball in the middle of 
the pitch, slaloms past the defenders and makes a precise 
pass – Oberman lets the ball go past him and Neri Cardoso 
scores to make it 1-0.
The path to the final is full of obstacles: the first is 
Colombia, the winning team in the South American playoffs. Messi is suffering from an absence of players able to pass to him; nonetheless, in the twelfth minute of the second half 
he manages to level the score, making up for the first goal 
scored by the ‘coffee-growers’. The introduction of Gago, Pablo Vitti and Emiliano Arementeros brings fresh legs to 
the team and, in the 93rd minute, Julio Barroso manages 
to avoid extra time. Spain awaits them in the quarter-finals. It has been widely written about as a greatly anticipated 
match, because the Spaniards are the current European 
Champions and they reached the final of the last Under 20 World Cup, although Brazil clinched the title in the end. 
Speaking of duels, there are great expectations about see-
ing Messi and Cesc go head to head, two eighteen-year-olds (Leo’s birthday was the day before the match), friends from 
Barcelona and rivals on the pitch.
‘I’ve got on well with Messi ever since the first day we met 
in the youth academy. I’ve spent three amazing years with him, scoring goals and doing one-twos. I’ve had a great time 
with him, it was amazing to play alongside him,’ says the ‘Wonderkid’ – as the Arsenal fans call Fàbregas.
‘Cesc is a good friend of mine – we met back in the Barça 
youth leagues. He’s an impressive, well-rounded player, with many attacking and defensive skills,’ replies Messi. And he 
assures everyone that he and his team have great respect 
for Cesc and Llorente’s Red Fury team. The game is actu-ally very balanced at 1-1 until the 70th minute. Then Spain 
loses concentration and Leo ups the pace: first he serves up 
the advantage goal on a silver platter to Gustavo Oberman, 90 Messi
then two minutes later, after chipping the ball over the head 
of one of his opponents, he scores the 3-1 winner.
‘The Argentine team is the rightful winner, they played 
better than we have,’ admits Iñaki Sáenz. Regarding Lionel, he comments: ‘He is talented, he makes good decisions, he 
looks for the goalkeeper and he knows what to do.’
The semi-final is the scene of the classic Argentina-Brazil 
clash, both four-times champions in this tournament and the memories of all the previous duels weigh on their minds – like in Qatar in 1995, when the goals of Leonardo Biagini 
and Francisco Guerrero claimed victory for the Albiceleste. 
The Argentines are playing with black armbands as a sym-bol of mourning – after two weeks in a coma due to a road 
accident, Independiente goalkeeper and national Under 17 
player Emiliano Molina has just died. Within eight minutes the Albiceleste are already dominating, thanks to a torpedo-
like shot from Messi from outside the area, which just edges 
in at the goalpost, rendering the Brazilian goalie’s spectacu-lar dive completely futile. Renato equalises in the second 
half, but at the last minute, after Leo gets past his opponent 
for the umpteenth time, Zabaleta picks up a rebound off a Brazilian defender and manages to score. And then comes 
the final, at 8.00pm on 2 July at the Galgenwaard Stadium 
in Utrecht. The opposition are Nigeria, who have beaten Morocco in the semi-finals. The previous day, a Dutch TV 
channel had presented Messi with a golden clog, the trophy 
that declares him player of the tournament. ‘I’m very happy and I thank you for this prize,’ he says. ‘The truth is that 
I’m very surprised at everything that has happened to me 
here.’ And the surprises continue into the final. In the 38th minute, Messi controls the ball down the left-hand touch-
line; he begins a 45-yard zigzagging run and gets into the 
box. Dele Adeleye realises that he cannot snatch the ball from him and instead knocks him down. There is no doubt Videotape  91
in referee Terje Hauge’s mind: it’s a penalty. Leo takes 
it without a run up, softly, with his left foot, to the right 
of Vanzekin – who throws himself in exactly the opposite 
direction: 1-0. In the 52nd minute Chinedu Ogbuke levels the scoreboard for Nigeria. In the 73rd minute Agüero is 
fouled by Monday James in front of goal. Leo steps up to 
the spot once more and shoots with precision into the left-hand side of the goal. Goooaaaal: 2-1. The Argentines win 
their fifth Under 20 title. Leo Messi is the star player.
‘What can we say about him? The final images of last 
night sum it up,’ writes Clarín the next day, ‘with the tro-phies for best player and highest goal-scorer of the tour -
nament, the champion’s medal around his neck and the 
sky-blue-and-white flag over his shoulders.’