59Chapter 10
Latigazo
Conversation with Fernando ‘Chiche’ Niembro, 
Fox TV commentator
Let’s talk about Messi and his transfer to Spain.
‘He didn’t stop in, or even pass through, Buenos Aires. 
Ezeiza, the international airport where he departed for 
Europe, is not even in the city. He went as a kid with growing problems and in Barcelona he exploded. We knew nothing 
about him. The Spaniards pinched him from us, and then 
we found out that there was a left-footed kid over there who was doing really well. What happened then happens more 
frequently now. The big European clubs recruit very young 
South American players. They don’t need to have played in the first league or be champions in order to be bought. 
They extract them by helicopter from a Brazilian slum and 
put them in their football schools. It’s an exodus of talented youngsters that damages our leagues.’
How would you assess Messi now?
‘Messi is currently a latigazo.’ [Literally ‘lash’, or ‘crack of 
the whip’.]
What does that mean?
‘He is a destabilising footballer, he can shake up a whole 
game with a single action. There are good footballers who are unable to do that over 90 minutes, whereas he’s capable 60 Messi
of enthusing the crowd and his critics with a single dodge, 
a single feint. But we Argentines aren’t used to that. We’re 
used to great players who are the whole package, coordi-
nated, who give their talent to the service of the team; that’s 
what Messi still has to learn.’
What does he have to learn?
‘He needs to understand that he is part of a whole, he has 
to share the ball, pass it more quickly, give the final pass and not just make it him versus the whole world. Because some-
times he gives the impression that he wants the ball all for 
himself and he doesn’t want to share it. He has time to learn and he needs a good teacher and great team-mates. And he 
has them: in a great institution like Barcelona.’
Anything else he needs to learn?
‘He should be wary of marketing.’
In what sense?
‘He should never be thinking: if I don’t have a good game I 
won’t sell watches, or soft drinks, or whatever.’
Changing the subject … Messi and Maradona?
‘The comparison is inevitable because Maradona and Pelé 
are footballing paradigms, but it’s unfair. The comparison will be made at the end of Messi’s career, but it will never 
be correct.’
Why?
‘Because today’s players have more obstacles than twenty 
years ago. Football is faster and more physical. There are more matches, and there’s more information. We know 
every thing about everything; it’s difficult for there to be sur -
prises and exceptions. It’s a more complicated world.’Latigazo  61
Yes, but aren’t there some similarities between the two?
‘Of course, some features are the same, like the speed or 
the quick dodge, but Messi’s is always in the same direction, 
whereas with Maradona you never knew if he was left- or right-footed.’
Will Messi surpass Maradona?
‘I hope he’s better than Maradona. It would be good for 
Argentine football, but first Messi needs to be champion of 
the world.’
What does the future hold for Messi?
‘It’s difficult to predict because the world of football is accel-erating at a very dynamic rate. It moves at an incredible 
speed. Everything changes and evolves in a frenetic way.’