147Chapter 25
The devil
10 March 2007
Barcelona – This time, Don Fabio’s nightmare is about 
a nineteen-year-old boy, Leo Messi. An Argentine flea who ruins his party. Capello had never won on Barça ter -
ritory (not with Juve, nor with Roma, nor with Madrid), he was getting there, against all predictions. And then along came the little guy, once, twice, bringing the scores level each time and, just when it looked like it was going their way, in the 90th minute he pulls the most beautiful sequence out of his hat, the speediest drib-bling, a cross into the centre: 3-3. Capello and his men are like children who have had their lollipop snatched from their mouths.
What is indisputable is that the Spanish derby has 
been strange, exciting, volatile, full of goals. It begins with the two captains, Puyol and Raúl, who take to the pitch and make the sign of the cross. They need it: Barça must wipe the expulsion from the Eden of Europe from the memories of the Nou Camp’s 98,000 spectators, while Real Madrid is playing a game of survival – their last chance to stay in the running for the league title. The standard prediction is that the ball will be controlled by the Blaugrana, the favourites, spread across the pitch in a daring 3-4-3 formation, so that Madrid are even less 148 Messi
marked than usual. Very few are prepared to wager a bet 
because Capello’s men like to get their own way against their eternal rivals. And, against predictions, within five minutes they are already dominating the scoreboard. The blond Guti passes to Higuaín along the left wing. The young Argentine plays an apparently innocuous ball: it is Thuram who turns it into a lethal one, with an incredible clearance that lands at Van Nistelrooy’s feet. The Dutchman takes a shot from outside the box. Pathetic diving from Puyol and Valdés. It’s in – 1-0. Now it’s Rijkaard’s turn to be nervous. Leo Messi comes on after just five minutes. Xavi sends him a deep pass, leav-ing only Casillas between the Argentine and the goal. The Whites are left rooted to the spot. Equaliser.
The defenders on both sides are foundering. One 
of the most nervous on the Barça team is Oleguer: he is to end up being sent off in the 45th minute after receiv-ing his second booking (for a foul on Gago). The first comes in the twelfth minute, when he grabs Guti inside the box. Penalty and yellow card. Van Nistelrooy makes no mistake. Fabio Capello cannot believe his eyes. The president told him not to come away with a defeat, but to be in the lead gives him a proper chance to breathe.
It doesn’t last long. Leo Messi is proving a nightmare 
again, as he latches onto a rebound from Casillas. It’s not easy, but he scores anyway. In under the crossbar. Credit for the equaliser must go to Ronaldinho, however, who has finally awoken from his daze. He does what he does best, unbalancing two or three opponents, doing a one-two with Eto’o and shooting at Casillas, who manages to get a hand to it at first, but can do nothing about Messi’s sudden rebound. Four goals in 27 minutes: this is the type of spectacle that the Spanish crowds love. Relieved of their fears, Barça seem to take charge of the situation. The devil  149
The Whites’ defence is wavering, then comes the send-
ing off, followed by a second half with only ten men. Rijkaard takes off Eto’o and sends on Sylvinho. The Blaugrana maintain control of the ball, but the Whites are dangerous. The advantage hangs by a thread. Guti takes a free kick: Sergio, Ramos and Puyol go up to meet the ball. The White defender gets a touch on the nape of his neck, the ball flies under the bar and into the back of the net. Victory? No, along comes Messi to save Barça and keep Madrid at arm’s length. And Capello is back to the same old problem.
Luca Caioli, Corriere della Sera, 11 March 2007
Yes, Capello … at best he had forgotten what Messi was 
capable of doing. And yet in the final of the Joan Gamper 
Trophy on 24 August 2005, it was precisely he who had 
asked about that devil (as he described him) who had driven the Juventus defence crazy, provoked three yellow 
cards, created  one goal, and looked dangerous throughout 
the 90 minutes. At the end of the match, decided on pen-
alties, Juventus had gone home with the cup thanks to six 
shots on target from the penalty spot. But Leo had been 
chosen as player of the match and was the genuine surprise of the game. Fabio Capello, who had instantly recognised 
the youngster’s talent, joked with Frank Rijkaard, saying: 
‘Well … if you don’t have room for him in your starting line-up, give him to me, we’re ready to sign him.’
Perhaps Fabio Capello thought everything would turn 
out well for him on the evening of 10 March 2007, just as it had on 22 October 2006 at the Bernabéu. 2-0 to the Whites 
and everyone at home happy, with a Messi who had put 
in a good effort for at least 70 minutes, with a repertoire of left-footers, assists that were wasted by his team-mates, 150 Messi
and breakthroughs into the box. And all while receiving a 
series of forceful tackles from Emerson that pushed the regu-
lations’ boundaries. To the extent that, by the end of the 
match, he would be diagnosed with a sprained right ankle in the external lateral ligament, which would keep him out 
for a week.
But he hadn’t managed to score.
This time the tables are turned. Has Messi got something 
against Don Fabio, who is currently the England manager? 
Absolutely not. Is it that playing against Capello brings 
him luck? Not that either. It’s a different issue altogether  . 
‘Playing against Real Madrid,’ says Messi, ‘is always par -
ticularly motivating for any player.’ That is a fact and he 
has demonstrated it since the first time he set foot on the 
Bernabéu ground on 19 November 2005.
Everyone remembers that match because of the show 
put on by Ronaldinho (two incredibly stunning goals, not to mention everything else he did) but also because of the ‘standing ovation’ given by two Real Madrid supporters to 
the Barcelona number 10. That was undoubtedly the photo 
opportunity of the match. Unforgettable. It was shown on all the TV channels. Editors and journalists even went as far 
as tracking down the two men, one with a black moustache, 
the other with a beard, who were on their feet applauding. The media people wanted to know why they paid such trib-
ute to him. Their response? How could they not applaud a 
superstar and his magic, even if only as a sporting gesture? But as well as the Gaucho (Ronaldinho), the people in the 
stands were also very impressed with Leo’s performance.
Let’s take a quick look at the highlights from that day. 
In the third minute, Sergio Ramos feels obliged to knock down the Flea on the edge of the area, in front of goal. 
In the fifteenth minute, Leo is the one who, after a fan-tastic piece of footwork, provides Eto’o with the chance to The devil  151
score the first goal. In the 26th minute, Messi’s spectacular 
change of pace traps Roberto Carlos. In the 30th minute 
Messi penetrates the defence, but Iker Casillas blocks the 
shot. Barça are within reach of the second goal. In the 40th minute, Ronaldinho slaloms and crosses to Messi, but the 
header is wide of the goalpost. In the 47th minute Messi 
tries again. It’s wide. A defender clears the ball. In the 55th minute Casillas denies Messi’s third shot. In the 69th 
minute, Messi is replaced by Iniesta. These minutes and 
notes record that he played a fantastic game in his Clásico derby debut, all that was missing was the goal to take his 
display of speed, angles and lethal assists to the level of 
perfection. But the strongest memory from that match is an abundance of courage on the part of a debutant, who 
showed respect for nothing  and nobody, who did not suffer 
an ounce of the ‘stage fright’ so beloved of his compatriot 
Jorge Valdano, who proved it from every part of the pitch, 
who took initiative and assumed responsibility, despite there 
being superstars on the pitch like an inspired Ronaldinho and an Eto’o on best form. These are feelings that will be 
widely confirmed, disputed and reaffirmed. It is a shame 
that he misses the return leg due to the injury he suffered at Chelsea. It is the same injury (only on the other leg) that 
he will sustain on 15 December 2007 against Valencia in 
Mestalla, five days before the classic derby. Sharp pain in the left leg, head bowed, biting on his shirt, and he’s off. 
Goodbye classic derby. Against Real Madrid, Barça have to 
lose the player who made all the difference at the start of the season. The ultrasound confirms it: tear in the upper 
part of the femoral biceps in the left thigh. Out for four to 
five weeks (he will play again 36 days later, on 20 January, against Racing Santander). And he will get injured again 
on 4 March 2008 in the Champions League quarter-final 
match against Celtic in Glasgow. Another femoral biceps 152 Messi
tear in his left thigh. Another five weeks out before return-
ing to the field.
Pause for a question: Why does Messi endure so many 
tears and breaks, to the point where people are already call-ing him ‘the porcelain star’? Accumulated muscle fatigue, 
an old injury that has not properly healed, an insufficient warm-up, psychological stress, an imbalance of pressure on 
muscular areas, bad posture throughout one’s career, direct 
impact, a supposed difference in length between one leg and the other … there are many possible causes of injury. 
Furthermore, the complexity of the hamstring structure 
makes it difficult to pinpoint the causes and that in turn makes a player’s recovery more difficult. In Messi’s case, 
some people also factor in his physical particulars, his mus-
cular and bone structure and his growth problems, stimu-lated by hormones. In any event, it is difficult to establish 
the precise cause, even for the Barcelona medics, who have 
often been slated by the press over prognostic errors with regard to recovery times. ‘They told me,’ explains Jorge 
Messi, ‘that his muscular mass is made up of explosive fibres, 
like those of a sprinter. That’s what gives him his trademark speed, but the risk of a break is considerable. In any event, 
Leo is perfectly aware that he really needs to take care of 
himself.’ Let’s close the chapter on the issue of injuries and resume the story of the classic derby on 10 March 2007, 
although, admittedly, there is also an injury involved in this 
story. Leo has been out for nine weeks, but this time it is not because of his muscles but because of an incident dur -
ing a match. On 12 November 2006, in a game against Real Zaragoza, opposition defender Alberto Zapater stamps on his foot. The fifth metatarsal of his left foot is broken. He 
has to go into surgery, where a pin is fitted to stabilise the 
fracture and he is given a skin graft to speed up the recuper -
ation. Prior to the match in question he played some good The devil  153
games, ‘but,’ he says, ‘I still hadn’t scored. That was my 
unfinished business.’ He manages to score a hat-trick, his 
first at the top level (he had previously scored more goals 
in a match, but only on a small ground of little importance) and although it doesn’t seal a victory for the team it is at 
least enough to save Barça’s skin in extremis. ‘Because losing 
to Real,’ he says, ‘is always bloody awful.’ And that’s not all – a goal allows Leo to display a message (printed underneath 
his shirt) that reads: ‘Have strength, uncle’, to his godfa-
ther, who has just lost his father. It is his way of showing his full support at a difficult time. And there is another dedica-
tion made on that magical night. It comes in the form of 
kisses blown to Barça’s emblem. After the third goal Messi runs along and repeats the gesture, because ‘I owe a lot to 
Barça for what they did for me when they had the chance, 
and also to the fans for all the affection they have shown towards me, especially in these difficult few months.’ Those 
three goals change the course of a negative season. From 
10
 March onwards Leo plays frequently, he doesn’t waste 
any chances and he doesn’t just score goals – he creates 
works of art.