155Chapter 26
Jaw-dropping
Conversation with Gianluca Zambrotta
Two seasons together. Two very weak and sad seasons for 
Barça. And for the defender who arrived in Barcelona after 
having won the Germany World Cup with the Azzurri (the 
Blues – the Italian national team). But in the Nou Camp dressing room and on the pitch the current Milan player 
had time to get a close-up of Messi and evaluate him.
What do you think of Leo Messi?
‘I think he’s one of the greatest talents to come out of the 
last ten or twenty years. It’s undisputable that he’s one of the best players in the world today, especially if we take into 
account that he’s only 24 years old and still has a lot of time 
to grow.’
Do you remember the Barça-Real Madrid match on 10 March 2007?
‘I wasn’t at the ground but Messi’s performance had a big impact on me. As it did on everyone, I imagine. He had 
already shown us great things back in 2005 at the Bernabéu, 
but in that classic derby he outdid himself. The most sur -
prising thing of all is that a nineteen-year-old kid could be 
capable of taking the weight of a team like Barça on his 
shoulders, which is something very rare, and ensuring they equalised again and again. And all this in an incred-
ibly difficult  fixture, agonising, tense, hugely competitive; 156 Messi
all derbies are like that of course, but the truth is that the 
one in 2007 was particularly tough. What can I say? He has 
exceptional abilities and, above all, a certain maturity and 
sense of responsibility rare in such a young player.’
And what about that goal against Getafe?
‘That I did see. For me it was jaw-dropping. “How did he 
manage that?” I wondered. The same question that my 
team-mates, the coach and the Nou Camp spectators were asking. It was an incredible goal, the goal of a star. The 
most beautiful goal I have ever seen anyone score. It was 
very simi lar to the one Maradona scored in ’86. Although, 
from the ground, Leo’s goal seemed to be even better than 
Diego’s.’
From the point of view of a team-mate, what is Leo’s secret?
‘For him there is no difference between the Nou Camp and 
the football ground in his hometown. They are one and the same. He doesn’t feel the pressure, or at least that’s how it seems. The main thing is that there is a ball involved. He’s 
like all the great, extraordinary players I’ve met: when they 
see a ball they become kids again, excited by their favourite toy. They won’t let go of it and they would never stop play-
ing. Try to take a ball away from Messi. You can’t.’
Why?
‘Because he has incredible ball control, it’s always glued 
to his left foot, he’s extremely fast, he moves well in small spaces with or without the ball, like Maradona. And he’ll 
run rings around you to show you up. You never know 
where he’ll go next. He could go to your right, to your left, or nutmeg you. In some matches the opposition have had 
up to three players marking him, but in the end he has 
always managed to make an impact on the game. He’s in a Jaw-dropping  157
class of footballers where, if he’s on form, he’ll win you the 
match. He’s already proven it many times. Although, in all 
honesty, I wasn’t expecting such consistency, such high-level 
performance game after game. We were lucky to have him on the team.’
Is he an individualist?
‘Driving the ball forward, dribbling, those are trademark 
elements of his game – he always wants the ball because 
that’s how he has fun and how he entertains everyone else. It’s like, when you play football with your friends and you’re 
good, you always want the ball because you want to be the 
best and leave everyone astounded. No, he’s not an indi-vidualist. He has grown and he knows what it means to play 
in a team.’
And what was he like in training and in the dressing room?
‘He’s a modest kid, very willing to work hard, he feels that 
he still hasn’t reached his full potential. He’s a fun guy, he jokes and fools around. He’s one of those players who help 
to create a good atmosphere in the dressing room, one of 
camaraderie and friendship. He and I are not especially close, because there’s a ten-year age gap, but we chat often. 
He seems like a mature kid who has his head firmly screwed 
on. With a great personality.’