47Chapter 8
International star in a small town
Conversation with Mariano Bereznicki, 
La Capital journalist
What does Leo Messi represent for Rosario?
‘The best player the town has ever produced. Argentine 
hope. He is a footballing icon. We are all waiting for the day 
when he becomes Diego’s successor.’
How is he known around here?
‘In Rosario he isn’t “known”. He played junior football. He only played here until the tenth league. He didn’t become 
popular. Only those who came up against him on the pitch 
saw him. Some of us have heard about that time, when Leo was already promising in the short term, and that’s the 
nightmare for the Rosario clubs: they didn’t realise what 
they were losing. That’s Leo’s unfinished business, never having played here. He’s a product of Newell’s. Sooner or 
later we hope to enjoy seeing him on our pitches. At the 
moment we can only see his talents on television when he plays with Barça, or in Buenos Aires if we head over to the 
Monumental de Núñez stadium or wherever the national 
team are playing.’
When did you first meet him?
‘At the end of 2000. Leo was back from Barcelona. I inter -
viewed him without any problem. We went over to the 48 Messi
monument of the flag to take some photos. People didn’t 
recognise him. He was little, just like everyone else. My 
impressions? A very submissive kid of few words. But he’s 
like that, he transforms when he steps onto the pitch, he 
changes completely when the ball is at his feet. On the 
pitch the real Lionel Messi appears. You have to sit back and enjoy it.’
Five years later everything changed …
‘It was after the 2005 Under 20 World Cup. That’s when 
Messimania began. It was all the rage. The media mobbed 
his house: newspapers, TV channels, national and interna-tional radio stations. Everyone wanted to interview him, talk 
to him. And so did the locals. Not a day passed when some-
one didn’t come up to him to congratulate him or ask for his autograph. Why such a frenzy? Because Argentina had 
been waiting for someone like him for a long time. They 
were talking about Riquelme, Tévez, Aimar … and along came Messi. He surprised us all with what he did at that World Cup. He proved himself as a distinct class of foot-
baller – unique. And he was crowned King of Holland.’
And now when he comes to Rosario, what happens?
‘When he comes here he’s an international star in a small 
town. Because he has signed deals with important, interna-tionally renowned firms, he represents capital. The compa-
nies need to promote him and people want to see him. But 
he takes refuge in his family, and his friends … in order to return strengthened and in the right frame of mind 
for his demanding Barcelona life. Rosario is where he can 
recharge his batteries.’International star in a small town  49
In your opinion, what is he really like, this famous Rosarino?
‘Only his intimate circle knows the real person. Even after 
reading many things about him one cannot really know 
him. It’s not easy. It seems to me that he is painfully hum-ble. Stardom is not drowning him, it hasn’t changed him. 
He’s as solid as a rock.’
And in terms of football?
‘I think he was born from a mould that had seemed long 
forgotten since Maradona.’
Let’s analyse his skills.
‘Solidarity with his team, loyalty, attacking with the ball, and with dynamite possessed by few others. His power to accel-
erate is impressive. And he does all this in a unique way.’
And the future? What do you predict?
‘Leo’s future has already arrived. He has proven himself now 
in the competitive game of Spanish and European football. But he is still very young. He hasn’t reached his maximum 
level of explosiveness, although he has certainly scored 
some outstanding goals that are comparable to Diego’s.’
Is he the new Maradona?
‘He is the true Messi.’