1Chapter 1
Rosario
Conversation with Celia and Marcela Cuccittini
‘I buy the rump or a piece from the hindquarter. They’re 
cuts of beef I’ve also seen in Barcelona but I don’t know 
what they’re called. I put a bit of salt on each piece, dip 
them in egg and coat them in breadcrumbs. I fry them until they’re nice and golden-brown and I put them in an oven 
dish. I slice the onion finely and fry it over. When the onion 
turns white, I add chopped tomatoes, a little water, salt, oregano and a pinch of sugar. And I leave it on the heat for 
around twenty minutes. Once the sauce is done, I pour it on 
top of each piece of beef, making sure they’re well covered. I take some cream cheese or hard cheese out of the fridge 
and lay it on top of the beef in thin slices. I leave them in 
the oven until the cheese melts. All that’s left to do is fry the potatoes as a side dish and the milanesa a la napolitana 
[schnitzel napolitana] is ready to serve.’
With the passion and experience of a good cook, Celia 
describes her son Lionel Messi’s favourite dish.
‘When I go to Barcelona I have to make it two or three 
times a week. And with at least three medium-sized cuts of 
beef. I tousle his hair and tell him: “My schnitzel napoli-
tana and my mate [traditional Argentine tea] are what make 
you score so many goals.” ’ Lionel has simple gastronomic 
tastes: schnitzel, but not made with ham or horsemeat; 
chicken with a sauce made of pepper, onions, tomatoes 2 Messi
and oregano . He doesn’t care much for elaborate dishes, 
like the ones his brother Rodrigo makes, but then, as is 
well known, Rodrigo is a chef and his dream is to open his 
own restaurant one day. It is natural for him to experiment 
and try new recipes, although his younger brother doesn’t 
always appreciate them. Does he have a sweet tooth? ‘Yes, Leo loves chocolates and alfajores [traditional caramel-filled 
biscuits – a national delicacy]; when we go to Spain we have to take boxes and boxes so that he always has a good sup-ply.’ She tells the story about how, when he was little, when 
a coach promised him an alfajor for every goal he scored, he 
netted eight in a single match. Some feast.
Over a cup of coffee in La Tienda bar on San Martín 
de Rosario avenue, the mother of Barça’s number 10 talks with great gusto about her world-famous son. Black hair, a delicate smile and certain facial features that remind one 
of Leo (although she laughs and says that he resembles his 
father completely), Celia María Cuccittini Oliveira de Messi has a soft, gentle voice. While she is speaking, she often glances at her sister Marcela, seated opposite. The youngest 
of the Cuccittini family, Marcela is also a mother of football-
ers: Maximiliano plays for Olimpia in Paraguay; Emanuel plays in Spain for Girona FC; and Bruno attends the Renato 
Cesarini football school, which counts players such as 
Fernando Redondo and Santiago Solari among its alumni. Marcela Cuccittini de Biancucchi is Leo’s godmother and 
his favourite aunt. When he returns to Rosario, he loves 
spending time at her house. ‘We have to go and meet him or call him to see how he is, but, of course, my sister spoils 
him,’ says Celia. ‘And then there’s Emanuel, they’re insepa-
rable.’ From a very young age they were continually playing ball. ‘There were five boys: my three, Matías, Rodrigo and 
Leo, and my sister’s two, Maximiliano and Emanuel. On 
Sundays, when we would go to my mother’s house, they all Rosario  3
used to go out into the street to play before lunch,’ recalls 
Celia. They were wild games, of football or foot-tennis and 
often Leo would end up returning to the house crying 
because he had lost or because the older ones had cheated.
‘Just the other day, Maxi was reminding me about those 
games,’ adds Marcela, ‘and he was telling me that when they all meet back here in Rosario he wants to play Messis against Biancucchis, just like old times.’
And the memories bring us to the grandmother, Celia: 
her delicious food, the pastries, the Sunday family reunions and the passion for football. ‘She was the one who accom-
panied the kids to their training sessions. She was the one 
who insisted that they let my Lionel play even though he wasn’t old enough, even though he was the youngest and 
he was small. Because,’ says Celia, ‘he’s always been small. 
They were afraid he’d get trodden on, that he’d get hurt, but she wasn’t, she insisted: “Pass it to Lionel, pass it to the 
little guy, he’s the one who scores goals.” She was the one 
who convinced us to buy him football boots. It’s a shame she can’t see him today. She died when Leo was ten years 
old, but who knows if, from up there, she sees what he has 
become and is happy for that grandson of hers whom she loved so much.’
But how did Leo begin playing football? Who taught 
him? Where do all his many skills come from – is it a ques-tion of genes? ‘I don’t know, from his father, from his broth-
ers, from his cousins. We have always loved football in our 
family. I am also a fan. My idol? Maradona. His career, his goals, I followed them with much passion. He was a barbar -
ian on the pitch. When I met him, I told him: “I hope one day my son will be a great footballer and you can train him.” And look what’s happened … look how far he’s come …’
A pause in the story: the mobile phone on the table 
starts to ring. Celia excuses herself and moves away to 4 Messi
answer it. Meanwhile, Marcela returns to the topic of young 
Leo. ‘He was incredible, before he was even five years old 
he could control the ball like nobody else. He loved it, he never stopped. He hit every shot against the front gate, so  
much so that often the neighbours would ask him to cool it a bit.’
Celia has finished her phone call, she sits down and nods 
in agreement. ‘The worst punishment we could threaten him with was: you’re not going to practice today. “No mummy, please, I’ll be really good, don’t worry, I prom-
ise … let me go and play,” he begged and insisted until he 
convinced me. Leo wasn’t a temperamental child and he wasn’t lazy either, he’s always been a good boy, quiet and 
shy, just as he is today.’
Really? ‘Yes, really. He doesn’t take any notice of the 
fame. When he comes back to Rosario he always wants to come and wander around this area, along San Martín 
avenue , with his cousin Emanuel. When we tell him it’s not 
possible, that here the people of his hometown will get hys-
terical when they see him and not let him go two steps, he 
gets upset. He doesn’t understand it, he gets annoyed. In Barcelona, he goes to the Corte Inglés department store in 
his trainers and sports gear. Ronaldinho often used to ruffle 
his hair and ask him if he was crazy going out dressed like that. He hasn’t taken any notice of who he is. That’s why 
being famous, signing autographs or taking photos with 
fans doesn’t bother him. Some evenings, when he comes home after a long time and when I go to see him, I lay by his 
side on the bed. We chat, I ruffle his hair, I tell him things, 
and I say, half joking: “What all the girls wouldn’t give to be next to you like this.” He makes a weird face and says: 
“Don’t be silly mum.”’
On the walls of the bar hang the shirts of Argentine play-
ers. Leo’s is there too, under a window, marked with the Rosario  5
number 30 of Barcelona. ‘They don’t know I’m his mother, 
although we live in this town,’ comments Celia, a woman 
who shies away from fame, very aware of the risks that come 
with celebrity, and having clear priorities for her life and those of her children. All well and good, but how does she 
feel being the mother of a star? ‘Proud, very proud. Opening 
the newspaper and seeing – here just as much as in Spain – a piece about him or seeing his shirt number, or seeing the 
kids who wear it … it makes me swell with pride. That’s why 
it hurts me to hear criticism about his playing or false infor -
mation about his life. It affects you deep down in your soul 
and it pains you when someone calls you and says, have you 
seen this, have you seen that? Leo? He hardly reads what they write about him. If he notices it, it doesn’t affect him 
that much. But that isn’t to say that he hasn’t been through 
some tough times. He has had his low moments, when he was injured, out for months, when things don’t go the way 
he wants them to go. At times like that, I don’t even think 
twice, I pack my bags and I go to Barcelona, to see what’s happening, to be close to him, to look after him as much as 
I can. Leo has always been a boy who keeps all his problems 
inside, but at the same time, he’s been very mature for his age. I remember, when we hinted at the possibility of him 
returning to Argentina, he said to me: “Mum, don’t worry, 
I’m staying, you go, God will be with us.” He is very strong willed.’
She returns to the topic of his success, of the people who 
go crazy for the ‘Flea’ on both sides of the Atlantic. ‘The thing I like the most is that people love him,’ says Celia. 
‘They love him, I think, because he is a simple, humble, 
good person. He always thinks of others and he makes sure that everyone around him is OK: his parents, his siblings, his 
nephews and nieces, his cousins. He’s always thinking about 
his family. Of course, I’m his mother and a mother, when 6 Messi
she speaks of her children, the apples of her eye, always says 
good things, but Leo has an enormous heart.’
How does a mother see her son’s future? ‘In terms of 
football, I hope he makes history like Pelé, like Maradona; I hope he goes far, very far. But above all, as a mother, I hope 
to God he will be happy, that he has a family, that he lives life, because he still hasn’t really lived. He has dedicated 
himself to football, body and soul. He doesn’t go out, he 
doesn’t do many of the things that young people his age do. That’s why I hope he has a wonderful life. He deserves it.’
Outside the large window, the sky has darkened. The 
traffic has become more chaotic: buses, rickety vans, cars leaving clouds of smoke behind them, a cart full of junk 
pulled by a skinny horse and a multitude of people who 
wend their way to the shops and the bus stops. Celia has to get home; María Sol, the youngest of the family, is waiting 
for her there. Marcela has to pick up Bruno from football 
school. It’s raining and Celia insists on accompanying her guests back to the centre of town. She goes to fetch the car. 
At the door, a few last words with Marcela about a mother’s 
fears – injuries, and the money that can go to one’s head. ‘For now, my kids, and Leo, haven’t lost their sense of real-
ity. I, my family, and my sister’s family, we live in the same 
town in which we were born, in the same house as always, we haven’t moved to a different region, we haven’t wanted to 
leave our roots, and the kids are the same as always. I hope 
they never change. I hope what has happened to other foot-ballers, who have lost themselves in all the fame, doesn’t 
happen to them.’
A grey Volkswagen stops by the pavement. Celia drives 
rapidly through the streets in the southern part of Rosario. She passes Leo’s old school and comments: ‘He wasn’t a 
good student. He was a little bit lazy.’Rosario  7
She turns right by Tiro Suizo, a sports club founded in 
1889 by immigrants from the Tesino region. Two kids don’t 
notice the car, they are too absorbed, scampering along 
with the ball between their feet.
‘That’s what Lionel was like,’ says Celia.