79Chapter 14
Home-grown
Conversation with Cristina Cubero, Mundo 
Deportivo (Sports World) journalist
What does Leo Messi represent for Barça?
‘For Barcelona – and for the world – he represents the wait 
for a player like Maradona. A player who can enter the halls of 
fame among the footballing greats: Pelé, Maradona, Cruyff.’
Is he a player who responds to the club’s values?
‘Yes, definitely. I think they are “more than just a club” to him. The way they signed him – he had a growth problem 
but they made a huge push for him. It’s about more than just 
football. And another thing – Barcelona has always favoured players who are talented and technically skilled, and he is 
one of them. And what’s more, Messi is a kid who has grown 
up through the Barça ranks, among us. He is one of us, he is home-grown. He has grown up in the Blaugrana culture. 
And the Barcelona locals really appreciate that. Let’s not 
forget that there is a tradition around here of going to see the youth teams play. Many people knew who Leo was from 
the youth leagues and they know what it takes to get to the 
first team. That’s another reason to love him.’
When did you first meet Messi?
‘I have known him since he was sixteen years old. I’ve fol-lowed his whole career, both at Barça and with the Argentine 80 Messi
national team. I still remember the first time I interviewed 
him … He was a shy kid, but he surprised me when he said 
he didn’t enjoy watching football … he liked playing it. Or 
that time in Hungary, when he cried all night because he 
had been sent off during his first game with the Albiceleste.’
How has he changed over the past few years?
‘In terms of football I think things have fallen into place 
for him since those goals against Getafe and Espanyol. He’s no longer a clone of Maradona, he is his own person now, 
he’s Leo Messi. He has had lots of opportunities to put into 
practice all the skills that he has stored away; he absorbed it all from Diego, all those images that he’s seen thousands 
of times. He’s shown that he knows how to do it. That’s it. 
Now he can develop his own personality. He’s not the kid who cries any more, or who stamps his feet like he did in 
the Champions League final in Paris, when he didn’t get a 
medal – he’s matured. If he gets angry, he says so, he shows it openly, like when he dedicated his goals to Ronaldinho. And his social scene has changed a lot. I think he has come 
to realise what he represents, and the atmosphere that he 
generates, especially after last year at the Copa América in Venezuela, when an entire stadium was screaming his name. 
It must have been a shock, something that is not easy to get 
used to. But the good thing is that the fame hasn’t gone to his head. He behaves the same way as he did before, despite 
having no privacy. A good example of that happened a few 
months ago in Rosario when a kid stopped him at a traffic light. He wants a photo. The normal thing to do would be for 
Leo to wind down the window and let him take a photo on 
his phone. But no. Leo parks and gets out for a picture.’Home-grown  81
Has his role in the dressing room changed?
‘He’s not the captain, but in terms of football he’s a sport-
ing leader, and no one disputes it. His team-mates know 
exactly what they can expect from him, and everyone knows how valuable he is.’
Once Joan Laporta arrived Ronaldinho became Barcelona’s icon, 
now it is Messi. What are the differences between them?
‘Ronaldinho was a trickster, an artist with the ball. Leo rep-
resents the essence of the game: speed plus skill.’