9Chapter 2
Garibaldi Hospital
24 June 1987
A cream-coloured block built in the nineteenth-century style 
occupies a rectangular plot at number 1249 Visasoro street. 
It is the Italian hospital dedicated to Giuseppe Garibaldi, 
who is also honoured with a statue in Rosario’s Plaza de Italia. He is a popular figure, known as the ‘Hero of the 
Two Worlds’, because during his exile in South America he 
fought battles along the length of the Paraná river. In those parts his Red Shirts left their mark wherever they went: for 
example, in the names of the Rosario and Buenos Aires hos-
pitals, which were founded by political exiles, supporters of Mazzini and Garibaldi, and their workers’ unions. The 
Rosario hospital complex was inaugurated on 2 October 
1892 in order to serve the Italian community, which at that time represented more than 70 per cent of the immigrants 
who had arrived from the other side of the Atlantic. Today it 
has one of the best maternity units in the city. It is here that the story of Lionel Messi, third child of the Messi-Cuccittini 
family, begins at six o’clock one winter morning.
His father, Jorge, is 29 years old and is the head of depart-
ment at steelmaking company Acindar, in Villa Constitu-ción, some 50 kilometres outside Rosario. Celia, 27, works 
in a magnet manufacturing workshop. They met as young-sters in the Las Heras neighbourhood, previously known as 
Estado de Israel and today known as the San Martín neigh-10 Messi
bourhood, in the southern area of the city, where the resi-
dents are humble and hardworking. Celia’s father Antonio 
is a mechanic – he repairs fridges, air conditioning units 
and other electrical items. Her mother, also called Celia, 
has worked for many years as a cleaning lady. Jorge’s father 
Eusebio makes his living in construction; his mother, Rosa María, is also a cleaning lady. Little more than 100 metres 
separate their homes. Like many other local families, they 
have Italian and Spanish ancestors. The surname Messi comes from the Italian town of Porto Recanati, in the prov-
ince of Macerata, which saw the birth of the poet Giacomo 
Leopardi and the tenor Beniamino Gigli. It is from there that one Angelo Messi departed on one of the many boats 
bound for America at the end of the nineteenth century, in 
search of a better life in the new world, like so many other emigrants carrying third-class tickets. The Cuccittinis also 
have Italian roots, on their father’s side. Despite these fami-
lies originating from the humid pampas, they eventually came to settle in the city.
At 305 kilometres from the capital city of Buenos Aires, 
and with around a million inhabitants, the city of Rosario is the largest in the Santa Fe province, extending along the banks of the Paraná river. The Costanera promenade runs 
alongside the river until the Nuestra Señora del Rosario 
bridge, which crosses the waters and the islands in the river and connects the city with Victoria. The Paraná has 
always been an important highway in the river trade: from 
here, many agricultural products are exported to the whole of the Mercosur – like soya, which, in recent times, has 
brought wealth to this region and transformed the area’s 
urban fabric. New buildings, skyscrapers and incredible vil-las are springing up in front of a beach of fine sand depos-
ited by the river. And yet, Rosario remains the patriotic 
city par excellence. School groups dressed in white pose for Garibaldi Hospital  11
photos  at the base of the monument of the flag, built in the 
old Soviet style and inaugurated in 1957 to mark the place 
where General Manuel Belgrano ordered the raising of the 
national flag for the first time, on 27 February 1812.
Rosario is a city of the grandchildren of immigrants, of 
slums and country houses. But let us leave aside the stories of immigration, the mix of cultures, languages and tradi-tions, which are plentiful in Argentina, and return to Jorge 
and Celia, who fell in love and began dating at such a young 
age.
On 17 June 1978 they marry in the Corazón de María 
church. The country is thoroughly absorbed in the World Cup – so much so that the newlyweds, honeymooning in Bariloche, still ensure that they catch the Argentina-Brazil 
match taking place in Rosario. The result is nil-nil. Eight 
days later, at River Plate’s Monumental stadium in Buenos Aires, César Luis Menotti’s Argentine national team, known 
in Argentina as the Albiceleste (literally meaning ‘white 
and sky blue’), beats Holland 3-1 to win the World Cup. Collective mania ensues. Fillol, Olguín, Galván, Passarella, 
Tarantini, Ardiles, Gallego, Ortiz, Bertoni, Luque and 
Kempes seem to banish all memories of the Proceso de Reorganización Nacional (period of military rule) – the 
deceased dissidents, the more than 30,000 ‘disappeared’ 
citizens, and the tortures and horrors of General Jorge Rafael Videla’s ferocious and bloody military dictatorship, 
which was instigated on 24 March 1976 with the dismissal of 
Isabel Perón. On the streets of Buenos Aires you can still see the words ‘Inmundo mundial’ – dirty world (cup) – painted 
beneath the green of a football pitch and the inscription 
‘1978’.
Two years after the coup d’état, the country is still under 
a reign of terror, but life goes on. Celia and Jorge become parents: Rodrigo Martín is born on 9 February 1980, and 12 Messi
their second son, Matías Horacio, is born in one of the 
darkest hours of the country’s history. The date is 25 June 
1982, just eleven days after the end of the Falklands War. Argentina, defeated, counts her losses (649 dead) and her 
casualties (more than 1,000), as well as all the men who will 
never forget those two and a half months under fire. Young, inexperienced and ill-equipped, volunteers convinced 
to enlist by a cheap patriotism in order to re-conquer the 
Falklands archipelago, occupied by the British in a distant 1833. Operation Rosario, the name of the key Argentine 
invasion led by General Leopoldo Galtieri on 2 April 1982, 
was the umpteenth attempt at distraction orchestrated by the military junta, intended to divert attention from the 
disasters of the economic programme introduced in 1980 
– policies that had led to 90 per cent inflation, recession in all areas of the economy, a rise in external debt for both 
private companies and the State, the devaluation of sala-
ries, and in particular the progressive impoverishment of the middle class (a characteristic of the country’s history 
which stands out as compared with other Latin American 
nations). The war should have made the country forget the dramas of the past and engulfed the people in a wave 
of patriotism, but Galtieri was not prepared for the Iron 
Lady, Margaret Thatcher, nor had he taken into account the British army.
In a few weeks British forces quash the Argentine army 
– a disaster that will lead to the fall of the military junta and the celebration of democracy within the year. But the 
restoration of the Malvinas – the Argentine name for the 
Falklands – to Argentina remains an ongoing demand: in Rosario, in the Parque Nacional de la Bandera (‘national 
park of the flag’), a monument has been built in honour of 
‘the heroes that live on the Malvinas Islands’, and the 1994 Constitution lists the territory’s restitution as an objective  Garibaldi Hospital  13
that cannot be renounced. In 1983, however, election vic-
tory belongs to Raúl Alfonsín, one of the few politicians 
who had kept his distance from the military, maintaining 
that their only objective in going to war was to reinforce the dictatorship.
Four years later, when Celia is expecting her third child, 
the situation is still dramatic. In Semana Santa (Holy Week) of 1987, Argentina is on the brink of civil war. The carapinta-
das (literally, painted faces) – young army officers captained 
by Colonel Aldo Rico – have risen up against the govern-ment, demanding an end to the legal trials against human 
rights violations committed during the military regime. 
The military commanders are unwilling to obey the presi-dent. The people take to the streets to defend democracy. 
The CGT (Confederación General de Trabajo – the labour 
union) declares a general strike. On 30 April, Raúl Alfonsín addresses the crowd gathered in the Plaza de Mayo, saying: 
‘The house is in order, Happy Easter’ – a phrase that will go 
down in history, because nothing could be further from the truth. With no power over the armed forces, the president 
has had to negotiate with the carapintadas, guaranteeing 
them an end to the military trials. The law of Obediencia Debida (due obedience) exculpates officers and their 
subordinates of the barbarities that were committed and 
deems them responsible only for having obeyed the orders of their superiors. It comes into force on 23 June 1987, the 
same day that Celia is admitted to the maternity ward at the 
Garibaldi hospital. Her other sons – Rodrigo, seven, and Matías, five – stay at home with their grandmother, while 
Jorge accompanies Celia to the hospital. After two boys 
he would have liked a girl, but the chromosomes dictate that they are to have another boy. The pregnancy has been 
unevent ful, but during the final few hours complications 
arise. Gynaecologist Norberto Odetto diagnoses severe 14 Messi
foetal  distress and decides to induce labour in order to 
avoid any lasting effects on the baby. To this day, Jorge can 
recall the fear of those moments, the panic he felt when the doctor told him that he was going to use forceps, his plea 
that he do everything possible to avoid using those pincers, 
which, as is the case with many parents, concerned him greatly due to the horror stories he had heard regarding 
deformity and damage to one’s baby. In the end the forceps 
were not needed. A few minutes before six in the morning, Lionel Andrés Messi is born, weighing three kilos and meas-
uring 47 centimetres in length, as red as a tomato and with 
one ear completely folded over due to the force of labour – anomalies which, as with many other newborns, disappear 
within the first few hours. After the scare comes happiness: 
the new arrival is a little bit pink, but healthy.
Outside the confines of the hospital, however, the situ-
ation is much less calm. A bomb has exploded in the city and another in Villa Constitución, where Jorge works. Throughout Argentina the number of blasts – in response 
to the due obedience law – rises to fifteen. There are no 
victims, only material damage. The bombs reveal a country divided, overwhelmed by military power and entrenched 
in a grave economic crisis. The secretary of domestic com-
merce has just announced the enforcement of new prices for basic goods: milk and eggs are to rise by nine per cent, 
sugar and corn by twelve per cent, electricity by ten per cent 
and gas by eight per cent – difficult increases for a working-class family like the Messi-Cuccittinis, despite being able to 
rely on two salaries and a property to call their own. Aided 
by his father Eusebio, Jorge built the house over many week-ends on a 300-square-metre plot of family land. A two-storey, 
brick building with a backyard where the children could 
play, and in the Las Heras neighbourhood. Lionel arrives Garibaldi Hospital  15
here on 26 June, when mother and son are discharged from 
the Italian hospital.
Six months later, Lionel can be seen in a family album, 
chubby-cheeked and smiling, on his parents’ bed, dressed in little blue trousers and a white t-shirt. At ten months he 
begins to chase after his older brothers. And he has his first 
accident. He goes out of the house – no one knows why – perhaps to play with the other children in the street, which 
is not yet tarred, and along which cars rarely pass. Along 
comes a bicycle and knocks him over. He cries desperately; everyone in the house comes running out into the street. 
It seems it was nothing, only a fright. But throughout the 
night he does not stop complaining and his left arm is swol-len. They take him to hospital – broken ulna. He needs 
a plaster cast. Within a few weeks it has healed. His first 
birthday arrives and his aunts and uncles buy him a football shirt, already trying to convince him to support his future 
team – Newell’s Old Boys. But it is still too soon. At three 
years old, Leo prefers picture cards and much smaller balls – marbles. He wins multitudes of them from his playmates 
and his bag is always full. At nursery or at school there is 
always time to play with round objects. For his fourth birth-day, his parents give him a white ball with red diamonds. It 
is then, perhaps, that the fatal attraction begins. Until one 
day he surprises everyone. His father and brothers are play-ing in the street and Leo decides to join the game for the 
first time. On many other occasions he had preferred to 
keep winning marbles – but not this time. ‘We were stunned when we saw what he could do,’ says Jorge. ‘He had never 
played before.’