97Chapter 17
A friend
Conversation with Pablo Zabaleta
‘He’s a very good person,’ says Leo’s mother Celia, of Pablo 
Zabaleta. And she is happy that her son is close to the Under 
20s captain who won the World Cup, was later a winger with 
RCD Espanyol, and is now at Manchester City. He grew up in Arrecifes, and before making the move to Europe he cut 
his teeth at San Lorenzo (Argentina). And although he is 
only 26, everyone already considers him a veteran, or in other words, someone you can trust.
When did you meet Leo?
‘In the Under 20 team when we won the Holland World Cup, 
which was an amazing experience and a joyful moment for 
all of us. That’s where the beautiful friendship was born. We also became close with Kun (Agüero) and Oscar (Ustari). 
That was a great team …’
What was so special about it?
‘There was a good atmosphere, great camaraderie, and 
everyone  really wanted to win …’
But Leo didn’t find it easy to integrate …‘No, I don’t think he did … The problem was that no one knew him. He had come here very young, to Spain, and he 
had taken a different path. In Argentina, the players move 98 Messi
up to the first teams very young and that makes them grow 
up faster, it makes them find the right rhythm. Leo came 
from Barcelona, but it didn’t take him that long to adapt and by Holland he really took off. The world went crazy for 
the way he played.’
And after that World Cup there were many more important 
moments.
‘In Budapest I shared a room with him on the day of his debut with the national first team, although it wasn’t a great 
game for Leo. A happy moment that we shared was winning 
the Olympic gold in Beijing.’
And what is your relationship like, now that you live in 
Manchester?‘We speak a lot on the phone and we see each other when 
the national team meets. Before, when I lived in Barcelona, 
we used to go out to an Argentine restaurant. Our favourite dish? A good rump steak. On other occasions we’d meet 
up in the afternoon to drink mate and talk football – the 
Argentine league, the national team, and whatever was hap-
pening in Spain.’
What is Messi like from a friend’s point of view?
‘He’s a pretty normal guy. He’s someone who likes to be at 
home and who loves his family very much. I think he’s an 
even better person than he is a footballer.’
And what is he like as a footballer?
‘As a player he’s a gem. He has the heavenly gift of han-dling the ball really well. He impresses me with his ability 
to move the ball at such speed. It’s incredible, what he’s 
capable of doing, the way he gets round the other players, the way the ball is always glued to his foot. As he has shown A friend  99
us many times, he’s capable of taking a team to greater 
heights, of deciding a match. And he doesn’t feel the pres-
sure. Unbelievable. Leo is similar to Maradona, although 
Diego is unique and to compare them is crazy. As a friend I’m happy that he is doing so well.’
So, what did you mean when you said that ‘he’s an even better 
person than he is a footballer’?
‘I said that out of humility towards Leo. He hasn’t changed 
since I’ve known him. Fame hasn’t made him lose him-self, the praise hasn’t gone to his head. He is still a great 
friend.’