115Chapter 20
Boy of the match
22 February 2006
It is cold in London – intensely cold. The first leg of the 
Champions League quarter-final is being played at Stamford 
Bridge. The ground is muddy, which has provoked no end 
of controversy in the press. The atmosphere is heated – very heated, and very English. On one side is Chelsea – 
with a rational game, defensive, vigorous and impetuous, 
the most convincing team in Europe. On the other, Barça – talented, imaginative, with a taste for the spectacular. A 
lovely footballing model, but one that is often considered 
fragile, a machine easily broken. Both sides lead their respective leagues and, by the end of 2005, they have done 
incredible things. The new year has not started too well, 
however: in the Premier League, Chelsea let in three goals at Middlesbrough and they suffered the unspeakable in 
the FA Cup against modest Colchester. Barça are without 
Eto’o, who is playing in the African Nations Cup. With Xavi injured they have been knocked out of the Copa del Rey at 
the hands of Zaragoza, and without Ronaldinho they have 
lost two league games. The defeat against Valencia is tough, since they are closing in on Barça in the table, reducing the 
gap to six points.
Leaving circumstances to one side, the match offers 
myriad  points of interest. Like the duels: between Ballon 
d’Or winner Ronaldinho and the runner-up Frank 116 Messi
Lampard; between Eto’o and Drogba, voted best and sec-
ond best African players. And let’s not forget the duel 
between the coaches: on the one hand emotional, hysteri-
cal José Mourinho and on the other, cool, calm Rijkaard: 
two completely opposing characters.
Moreover there is the eternal theme of revenge, or venge-
ance, which is always present in football. Few have forgotten the defeat and the three goals in nineteen minutes that the 
Blues had inflicted on the Blaugrana on 8 March 2005 in the return leg of the Champions League last sixteen. Barça led 
with a relative advantage after their 2-1 victory at the Nou 
Camp, but were left helplessly chasing the comeback after a series of defensive errors, which, according to Rijkaard, 
were due to a lack of maturity and concentration. Despite 
Ronaldinho’s exploits and a string of missed chances, this Barça team, who already thought of itself as the new 
Dream Team, had to deal with the sight of Mourinho run-
ning onto the pitch and blowing kisses to the fans, as well as the insults, the shoving and the violent brawl between the players and the security guards, which even implicated the 
Dutch coach. The journey home was bitter, as the errors 
were rehashed over and over and referee Pierluigi Collina was accused (by the Spanish press) of not having given vari-
ous penalties, nor having seen Carvalho’s foul on Valdés in 
what was eventually a 4-2 victory led by Terry. Accused, in other words, of having favoured Chelsea.
It is well known that in cases such as these, history mat-
ters. It triggers headlines on every sports page and almost creates the impression of a television drama entitled 
‘Revenge’; there is more and more tension felt among the 
players, who go onto the pitch now at 8.45pm. The team-sheets are announced: Chelsea are missing Drogba, who is 
replaced in the attack by Hernán Crespo, while Asier del 
Horno and Claude Makelele are confirmed at the back. Boy of the match  117
Meanwhile Thiago Motta joins Edmílson in the centre for 
Barça. Andrés Iniesta, who has been in the starting line-up 
for some time, is on the bench. Leo Messi is sporting the 
number 30 fluorescent yellow shirt. To many, he seems no bigger than a kid when he comes onto the pitch. How will 
he be able to deal with this kind of tension, which is difficult 
enough even for the big boys? It seems that he doesn’t feel the pressure. Is it down to a youthful lack of inhibition? Or 
is he simply fearless? The answer comes in the third minute, 
when the first shot on target comes from the Argentine and Petr Cech saves it comfortably. Leo is definitely fearless. And 
he demonstrates it continuously in the coming minutes as 
he scurries into every available space like a little mouse. He runs up and down, stealing balls, passing accurately, work-
ing well with his team-mates, creating the first real chance 
and sowing the seeds of panic among the Chelsea defence. A nightmare for Del Horno, who leaves a stud-mark impres-
sion through his right sock in the 31st minute. No caution, 
and no protest whatsoever from the Flea. Play continues. But a scuffle leads to the Basque defender being sent off 
six minutes later, leaving Chelsea a man short. What hap-
pens? Messi controls the ball three-quarters of the way up the pitch, resists an extremely tough tackle, and battles 
shoulder to shoulder with Robben, who manages to steal 
his position and snatch the ball, but the little guy will not back down. He chases him to the edge of the pitch, trying 
to overpower him from one side or another. Finally, with 
an unexpected burst of energy, he seizes the ball near the corner flag. Robben is now in front of him – he succeeds in 
nutmegging him but no sooner has he done so than he is 
flattened by a blue locomotive.
‘I saw the defender coming at me fast and deliberately, 
and I tried to jump out of the way … But I didn’t make it,’ the Argentine later explains. The yellow shirt is knocked 118 Messi
to the ground, along with Del Horno’s blue one. Players 
gather around them, causing a commotion. Robben and 
Gudjohnsen start arguing with the linesman. Deco and Ronaldinho throw themselves at Del Horno. Puyol almost 
comes to blows with Robben. Motta and Edmílson try to 
calm the situation. Terry argues with Terje Hauge, the Norwegian referee, while Ronnie mutters something in his 
ear. Then comes the red card: Del Horno protests, Motta 
applauds, Makelele complains. The game recommences and Mourinho readjusts his team. He substitutes Joe Cole, 
sending on right back Geremi, and moving Ferreira into 
position to mark Messi. But nothing changes, neither the foul nor the recent beating has fazed the youngster, who 
continues to take centre stage; he doesn’t let up, he pays 
no attention to the Blues’ exasperation, and soldiers on with his fearless solo performance. He continually empow-
ers the right flank of the pitch, creating juicy chances for 
Ronaldinho and Deco, although they fail to take advan-tage of them. Leo is too isolated – without the team behind 
him, he fails to make an impact. In the meantime, ten-man 
Chelsea are adhering strictly to their coach’s instructions: ‘Just get the 0-0 draw.’ Now they have the perfect excuse 
to hang back and wait for an opportune moment to strike. 
The Blues are in complete control and it’s not long before they make it count: spurred on by Drogba’s entrance at the 
beginning of the second half, the English team takes the 
lead in the 58th minute. It is Motta who ends up sliding the ball into his own net while trying to clear a free kick by 
Lampard. Now they need to turn the game around. Once 
again it is Messi who is trying everything possible, motivat-ing the rest of the team and ignoring the chants and whis-
tles from the Stamford Bridge crowd at every turn. Fast, 
direct, he skips away, destroying the defence, shooting, making incredible passes – but nobody is there to receive Boy of the match  119
them. He puts in a gentle shot from the edge of the area 
which grazes the goalpost to the left of the Chelsea goal-
keeper. And he stands there as if stunned, with an ironic 
expression, wondering how he could have done better. He is the most determined, and finally the team gets behind 
him. In the 70th minute Terry turns the tables for Barça: 
Ronaldinho takes a free kick that beats Cech to level the score and Barcelona start to play some good football and 
create chances. And it’s Messi again: he sends a golden 
opportunity to Larsson, who has come on for Motta. Three minutes later, Terry launches himself onto the Argentine in 
the area to prevent him from controlling the ball. Penalty? 
The referee ignores the incident. In the 79th minute Eto’o heads a great pass from Márquez into the net. They have 
done it.
Unbeaten until that moment at Stamford Bridge, after 
49 matches (38 wins, eleven draws), José Mourinho must face up to the blow of his first defeat. And he doesn’t digest 
it very well. He blames it on the referee and Leo: ‘Am I disappointed with Del Horno’s sending off? Did you see the 
match? Either way I’m cross with the authorities: write that 
if you want … But what can we do? Ask for them to retract Del Horno’s red card? Suspend Messi for his theatricals? 
Nothing will change the result … Because let’s be serious, 
Messi put on an act. Catalonia is a country of culture, you know it is. And I’ve been to the theatre many times and it’s 
very high quality over there. And Messi has learnt from the 
best …’
‘Whoever says that Messi put on an act obviously didn’t 
see what really happened,’ says Eto’o. ‘They were pound-ing on him from all directions,’ insists Rijkaard. Leo simply  
says: ‘I have a cut on my knee, one on my thigh and another 
on my foot. My whole body is bruised, but I’m not in pain 
because we won.’ He adds: ‘It has been an incredible game.’120 Messi
Everyone else is in agreement, starting with his team-
mates, who hug him as he leaves the field, while the fans 
who came to the match chant his name. The following day the descriptions are flowing – people are talking of ‘dedi-
cation’, ‘genius’, ‘a footballing virtuoso’, ‘Barça’s treasure’, 
‘the birth of a great star’, ‘the best’, ‘the bravest’, ‘the best in the match’. In the context of his age and his nerve, his 
performance is compared to the likes of Pelé in the 1958 
World Cup in Sweden, of Maradona in the Under 20 World Cup in 1979, of Cruyff against Benfica in 1969, of George 
Best. He is showered with praise, it is as if the boy has passed 
the test of maturity with flying colours and, with him, the entire team.
The return leg at the Nou Camp is on 7 March. In the 
23rd minute Leo Messi is off, stealing the ball from Robben – but suddenly he puts his hand to his left knee and falls to 
the ground. ‘In the play when I collided with Gallas, I had 
already felt the first stabs of pain, but I decided to keep going,’ he would say later, ‘and in the next play I realised 
that I couldn’t go on.’
There has been no rough play, no knock, but Leo is lying 
on the ground. He grimaces with pain, his hands holding back his hair and covering his face to try to hide his fear. 
The crowd falls silent. His team-mates look at each other, downcast. He leaves the pitch, distraught. Rijkaard hugs 
him, emotional. It is a difficult moment for a player who 
was applauded by 90,000 Nou Camp spectators – not as a drama queen, but as the puppet master who had pulled the 
strings of the Stamford Bridge victory.
Muscular tear in the upper part of one of the right ham-
strings – a four-centimetre tear. The Barcelona medics say that recovery will take four to six weeks. But luck is not on 
Leo’s side. When the time comes for him to play again, more problems arise in the same area: he can still feel the Boy of the match  121
scar. He was supposed to play against Villarreal but does 
not, he should be playing in the Champions League semi-
final against Milan but is not. In the end he goes 79 days 
without football. And he watches the Champions League final from the stands.
There had been talk of the possibility of him playing for 
a short stint on this great occasion – Barça-Arsenal at the Stade de France, Paris – perhaps for a few minutes at the 
very least, but despite the seemingly healed injury, Rijkaard 
decides not to risk it. His team-mates go on to lift the cup for the second time in Barça’s history. Sad and alone, Leo 
does not go down to the pitch to collect his medal.