73Chapter 13
Debut
16 November 2003
The Dragão stadium is beautiful. Blue, contrasting with the 
green of the pitch; an open structure that allows a glimpse 
of Porto all lit up. The white cover closes in the space and 
provides a view of the pitch. Manuel Salgado’s construction, which seats 52,000, was built in order to replace the old 
Das Antas ground, as well as to host Euro 2004. The inau-
gural match between Portugal and Greece was held here. It is the backdrop against which FC Porto usually play – a 
beautiful location and well floodlit for the debut with the 
first team. Particularly since the date in question is Sunday 16 November 2003, the day of the stadium’s inauguration. 
The crowds have gathered, curious to see a new football-
ing moment for the city, to experience its magic directly, to wager whether or not the home colours will bring them 
luck, and to spend half an hour with their eyes trained on 
the sky admiring the golden blaze of fireworks.
For once, the match is perhaps of lesser importance. A 
bit of football, very few emotions, a decidedly boring fix-ture, which, in keeping with the script and to the delight of the home team, ends with a 2-0 victory to Porto.
Lionel Messi debuts in the 74th minute. He is the third 
substitution for Barcelona, invited to take his place as one of the protagonists of this Portuguese fiesta. This Barcelona 
team has been obliged to look to youth team players to fill the 74 Messi
teamsheet. The internationals have been called up to their 
respective countries, occupied elsewhere in the Euro 2004 
quali fy ing rounds or in friendlies. So there they are, the promi-
sing youngsters, called upon for a trip to Portugal: Jorquera, Oscar López, Oleguer, Márquez, Fernando Navarro, Xavi, 
Ros, Santamaría, Gabri, Luis García, Luis Enrique, Expósito, Thiago, Jordi, Oriol Riera and Messi, who had scored three 
goals for the youth A team at Granollers the previous day.
Leo replaces Navarro; he is wearing number 14. And he 
cannot wait to show what he is worth. So much so that he makes himself noticed in the fifteen minutes he is on the 
pitch by creating two scoring chances. At the final whistle, Frank Rijkaard comments that ‘he is a boy with a lot of tal-
ent and a promising future’.
Leo is sixteen years, four months and 23 days old. In the 
club’s history, only two players younger than that have worn the Barcelona first team shirt: Paulino Alcántara – who 
debuted against Català on 25 February 1912, aged fifteen years, four months and eighteen days – and the Nigerian Haruna Babangida – who was brought on by Louis Van Gaal 
to play for a few minutes against the AGOVV in 1998 dur -
ing a pre-season match in Holland, aged fifteen years, nine 
months and eighteen days. This is undoubtedly a good sign 
for the young boy who arrived from Argentina two-and-a-
half years ago.
In any event, the magical night in Porto is, for the time 
being, an isolated incident, an exception. Messi will have to wait until the July 2004 Asia tour in South Korea, Japan and China before wearing the first team shirt again.
In the meantime, Barcelona Football Club has seen many 
changes. On 15 June 2003, Joan Laporta wins the election and becomes the new club president. Frank Rijkaard arrives to pre-
side over the dugout and, on 21 July, Ronaldinho is presented 
as the new Messiah to 30,000 people at the Nou Camp.Debut  75
After the annus horribilis that was the 2002–03 season 
(knocked out of the Champions League by Juventus in the 
quarter-finals; brought down by the Novelda 2nd B team 
in the Copa del Rey; sixth in the league, 22 points below the champions, Real Madrid; two coaches, Van Gaal and 
Radomir Antic, and two presidents, Joan Gaspart, and 
Enric Reyna in the interim), the club’s shareholders hope 
that things will improve and that they will recover the lost 
ground with regard to their historic Madrid rivals. They 
need a change of direction. And the changes come. Not only in the first team, but also in the youth teams. Joaquím 
Rifé is dismissed from his position as football director, 
and along comes Josep Colomer who, during his tenure, appoints Ángel Guillermo Hoyos as the youth B-team coach, 
class of 1987. He is an Argentine winger who has played for 
Talleres Córdoba, Gimnasia y Esgrima de Mar del Plata, Boca Juniors, Chacarita, Everton (in Chile), Deportivo Tachira 
(Venezuela) and Real Castilla. Hoyos and Messi immediately 
get on well. They talk about football and, of course, Leo’s passion for Newell’s. They very quickly understand each 
other. The new coach’s first impression occurs on Japanese 
soil at the beginning of August 2003, where the youth B team is about to compete in the Toyota International Youth 
Under 17 Football Championship. ‘When I arrived,’ says 
Hoyos, ‘we did some light training to loosen up. Nothing particularly hard or revealing. But after five minutes I could 
hardly believe it. Of course, they had told me about him. 
But I didn’t realise the extent of it: Leo was fierce.’
A thought that is reinforced during the first match 
against Feyenoord in Aichi. Fifteen minutes after kick-off, Barça are already down by a goal. Leo calls for the ball, dodges past four defenders and the goalkeeper, and gifts 
Songo’o a goal. Hoyos cannot believe his eyes: on the one 
hand he is surprised by the boy’s generosity, not at all selfish 76 Messi
like so many others his age (or older); on the other hand he 
is dazzled by his class.
Leo goes on to be chosen as player of the tournament. 
It is a title he will receive again at the XXIII Torneig de Futbol Formatiu Memorial Jaume Serra in Sitges, at the third 
Memorial Salvador Rivas Miró in Sant Vicenç de Montalt, and at the Torneo dell’Amicizia, which is played at the end of 
August in San Giorgio della Richinvelda, in the Italian prov-
ince of Pordenone. The youth B team defeats Parma, as well as host region Friuli-Venezia-Giulia, Hansa Rostok, Eintrach 
Frankfurt and Treviso, and in the final they beat Juventus 4-0. 
The team racks up 35 goals in total, but Leo cannot forgive himself for having missed a penalty. Although the wound is 
somewhat healed by converting one in the final, the error 
still haunts him. At first, Hoyos tries to console him by saying the goalkeeper will be able to tell his children and grand-
children that he once saved a penalty taken by the greatest 
player in the world; then he sets him to work training daily from the penalty spot, explaining that over the course of a 
season he will have to shoot five or six times from there and 
any one of those could be decisive. It could be in a champi-onship game or in an important tournament. They are words 
that will come back to Leo when Argentina win the Under 20 
World Cup thanks to two of his penalties.
Nonetheless, the Hoyos/Messi winning partnership 
(only a single defeat, at the hands of Real Madrid in the José Luis Ruiz Casado Sant memorial tournament) does not last long – only for the pre-season. The club’s directors are 
in no doubt: Leo is outgrowing this particular league. They 
decide to move him up, along with Gerard Piqué, to the youth A team.
It is here that the youngster’s incredible rise begins. 
In just one season he moves from the youth B to A team, then up through the Barcelona ranks from Barça C in the Debut  77
Third League to Barça B in the Second B League, not for -
getting his brief moment of glory with the first team as well 
as reappearances in the youth leagues to help out his ex-
team-mates. Here is a more detailed account of Messi’s per -
formance and shining moments during his time with each 
of those three teams.
The youth A team – he arrives on the third match day 
of the league. He stays until Christmas, although for a few weeks he also plays for the Barça C team, returning at the 
end of May for the Copa del Rey. He plays in eleven cham-pionship matches and scores eighteen goals, one of which 
is truly incredible. It is against Real Betis during the final of 
the Nerja tournament. Messi finds himself in the centre of the pitch and, seeing that the goalkeeper has moved much 
too far forward off his line, shoots hard. The ball flies in a 
perfect arc: goal and victory.
Barça C team – at the end of November 2003, things 
are going badly for the team, who have only managed nine points in fourteen games. Enter the reinforcements: Messi and Alfi from the youth A team. They win their first match 
on 29 November against Europa. The two of them play 
extremely well. But the best moment comes on 4 January 2004. They are playing against Gramenet in Santa Coloma. 
The Blaugrana are losing 2-1. In the 87th minute it is Leo’s 
turn to shine. A header and a left-footer – wham bam – two goals in the blink of an eye (in addition to the equaliser), 
and the Flea brings home the victory for his team. Five goals 
in ten games, a determining factor in helping to get out of the relegation zone, and Leo moves on to better things. 
He is too good for the Third League, it would be better to 
try him in a higher league, despite the fact that he is only sixteen years old.
Barça B team – on 16 March, he plays his first match at 
home against Mataró. Coach Pere Gratacós admits that they 78 Messi
had to create a special training programme just for him, as 
he would have to face older boys who were taller, stronger 
and more experienced. The coach also confesses his aston-ishment at the way in which the youngster was able to switch 
teams, team-mates, coaches and formations, and yet still give 
it his all. He plays five matches and only the first is a victory – but Gratacós says that he was acclimatising and eventually 
showed what he could do. He adapted to the league and in 
the match against Girona he was the best on the field, which, like snakes and ladders, takes us back to square one: the 
youth B team. ‘Others would have got annoyed, but not him,’ 
says Juan Carlos Pérez Rojo, his youth team coach. ‘When the youth B team needed him, he immediately said yes.’
It happens in the last three games of the 2003–04 Liga. 
Three teams are still in the running for the title: Espanyol, Barça and Premià de Mar. The decisive encounter with 
Espanyol is on 15 April. If the parakeets pull it off they will 
be one step away from the title. By contrast, Barça cannot afford to put a foot wrong if they want to keep their options 
open until the end. So Leo pulls a majestic game out of his 
hat, and when the opposition, losing 2-1, start looking dan-gerous while desperately chasing the draw, Messi responds 
in his own way – with a goal that seals the deal.
Two weeks later, the team is celebrating, having won the 
title. His 36 goals in official matches, and 50 counting friend-lies, are worth a considerable amount, not to mention his first 
professional contract. The negotiations are not easy given the many differences between the club’s directors  and Jorge 
Messi, who deals with the matter personally. Eventually, how-ever, a deal is reached. The Barça bosses know that should Leo decide to leave the city, he would have other options. 
Cesc Fàbregas has already been lost to Arsenal during the 
confusion that followed the dismissal of Joan Gaspart. They do not want history to repeat itself.