201Chapter 33
Physical thinking
Conversation with Roberto Perfumo, ‘El Mariscal’
The La Biela waiters and clientele know him well. Some of 
them stop and greet him and ask for his perspective on the 
issues of the day. Once he has dished out his opinions to 
all and sundry, the Mariscal – ex-defender for River, Racing and Cruzeiro, one of Argentine football’s best defenders, 
who is also a commentator and a social psychologist – finally 
sits down to have a cup of coffee. The walls are covered with photos of motor racing champions like Juan Manuel 
Fangio, Friolán González and Manuel Gálvez, who in the 
50s and 60s used to frequent this café-bar, situated opposite the famous Recoleta cemetery in Buenos Aires. Those were 
different times. Today, the talk is about football.
What do you think of Lionel Messi?
‘Technically speaking he’s one of the few players in the 
world who can drive the ball forward without looking at it, and that allows him to watch the opposition and his team-
mates, and make an unprecedented pass. He can do it 
because he sees the whole pitch. He has a lot of precision while at the highest possible speed. He plays imaginatively, 
he’s creative and every time he gets the ball, every time he 
challenges the opposition, it’s an experience … everyone  is 
waiting  for something to happen. And it does. In addition, 
for me Messi has physical thinking.’202 Messi
What does that mean?
‘He is mind and body. All at the same time. He has the same 
gift that Pelé, Maradona and Di Stéfano had. It’s the speed 
with which his brain tells his legs what to do. Messi gets an 
idea and, bam! it’s already happened. Do you know what 
I mean? Seeing the position of the goalie and shooting between the posts is done through intuition, not through 
thinking.’
Since you’ve mentioned Maradona, the obvious thing is to ask you 
about the comparisons that have been made and are still made 
continually …‘After Pelé retired, it took Brazil another 24 years to 
become world champions again. We are still in mourning 
for Maradona. We’re all hoping a Saviour will appear, the new Messiah, who will take us to the top once again. Messi 
could reach that position, but he still needs time, he needs 
to develop his gifts and prepare himself for the opposition, he needs to reach his footballing maturity.’
What are his weaknesses?
‘He still has a youthful sin: he doesn’t always know how to make the best choices. Sometimes you have to make a run, 
sometimes you have to pass, it’s useless to persist when a 
play is not going your way, it’s better to choose the most simple and effective solution. He himself will realise that it’s 
the ball that has to keep on running … these are things you 
learn with experience and with age.’
Is Messi already an icon?
‘He is a simple guy, very humble, and kids admire him enormously.’Physical thinking  203
Why is that?
‘Because of his look, because of his face. He reminds me 
of the cuis (a type of squirrel, one of the most common 
Argentine mammals). Add to that his natural magnetism when the ball is between his feet. I hope he never loses his 
passion for playing ball. That’s the only way he will be the 
best in the world.’
Since you are so sure of your prediction … let’s move on to talking 
about the future and, in particular, the risks.‘I hope that the money doesn’t soften him. With millions 
of euros in the bank he still needs to run, train, play in the 
cold, the rain, the snow. I hope he doesn’t become an adver -
tising icon like Beckham; the risk is that you lose the passion 
for the game. I hope he never loses that “amateurism”, that 
love of being on the pitch that guys like Pelé and Maradona preserved. Being Messi won’t be easy, it will definitely be a 
headache. In any case, he is still climbing uphill to reach 
the top. The most difficult part will be once he is up there and has to maintain that level. Look at Ronaldinho.’
Meaning?
‘Juan Manuel Fangio used to say, “When the bad times 
come, no one can endure them.” That is what’s happening 
to Ronaldinho. When things start to go wrong … you say to 
yourself, it’s fine, I’ll get back to form. But you don’t look 
after yourself, you don’t concentrate, they start to ques-
tion you every blessed day, the environment doesn’t help because friends of a champion are the worst kind, family is 
a disaster, and you keep careering downhill without being 
able to apply the brakes. You don’t realise it and time passes. It’s a lesson Messi needs to remember when he’s at the top.’