41Chapter 7
Size: small
31 January 1997
Doctor Diego Schwarsztein remembers precisely the date 
of the first appointment: 31 January, his birthday. That was 
the day he met Lionel. He was nine and a half, and his par -
ents, concerned about their third son’s limited growth, had 
brought him to the doctor’s consultation room at the Clinic 
for Glands and Internal Medicine, number 1764 Córdoba 
street, in central Rosario.
‘It was a consultation about small stature, of which I do 
many each day,’ recalls the doctor. Leo measured 1.27m; he was not a star, he was not a renowned footballer, nor even a professional, he was just playing junior football at Newell’s. 
‘And I have always been a lepers fan [to prove it, there is 
a picture of his son underneath the glass on his desk, at a match where the Red and Blacks scored a goal against 
Boca]. This helped me to establish a good rapport with the 
patient. We used to talk about football, the only topic of conversation that would conquer the little boy’s shyness.’
Numerous appointments, more than a year of inves-
tigation, complex tests, biochemical analyses and clinics. ‘Because only tests can determine if we’re dealing with a 
hormonal problem or if it’s simply a case of finding our -
selves up against what is usually known as a “late bloomer” 
– a child whose growth rhythm differs from that of his con-
temporaries, who develops later.’42 Messi
To clarify, the doctor points out the significant dates 
and time periods in a clinical history, indicating the normal 
periods which are necessary in these cases in order to reach 
a diagnosis: growth hormone deficiency.
The explanation: ‘The glands aren’t making any growth 
hormone,’ says Schwarsztein. ‘To make a readily under -
stood comparison, it’s a case analogous to that of a diabetic, 
whose pancreas does not produce insulin. In this case, we’re 
dealing with the substance needed in order to grow. The difference is that diabetics represent seven per cent of the 
world’s population, whereas Messi’s case is not very com-
mon: it affects one in every 20 million, according to statis-tics. And it’s worth noting that it’s not hereditary. Just look 
at Leo’s brothers, or María Sol, his little sister, who is decid-
edly tall.’ How did Leo deal with this news? ‘I remember,’ says the doctor, ‘that he had a very healthy relationship with 
his illness; he dealt with all the tests – even the most invasive 
ones – and the therapy, without too much trouble. His fam-ily helped him a lot with that – a first-class family.’
Once the problem was identified, the endocrinologist 
began a programme of growth hormone treatment. One sub-cutaneous injection every day for anywhere between three and six years, until the patient has developed sufficiently.
How can the development be evaluated? How can one 
measure the potential for growth? With an x-ray of the hand. The doctor shows them at different stages of development: 
age nine, ten, eleven, up to eighteen years old. He points 
out the blank spaces between one bone and another and explains that when these disappear it means that the patient 
has reached their potential – they will not grow any more. 
Then he adds: ‘Nothing allows us to overcome genetics, but if difficulties arise we can help it along. I should emphasise 
that those who genuinely have growth hormone deficiency 
have it for life. That’s why it is necessary to intervene.’Size: small  43
In the case of Messi, this definitely was not some kind of 
experiment. He was not, as someone has written, a lab rat. 
The doctor loses his patience and says emphatically: ‘It was 
never an experiment. For many years growth hormone has been used in such cases, more than 30 years in fact. It used 
to be extracted from cadavers, but there was a risk of CJD. 
Since the mid-1980s it has been produced through genetic engineering. The long-term side effects are not confirmed. 
But we haven’t had any problems in any of our cases so far 
– like in Messi’s case, where it is imperative that we replace what is lacking.’
So, why are growth hormones such a taboo subject, and 
why is it one of the most commonly used products when it comes to drug taking among sportsmen?
‘Administered to an adult without a deficiency, in other 
words to a person with a normal level of secretion, growth hormone serves as an anabolic steroid to increase muscle  
mass and decrease fat tissue. It increases physical output and performance,’ explains the doctor. But the risks to one’s health are extremely high: it can trigger anything 
from liquid  retention to hyperthyroidism, from high blood 
sugar levels to cranial hypertension, and there is also a risk 
of tumours.
Despite having dealt with suspicions and fears, in both 
Argentina and Spain, there remains an issue about which much has been written – although generally without rhyme 
or reason – namely the cost of treatment, which can amount 
to 600,000 Argentine pesos a year (roughly equivalent to £100,000). It is a considerable sum, which may well have 
pushed the Messi family to depart for Spain, since Barcelona 
was the only club willing to take care of the expenses.
‘It always caught my eye, the story in the media that the 
father took the footballer away because they wouldn’t pay for the treatment here. It’s not definite that they didn’t 44 Messi
want to pay here. The father’s social security took care of 
the treatment, along with the Acindar Foundation. It’s not 
certain that they had to leave the country for that reason. Because here, if the parents have social security or medi-
cal insurance the treatment is approved by the Programa 
Médico Obligatorio [Compulsory Medical Programme] and if they don’t have cover, there is the National Advisory 
Committee for Children with Growth Hormone Deficiency 
which has administered free treatment since 1991.’
It’s a version that contrasts with that of the Messi family. 
According to Jorge, the father, the medical insurance and the Acindar social security stopped paying the total cost of the treatment after two years. Seeing the child’s promise, 
the Newell’s authorities initially agreed to cover part of the 
costs (every other injection). But little by little, the payments began to arrive late. ‘We went so many times to ask for the 
money, that in the end my wife said to me: “I’m not going to 
ask any more.” And that’s what happened,’ says Jorge, who did everything he could to find a solution to the problem.
‘River had opened an office in Rosario. It was a chance 
for the boy, and also a way of putting the pressure on Newell’s. We went to Buenos Aires for a trial. Leo trained 
in Belgrano and during the first match, when they brought 
him onto the pitch, they realised what he was worth, that he wasn’t just some little kid. “We want him,” they told me,’ 
recalls Jorge Messi, ‘“but only if you bring us the paperwork, 
if you can get Newell’s to agree to let him go.” In other words, they didn’t want to get into trouble with Newell’s. 
So nothing was done about it. Newell’s found out about it 
and they asked me not to take him away. They made other promises. Then along came Barcelona …’
With the matter more or less cleared up, there is one 
fact about which the Messis and Schwarsztein agree: ‘The hormone deficiency and its treatment are nothing more Size: small  45
than an anecdote – what really matter are the boy’s football-
ing skills.’ And here, getting up from his chair and pacing 
around his study, the doctor unleashes a series of reflec-
tions of a man passionate about football. He speaks with great fervour about the quick sprint; about control of the 
ball; about speed; about ‘Leo’s limits, which nobody can 
pinpoint; the porteños [Buenos Aires locals] who are jealous of a player who has hardly set foot in the capital, because 
here, in order to be successful, it’s imperative that you play 
for one of the big Buenos Aires teams. Look at Batistuta – he was from Newell’s, but he only became famous in Argentina 
when he went to Boca.’
Let us leave football aside for a moment and take a step 
back. The growth hormone treatment might be anecdotal but look at how a recent article has appeared in La Capital 
entitled ‘They want Messi’s drug for their children’. The body of the article reads as follows: ‘Ever since the therapy 
given to Messi became public knowledge, for many peo-
ple the growth hormone has been transformed into the “magic drug” that makes little children grow. Small stature 
is a huge concern for parents, especially when children are 
starting infant school and they are compared with others. Comparison is never healthy, because the normal rate of 
growth is extremely varied. In the majority of cases, small 
stature is due to genetic factors, malnutrition in the first two years of life, or a delay in development or growth (for 
which there is no specific therapy), but many parents are 
demanding from their paediatricians the same treatment given to Leo Messi.’
‘These are the negative consequences of media divul-
gence regarding a therapy associated with a famous footballer  , and the erroneous interpretation that parents 
and the population in general have made,’ protests the doc-
tor. ‘None of this would have happened if everything had 46 Messi
remained within the confines of doctor–patient–parent  
confidentiality. My duty is to insist that this particular course 
of medical action will do nothing for children who do not have the hormone deficiency, especially taking into account 
the costs against the lack of benefits. But it is imperative 
for those who do suffer from the deficiency, as Lionel does. That’s why he started receiving the treatment in 1998, when 
he measured 1.27m; and after continuing with the treat-
ment in Barcelona, he now measures 1.69m. Without this cure he would not have grown to his genetically intended 
height.’