241Chapter 36
Third time lucky
1, 19 and 21 December 2009
Yes – this time, it is his turn. This time, the saying ‘third 
time lucky’ comes true. After coming third in 2007 and 
second in 2008, Lionel Andrés Messi wins France Football 
magazine’s 2009 Ballon d’Or. And he wins it by a mile – Messi gets 473 out of a possible 480 points, more than 
double  the score of Cristiano Ronaldo, the runner-up, who 
is awarded 233 points. Xavi Hernández comes in third with 
173 points. Ninety of the award’s 96 voters vote for Leo as 
their number one player; and with 98.54 per cent of the 
maximum number of points possible, nobody in the 54-year history of this prestigious prize has won it as convincingly 
or unanimously as Messi. Only Michel Platini, who won it 
in 1984 with 98.46 per cent of the possible points, has come close. It is a true triumph. According to the editor-in-chief 
of France Football, Denis Chaumier, there are three reasons 
for his success:
1. Messi’s coups de théâtre, his dribbling, his acceleration, 
his efforts to destabilise the opposition, his talent, his 
creative spirit and his sense of teamwork, along with some of his goals, have made a profound impression throughout the year. His influence within football is still not complete, but what I find marvellous is the fact that the sheer joy and impertinence of his 242 Messi
presence on the pitch resemble those of a certain 
Maradona.
2. We shouldn’t forget that despite his young age, Messi has been among the contenders for the Ballon d’Or several times. Clearly, modern football will not give its highest honour to a flash in the pan, even one as impressive as Messi.
3. Messi is champion of Europe, of La Liga with Barcelona, winner of the European Super Cup and the Copa del Rey, and with the Argentine side has qualified for the final stages of the World Cup. It is hard to imagine a more remarkable run of achievements.
All sides are united in agreement on Messi’s records, per -
formances, talent, class and professional career. The jour -
nalists of France Football’s international voting panel have all 
bowed to the Flea. Tributes have poured in from around the world: from Japan to Iceland, from Ghana to New Zealand, from Kazakhstan to England. Describing his reasons for vot-
ing for Messi, the Daily Telegraph journalist Henry Winter 
writes in France Football:
Messi? Pure genius. He has a special relationship with 
the ball. He creates and scores goals, and works cease-lessly for the good of the team. To see him play is to witness a marvellous spectacle that greatly benefits the beautiful game.
It is 7.00pm on Monday 30 November 2009 when France 
Football’s representatives knock on the door of Messi’s cha-
let in Castelldefels to deliver the good news. Leo has been 
awaiting this news with impatience and excitement, along with his girlfriend Antonella, his brother Rodrigo and his Third time lucky  243
niece and nephew. When the France Football director tells 
him that he has won the award he responds with his usual 
timid smile, but his eyes are sparkling.
The announcement comes at the end of a fantastic 
week for both Leo and Barça. On Tuesday 24 November, in the fifth match of the Champions League, the Blaugrana, 
with Piqué and Pedro, ‘achieved an angelic victory over José Mourinho’s Inter in a devilish match’, in the words of 
El País. Up until now the task of getting into the last six-
teen seemed a very difficult one for Guardiola’s men, but now it is within their reach. Messi was unable to play in that 
match as he had sustained a muscular injury while playing 
Athletic Bilbao at San Mamés on the final match day of La Liga, but on Sunday 29 November he is in the starting line-
up for the classic derby against Cristiano Ronaldo’s Real 
Madrid. This is the fourth time that the two superstars have met. The Portuguese player, who has been out of competi-
tion for more than 50 days, shows excellent form in the 66 
minutes that he spends on the pitch. He leads the Madrid attack, but misses the best chance that the Whites get. His 
shot is turned away by Valdés, and for the fourth time he 
fails to score against Barça. Messi appears very little in the first half; he does not create play and his contribution is 
not decisive. He plays in the hole, behind the forwards but 
without his usual craftiness. However, in the second half, after Ibrahimovi´ c puts Barça ahead with an unstoppable 
left-footed shot and Busquets gets a red card, the Flea is 
once again at his best. He receives passes, brings others into play, asks questions of the Madrid defence, helps neutralise 
their attacks and invents two or three ingenious pieces of 
play. He contributes a great deal to the team just when they need it most. In the 88th minute he is in a position to make 
it 2-0. Alves crosses it into the centre from the right wing 
and Lionel shoots point-blank, which the incredible Casillas 244 Messi
saves. It would have been a great pleasure for Messi to score 
his eighth goal against the Madrid keeper – his last one was 
a penalty in the friendly between Spain and Argentina on 14 November – but, as he says in his post-match interview, 
‘it was not to be, because of Casillas’ great save. The most 
important thing is that Barcelona won.’ And in reply to any questions about the Ballon d’Or, he replies: ‘This afternoon 
Victor Valdés deserves the Ballon d’Or. He saved us.’ This 
may be true, but Lionel has won his showdown with the 2008 winner of the award, Cristiano Ronaldo. The match 
was the perfect scenario for the baton to be passed on.
So, on this Monday in Castelldefels there is more than 
enough reason to celebrate. Wearing a green-and-white sweatshirt, Leo joins his family and the guests from France 
Football as they drink a toast to the boy who couldn’t grow, 
and to his entry into the pantheon of world football. 
Afterwards, there is time to talk and to look at the front 
page – and 43 other pages – that the magazine has dedi-cated to this ‘Young King of Football’.
The next day sees more front pages devoted to Messi, a 
huge press conference and interviews.
It is a time for reflection, for hearts on sleeves and for 
dedications. ‘I cannot lie – I had a feeling that it could happen this year – but the results of the ballot surprised me,’ says Messi in the Nou Camp press room. ‘This prize 
is an honour; it is wonderful and very special, but I wasn’t 
obsessed with winning it. I knew that if it was meant to hap-pen it would, but either way I would keep on working in 
the same way as always,’ he explains. Someone asks him 
how he feels about being the first Argentine player to win it. ‘It’s a great honour. Of course, under the modern rules 
Diego [Maradona] would have won it more than once – 
and Di Stéfano and Sivori both won it, albeit under differ -
ent nationalities.’ (We should remember that it is only since Third time lucky  245
1995 that the Ballon d’Or was opened up to any footballer 
who played for a European club, regardless of where he was 
from. Alfredo Di Stéfano, who was born in Buenos Aires, 
won it in 1957 and 1959 with Spanish nationality and Omar Sivori, who won it in 1961, did so with Italian nationality 
despite having been born in San Nicolás.)
And since Leo belongs to Barça as much as he does to 
Argentina, he does not forget how valuable the prize is to his ‘home’ team: ‘The fact that I am the first footballer trained 
in the Barça youth academy to win this award really helps the “Barça project”, and is very important for both the club 
and the people who work at the club.’ As always, though, 
he thanks his family and his team-mates and dedicates the award to them. ‘Without them, I would not have won it,’  
he says emphatically. He adds that if he had been on the  
voting panel, he would have voted for one of his team-mates: ‘Xavi and Iniesta deserved this prize as well,’ he 
says. He especially acknowledges Pep Guardiola, saying: 
‘The boss had a lot to do with it. I knew him from Barça B  
but had never had direct contact with him. I believe he is a 
very intelligent man with a huge knowledge of football, and 
that he has the ability to transmit this knowledge to others in the best possible way. He is a coach who recognises the 
human side of his players, and because of this they all love 
him. The titles we have won with him have been key to this award.’
The Barça coach replies: ‘Leo is the rightful winner 
because as a player he is simply on another level. He has everything – he is tough, quick, scores goals even with his 
head [and who would dare to argue with this after the goal 
he scored in this way in the Champions League final?] – he understands the game and dominates all the records. But 
the difference with Leo is in his head, in his competitive 
spirit.’246 Messi
And the boss is not the only one who is full of praise. On 
1 December the whole world is talking about ‘the boy who 
became a legend’.
The best footballer of 2009 is crowned on 6 December 
2009 at 11.00am, on the set of the French football television programme Téléfoot. This is where Denis Chaumier hands 
over the golden ball trophy in person. But the day before 
the ceremony, Messi has a match to play against Deportivo 
de La Coruña, in the Riazor stadium. The Flea celebrates his prize with two goals and some spectacular play. The 
spectators in the old Galician stadium shout ‘Messi, Messi, 
Messi!’ At midnight, after a 3-1 victory, Lionel goes into the changing room for a quick shower, as a private plane waits 
to take him to Paris Le Bourget airport. His flight lands in 
the French capital at 3.15am, and a car transports him to the Hotel George V in the eighth arrondissement. It’s now 
4.00am, but Lionel doesn’t sleep; he spends the rest of the 
night listening to music (to be specific, Don Omar and DJ Flex), watching TV and chatting with his brothers Rodrigo 
and Matías and his sister, María Sol.
At 9.30am, the Parisian victory tour begins. Messi parades 
round the city, wearing a suit, tie and make-up, and stops in front of the Eiffel Tower before going into the television 
studio, where he is greeted by his former Barça team-mate Lilian Thuram. Then he is installed in front of the cam-
eras for applause, speeches and finally the presentation 
of the trophy. After that there is a photo session with his family, friends and Barça president Joan Laporta, as well 
as people from the club, France Football and the French TV 
channel TF1. The official car picks him up and crosses Paris 
again, heading towards TF1’s headquarters at Boulogne-
Billancourt. But before Messi can have lunch in the Louis 
XIII salon of the Hotel George V and return home, he has to give one last press conference. It is now that Leo, sitting Third time lucky  247
on a stool, confesses that he was a little bit impatient to 
receive the award, to lift the Ballon d’Or. Because six days 
can feel like a very long time. And he also surprises those 
present by admitting: ‘I would love to win it again; it would 
be magnificent to win one more.’
Well, the boy has a lot of faith in himself, but we’ll soon 
see. In the meantime, Barça have other challenges ahead. 
The first: ensuring they go through to the Champions League 
final sixteen. A very difficult match awaits Pep’s men in Kiev. It is below zero degrees and Shevchenko and his team-mates 
are still convinced that they can go through. It’s true that the 
Blaugrana have two useful results: they could lose by a goal or they could need to draw, depending on what happens 
at the Giuseppe Meazza in Milan where Inter and Rubin 
Kazan are playing at the same time as they are. But the main objective is to qualify first in the group to avoid the English 
superpowers: Chelsea, Manchester United and Arsenal. ‘It’s 
forbidden to speculate,’ declares Guardiola, demanding that his players respect team etiquette and aim only for the victory. It will not be easy, because Dynamo go ahead after 
two minutes at the V. Lobanovskiy stadium, due to an error 
in the Catalan defence. Everything becomes complicated in the worst possible way: the 2008–09 champions are only 
one goal away from being knocked out. But Barça do not 
fall apart, they keep the ball from the Ukrainians, they push ahead without stopping, until they manage first to equalise 
(thanks to Xavi), and then to claim victory. It is sealed by 
Leo with a fantastic goal from a free kick. They have been pounding on Messi continually. He had the opportunity to 
equalise early on, but he wasn’t able to take advantage of 
the bad clearance gifted to him by Shovkovskiy, and in the scuffle ended up losing his nerve in the area. Direct free 
kick in the 86th minute. It is the Flea who steps up to the 
ball: majestic execution, left-footed shot hammered into 248 Messi
the back of the net. What a shame that four minutes later 
Almeida tackles him from behind – the ninth time he has 
been fouled – and he falls to the ground, injured.
‘Anyone else in his situation could retire on the Ballon 
d’Or,’ comments Pep Guardiola after the match. ‘But Leo has an unmatched competitiveness in his soul, such ambi-tion, that he gets angry and even in difficulty he wants 
another goal and he says: “I’m going for it.” He goes right 
for it, straight ahead.’
The medical report states that Messi is suffering from a 
grade one sprain of his right ankle. He cannot play in the derby against Espanyol, and his participation in the semi-final of the Club World Cup in Abu Dhabi is threatened. 
On Saturday 12 December at the Nou Camp Leo is not play-
ing, but he takes to the pitch to parade the Ballon d’Or in front of the 84,554 spectators. Celia, his mother, is there to 
present it to him.
An emotional moment and huge applause, before the 
long trip to Abu Dhabi, where Barça will face Mexican club Atlante in the semi-final on Wednesday 16 December, 
Atlante having just beaten Auckland City 3-0.
The photos and the TV footage from the United Arab 
Emirates show Messi on the beach, in blue swimming trunks and with a bandaged ankle, training in order to recover in good time. Leo and the whole of Barça are immersed in the 
competition, concentrating extremely hard on training in 
the lead-up to the game against Atlante, who are known as the Iron Colts. All predictions favour the Catalans far above 
the CONCACAF champions, but the Barça fans have not 
forgotten the two finals they lost in 1992 and 2006. They need to psych themselves up from the start. That’s the 
plan, but things don’t go their way. Barcelona are losing 1-0 
after five minutes at the Zayed Sports City stadium. In the 35th minute Sergio Busquets equalises. Nonetheless Barça Third time lucky  249
cannot  handle Atlante. The Mexicans are defending well 
and they take advantage of the few opportunities they have, 
while the Blaugrana make fools of themselves and seem to 
lose the thread of the game. There is nothing to do but call on Messi. The Argentine, on the bench, was not planning to 
play unless absolutely necessary. But Barça have stalled, and 
Guardiola makes use of him in the 53rd minute. ‘I knew that Messi was coming on judging by the screams from the 
crowd. I knew that his presence could upset the balance of 
the match,’ Atlante manager José Cruz will say later, ‘but I wasn’t expecting him to do it so quickly.’
One minute, just one minute, is all it takes Leo to turn 
the match around and dictate the outcome. The Argentine manages to lose his marker while making a diagonal run, 
Ibrahimovi´ c sees him, spins around and offers him a beauti-
ful and precise shot out deep. The Flea does the rest: per -
fect control, perfect sidestep around the Atlante goalie and, 
of course, perfect shot. The ball sputters forward into the 
net. It is his first touch, and it is 1-2; the Mexican resistance is over; Barça has woken up; Pedro nets the third, becoming 
the only footballer in history to have scored in six different 
club competitions in one season; now the eleven Blaugrana players can dedicate themselves to delighting the crowd 
with kicks and touches. Pure virtuoso. The chances come 
one after the other and Messi allows himself the luxury of missing another head-to-head with Vilar, the Argentine 
goalie, whom he knows well from the Albiceleste. And, once 
again, Messi has been the genie. José Cruz explains it as follows: ‘Without Messi Barcelona is the best team in the 
world; when Leo plays they are from another galaxy.’ There 
is nothing more to be said.
Only the final remains, on 19 December; only Estudiantes 
de La Plata, the Argentine team who have eliminated South Korean club Pohang Steelers 2-1 in the semi-final. 250 Messi
They are the team of the bald ‘Brujita’ (‘little witch’), Juan 
Sebastián Verón, who was Leo’s mentor in the 2007 Copa 
América, the globe-trotter who has become the team’s cen-tral figure and dreams of repeating the achievements of his 
father Juan Ramón ‘La Bruja’ (‘the witch’) Verón. In 1968 
the Estudiantes striker led the ‘Rat Stabbers’, as they are nicknamed, to victory in the Intercontinental Cup, beating 
Manchester United at Old Trafford.
It is certainly a dream given the forces on the pitch, but it 
lasts 89 minutes – almost the whole match, almost a miracle. The Argentines find the goal and the advantage towards 
the end of the first half (37th minute), with a clean header from Boselli, who finds a gap between Puyol and Abidal to 
finish Díaz’s cross. Barça find themselves in the worst pos-
sible scenario: a goal down, no goals of their own, Messi with a yellow card to his name and, above all, a team that 
is lost and can find neither gaps in midfield, nor decisive 
passes. All the gaps are blocked by the Rat Stabbers’ trivote (a formation of three defensive midfielders). Messi is invis-
ible and Henry is nowhere to be found; Ibrahimovi´ c battles 
on with little effect.
By contrast, Estudiantes know exactly what to do: kill the 
game, block the ball and any initiative from the Barça play-ers and recoil into their shell, not conceding even the slight-est chance to their opponents, using all the tools at their 
disposal (fouls, clearances, letting the ball go out, substitu-
tions, little kicks) to waste time, to get to the 90th minute and win the cup they so desire for the second time. Barça 
do not give up, they show all their strength of character, all 
their determination, they try again and again until Xavi gets it in the box in the final minutes. Piqué passes to Pedro who 
heads the ball, which collides with the net. They have equal-
ised. Extra time. And Barça have won, the Argentines know it. Their faces say it all – they cannot hold up any more, Third time lucky  251
they cannot stand up to little Messi, who plays as though he 
were playing in a playground; he scores with his chest, with 
his heart, with the emblem on his shirt. He anticipates his 
friend Juan Sebastián Verón, and in the 110th minute he 
finishes Daniel Alves’ cross with that move which no one 
was expecting.
Why did he shoot with his chest instead of with his head? 
‘I was trying to play it safely. I saw that the goalie was unpre-pared,’ Leo will explain the following day in an interview with El País. ‘I thought it would be enough to put it in gen-
tly, just to the side of the area he was blocking. Luckily it turned out well.’
Simple as always, and as always the Flea looks up to the 
heavens and dedicates his goal to his grandmother Celia and to God for everything he has been given. After that there are only celebrations in the Blaugrana camp and tears 
from Pep Guardiola, who has been overcome by emotion 
for once. Leo is the first to hug him and thank him, but he does not forget his opponents. He goes over to shake hands with all the Estudiantes players one by one, ‘because they 
played fantastically, because they’re Argentine, because 
they were very sad’. Third time lucky. After the 1992 and 2006 defeats, Barça win the trophy for the first time in the 
club’s 110-year history. And the team are crowned kings 
of the world. No team has ever won six titles in one year. ‘Right now I don’t think we have fully realised what we have 
achieved,’ confesses Messi to El Periódico. ‘It will be difficult 
for another team to match this and, as time goes on, we will value it more and more.’
Barça have climbed to the top of the world, and Leo 
reaches the top once again on Monday 21 December in a snow-covered Zurich.
A few minutes after 9.00pm, UEFA president Michel 
Platini steps up to the podium accompanied by FIFA 252 Messi
president  Joseph ‘Sepp’ Blatter. Before he opens the golden 
envelope, one last look at the candidates for the prize. They 
roll the clip showing the faces of Cristiano Ronaldo, Andrés Iniesta, Kaká, Messi and Xavi.
Platini says he is very proud that all those nominated 
play in European teams. Then comes the most important moment, the announcement: ‘The FIFA World Player 2009 
is Lionel Messi.’
Third time lucky. Again. After coming second in 2007 and 
2008, Leo is the number one. The Barça number 10 gets up from his seat, buttons his Ermenegildo Zegna jacket, adjusts 
his blue tie and goes up on stage. Michel Platini hands him the prize and invites him to speak.
Good evening. First of all I would like to thank all the 
players who voted. It is a great honour for me to receive this prize, because it has been given by players from other clubs and other national teams, and that’s really wonderful. I would like to thank – and share this with – my team-mates [here the camera pans to Iniesta in the audience], this is the best possible finish to what has been a magnificent year for Barcelona, for my team-mates, and for me. Thank you very much.
Leo’s voice is shaking and he is smiling more than ever. He 
has won, and he has done it by a landslide once again: 1,073 
points, three times as many as Cristiano Ronaldo, who is 
second with 352, Xavi is third (196), Kaká fourth (190) and Iniesta fifth (134). The managers and captains of 147 coun-
tries have awarded him an overwhelming victory.
‘This is priceless, it’s priceless,’ declares Jorge Messi, who 
is accompanied by Celia, Matías, Rodrigo and María Sol. ‘To win a prize, or for the team to win a title, those are things 
that are possible to comprehend. But to win everything  at Third time lucky  253
once, that was inconceivable,’ says the Flea’s father. And, 
quite emotional, he explains: ‘It’s the perfect end to a per -
fect year – more happiness would be impossible.’
‘Planet Earth surrenders to Messi’, say the headlines 
the following day, but it still remains for Leo to conquer the heart of one particular country; his country, Argentina. Because ‘it annoys them that he still isn’t a “Gardel” when 
it comes to the national team’. Moreover, because although 
they have qualified, with difficulty, for the South Africa World Cup, the Flea has never shone with the Albiceleste. 
‘Because in the Barcelona shirt he is transformed, and in 
the Argentine one he is not.’ Yes, it’s true, in Argentina they accuse him of a lack of affection towards his nation 
‘as if his lesser performance were due to a lack of motiva-
tion rather than the popularisation of a player who, with the Albiceleste, has more chance of winning the lottery than 
receiving a decent pass. Maradona has imposed a Messianic 
model,’ writes David Gistau in El Mundo, ‘in which Messi, the child of another time, does not fit; furthermore, he left Argentina very quickly – as if immersing himself in a kind of 
popular idolatry.’ They do not realise that the problem does 
not lie with Messi, but rather with the team. They see him as a foreigner, they write ‘Messi is not Argentine’, because he 
has given all he can to Barça, he has given it his all in Europe 
and, what’s more, he has ruined Estudiantes’ dream, which was supported by practically the whole country. Yes, Messi 
has a problem with Argentines, or better, the Argentines 
have a problem with Messi. Leo knows it and it bothers him that they say that he does not care about the Albiceleste. 
And there is nothing that angers him more than when they 
say that he is not Argentine. ‘What do they know about my feelings?’ he exclaims. But this year the problem can be 
resolved. At the World Cup. All that is needed is for Leo to 
do what he does best.