179Chapter 29
You have to prove it
Conversation with Carlos Salvador Bilardo
Call him the oracle, the professor, the grey matter, the 
father of a new school of footballing thought (Bilardism, of 
course), or simply, the Narigón (nosy one). All of them are 
titles that Bilardo has garnered over the length of his suc-cessful career as a footballer and coach, as much in his own 
country as abroad. His philosophy is well known: ‘Winning 
is all that matters,’ and ‘No one remembers the runner-up,’ and of course ‘A final is a question of life and death.’ Now, 
after a stint in politics as sports secretary for the province of 
Buenos Aires, the medical doctor who dedicated himself to football has returned to his true love: he is now the general 
manager of the Argentine national team. And, as always, he 
enjoys reflecting on football in his usual frank and ironic way.
It’s possible that you were the coach who has had the greatest 
rapport with Maradona. You had it in the national team that 
won the World Cup in Mexico in ’86; in Italy in ’90 when the 
Albiceleste reached the final; and in Sevilla; and you were by his side in the 2010 World Cup. In short, you know Diego very well, 
and you follow Messi’s development, which leads us to ask: ‘Is Leo 
the new Diego?’‘In Argentina, and not only in Argentina, when a new player 
breaks onto the scene there is always a comparison to be 180 Messi
made with Maradona. Many people have gained the title 
of new Maradona … the problem is that they have to keep 
proving that they’re on his level. In his day, Diego proved 
he was the best in the world. Messi is doing very well, he’s on 
the right track, but if he doesn’t win a World Cup, as team 
leader, he will never get to Maradona’s level. Just as has happened with other great footballers who haven’t been 
crowned world champions. I’m thinking of Gullit, Cruyff, 
or Platini.’
Leaving the future aside, let’s talk about Messi’s goal against 
Getafe and Maradona’s goal against England, which you saw from the dugout …
‘They are two similar goals, in different situations: one at a 
national level in the quarter-finals of a world championship, the other at a club level in the semi-finals of the Copa del 
Rey.’
OK … but did it surprise you?
‘It surprised me the way that Spain went crazy for Messi. 
They couldn’t talk about anything else. And here as well: 
they didn’t stop showing it on TV over and over again.’
And from a technical point of view?
‘It surprised me that from the moment he got the ball until the execution, Messi maintains the same level of power. 
Maradona changed rhythm and Messi always moves in the 
same way. He does the same as all left-footers who play on the other touchline. When they get the ball on the right 
hand side and move inwards they have the whole width of 
the goal in which to score.’You have to prove it  181
Which of the two do you prefer?
‘I’ll stick with Maradona’s goal. Maradona had people com-
ing at him continuously, and the central defenders stag-
gered their attack: first Butcher and then Fenwick. Messi ran 30 metres without anyone trying to tackle him. That’s 
why he gets more touches with his right foot, his weaker 
foot. He leads with it, and then he always sidesteps with his left foot. It’s very difficult for the defenders to get at him 
because he comes bounding along and he goes very fast. In 
the end, the central defenders wait for him in a line, and it’s easier for him.’
Messi and Maradona … let’s consider their qualities.
‘From three-quarters of the way up the pitch, up to the goal, 
they are two players who can decide a match, they have 
quick, short steps, it’s difficult to take the ball from them and they also kick well.’
Can you compare them in other respects?
‘Comparisons are an eternal feature of football. How many 
times has Maradona been compared to Pelé, Platini or 
Cruyff in order to ascertain who was better? But times are changing, just like with medicine. The knowledge of a doc-
tor today is not the same as it was twenty years ago.’
Anything else?
‘I still don’t know Messi very well. With regard to Diego I 
can say that he is a man who knows his football, tactically and technically.’