269Chapter 38
Surprise
10 January 2011
Pep Guardiola’s face is an open book. His expressions 
illustrate a moment in time better than a thousand words. 
Emotion, surprise or, who knows, perhaps the disappoint-
ment of one man or an entire country. The Barcelona coach is charged with opening the envelope to reveal the winner, 
despite the fact that France Football wanted Johan Cruyff to 
do it and FIFA’s first choice was David Beckham. He pauses, then starts by saying ‘Ladies and gentlemen’ … then he 
eschews protocol and switches into Catalan. ‘El guanyador de 
la FIFA Pilota d’Or es …’ He repeats it in Spanish: ‘El ganador del Balón de Oro es …’ and then finally in English: ‘The win-
ner is …’
The cameras focus in on the three home-grown candi-
dates – Andrés Iniesta, Lionel Messi and Xavi Hernández. An unprecedented trifecta in Blaugrana history, testament 
to the club’s style and teaching traditions. Such a white-wash has not been seen since the late 1980s when Arrigo 
Sacchi’s AC Milan did it twice in a row. In 1988 with Marco 
van Basten, Ruud Gullit and Frank Rjikaard, and in 1989 with van Basten winning again, alongside Franco Baresi and 
with Rjikaard again in third place.
Guardiola tears open the envelope, revealing the card. 
It is facing towards the audience, inadvertently allowing everyone to see the name. A moment of confusion ensues 270 Messi
while the gaffer turns it over, before finally announcing: 
‘Lionel Messi’. Days later, when the journalists ask about 
the rumours which had Andrés Iniesta tipped as the winner, 
Pep Guardiola replies: ‘I think Leo is the best.’
On stage at the Zurich Palace of Congress everyone 
is surprised. No one was expecting it – least of all Lionel. Dazed and confused, the boy from Rosario gets up from his 
seat, buttons the jacket of his Dolce & Gabbana suit, adjusts 
his tie, sticks out his tongue like Michael Jordan after a great basket, and goes up on stage. Pep shakes his hand, 
gives him the trophy and a pat on the back and directs him 
over to FIFA president Joseph Blatter. Meanwhile, the cam-eras pan the audience for Lionel’s parents Celia and Jorge, 
who are holding hands, as well as a smiling Sandro Rossell, 
Barcelona FC’s president. The moment has arrived for the winner’s speech.
‘Good evening and thank you very much for your 
applause,’ says Leo, gripping the lectern. ‘The truth is … I wasn’t expecting to win tonight. It was already wonder -
ful to be here with my team-mates, and to win it is even 
more exciting. This is a very special day for me and I want 
to share it with my team-mates and thank them, because without them I would not be here. I would also like to share 
it with the people I love, who have always supported me and 
are always by my side. And I want to share it with the whole of Barcelona and Argentina.’ More applause, followed by a 
slideshow of the Argentine’s best moments, congratulatory 
remarks, and a family photo with the runners-up.
Despite all bets being on Andrés Iniesta and Xavi 
Hernández as the favourites, Messi has won the 2010 FIFA Ballon d’Or. It is a prize which rewards the achievements of an individual during the preceding year, taking into account 
past record, influence on the team and fair play. This year, 
for the first time, the trophy which France Football created Surprise  271
in 1956 has been merged with the FIFA World Player of the 
year award, which the footballing organisation launched 
in 1991, meaning that this year Lionel has been chosen 
by journalists from all over the world, as well as the man-
agers and captains of 208 national teams. The Argentine 
has been awarded 853 points (22.65 per cent of the vote), Andrés Iniesta 677 (17.36 per cent) and Xavi Hernández 
637 (16.48 per cent). At 23, he is the youngest player to 
receive his second Ballon d’Or. Alfredo di Stéfano was 33 when he won it for the second time in 1959, Michel Platini 
was 29, Johan Cruyff was almost 26 when he won it, Ronaldo 
was 26 when he was crowned in 2002 after the Japan and Korea World Cup, while Marco van Basten won his second 
trophy before turning 25.
‘Messi deserves it. He’s the best, there’s no doubt about 
it. I’m very happy, just being here is reward enough,’ says Andrés Iniesta after the ceremony, although he seems dis-
appointed to have missed out on the prize after coming so close.
‘Anything is possible,’ says Xavi, the bronze award win-
ner. ‘The truth is that none of the three of us knew who was going to win, but when Leo got it I felt that it was footballing justice because he’s the best player in the world, he makes 
an impact in every match. It’s not a big deal that I didn’t win 
it. Individual prizes in football are always unfair, because it’s a team sport. Raúl, Casillas and Puyol, for example, all 
deserve it and none of them have won it. At the end of the 
day, the prize has stayed in the family once again, with Barça and with La Masia – our youth academy.’
It’s hard to believe that none of them knew who was 
going to win. But judging by Lionel’s body language it must be true. The kid from Rosario has been perfectly calm at 
the gala during the lead-up to the announcement, much 
more so than he was at the same venue in 2009 when he 272 Messi
collected FIFA World Player of the Year. He gets into the 
festivities at the Hyatt Hotel with everyone else. He doesn’t 
give the impression that he already knows the result of the 
votes. He is convinced that since Spain won the World Cup, 
one of their players will win the Ballon d’Or.
‘I don’t mind whether it’s Xavi or Iniesta. Both of them 
deserve it,’ he says. Unlike Real Madrid manager José Mourinho who knew beforehand that he had beaten Spain’s 
manager Vicente del Bosque as well as Pep Guardiola to the best manager prize, Messi has no idea that he will be win-
ning his second Ballon d’Or. He thinks there is no chance 
after his World Cup performance. Which is why, when he comes onto the Palace of Congress stage as a member of the 
‘best eleven of 2010’ (Casillas, Puyol, Piqué, Lucio, Maicon, 
Iniesta, Xavi, Sneijder, Cristiano Ronaldo, Villa, Messi), he looks relaxed and nowhere near as nervous as he has on 
previous occasions.
It is only at 8.05pm when Guardiola announces his 
name that Leo realises that what he thought was unlikely 
has become reality. Father Christmas has brought him the 
present he wanted the most but didn’t dare ask for. He is 
embarrassed to hold the trophy and he is almost apologetic to his team-mates in front of the cameras and microphones. 
On the private plane ride back to Barcelona, already hav-
ing ditched the suit and tie in favour of a t-shirt, he lifts his champagne in a toast. ‘I want to toast Xavi and Iniesta,’ he 
says. ‘Although I won, they deserve it just as much as I do. 
So this is for them.’
Surprises aside, it seems that none of the other candi-
dates or winners objects to Messi’s prize. José Mourinho, for example, explains: ‘For me, Messi, Iniesta and Xavi are play-ers on another level. And when a player on another level 
such as Messi wins, everyone should respect it. Obviously, I 
would have preferred Sneijder to win after everything he’s Surprise  273
done in the past year, or Cristiano Ronaldo because he’s 
one of my current players, or Diego Milito, but I have to 
respect the choice that has been made.’
Vicente del Bosque, who was tipped as the favourite for 
manager of the year, tells the journalists: ‘Here nobody is a 
loser. It was very difficult to choose the best and I think that Mourinho deserves it just as much as Leo Messi.’
Real Madrid and Spanish captain Iker Casillas has a dif-
ferent opinion: ‘I prefer to focus on the criteria required to award the Ballon d’Or … the World Cup has always been 
extremely significant in these types of awards, except in the 
year after Spain’s win. The least I can say is that we’ve been unlucky. All the Spaniards are feeling slightly incredulous. I 
would have liked Andrés or Xavi to win, but we’ll keep fight-
ing for them to win it one day.’ (It is worth remembering that only one Spanish-born player has ever won the Ballon 
d’Or, Luis Suárez in 1960.)
The debate shows no sign of abating the following day. 
‘Spain is seething. It’s gold for Messi and disappointment 
for Spain,’ reads the As headline. And in its report, the 
Madrid publication notes that ‘protocol generally dictates 
that the FIFA winners are chosen from the country that won the World Cup the previous year, but it has been ignored – 
it seemed like a foregone conclusion.’ It later adds: ‘Messi 
without Xavi and Iniesta is a lot less Messi.’
‘Two giants [Messi and Mourinho] and a Spanish boy-
cott,’ complains the cover of Marca. ‘Blatter deals Spanish football a slap in the face for the second time in a month. He denied us the 2018 World Cup in December, and now 
he has left Xavi, Iniesta and del Bosque trophy-less.’ Marca 
has also launched a poll on its website: ‘Was it fair for Messi to win the Ballon d’Or?’ In fewer than twelve hours there 
are 80,000 votes – 68.2 per cent of which do not agree with 
France Football and FIFA’s decision.274 Messi
But it is not just the online voters and the Madrid sports 
media who are disappointed with FIFA. National newspaper 
El País also carries an article by José Sámano reflecting on 
the lack of silverware in Spain’s coffers.
‘Among the many ways of working out who was going to 
win the Ballon d’Or, South Africa 2010 should have been the best indicator. Not just because the World Cup is the 
best showcase for football, but because it was symptomatic 
of the three finalists yesterday. Messi has triumphed when he has played with Xavi and Iniesta, but he couldn’t do it 
without them in Africa. The two Spaniards made it to the 
top without the Argentine’s help. The two of them, Xavi as much as Iniesta, don’t just symbolise an attractive ideology 
about the game the way that Messi does. They represent 
a national team that has been consistently successful dur -
ing the last two tournaments. But it should be noted that 
since 1995 when the prize was extended to non-European 
players, in a World Cup year the winner has always been a World Cup champion: Zidane in 1998, Ronaldo in 2002, and Cannavaro in 2006. Maybe questions need to be asked 
about why Spain loses all the global sporting votes: the 2016 
Olympics, the 2018 World Cup, the 2010 Ballon d’Or … It’s a well deserved prize for Messi but it’s an undeserved indif-
ference towards Spanish football, a day Barcelona will not 
forget.’
If disappointment and ‘nationalist’ criticism prevail in 
Madrid, discussion over award criteria is also rife in Italy and France. And almost nobody agrees with the choice of Messi as winner. ‘Messi? Nooo!’ reads the headline in 
Gazzetta dello Sport, summing up the general feelings of the 
Italian press. For the tabloids, who had already crowned Andrés Iniesta as the winner, the Flea’s second consecutive 
win is ‘unbelievable’ and ‘unfair’ because it ‘doesn’t reflect 
in the slightest’ who the best player of 2010 really was. Turin Surprise  275
newspaper La Stampa writes that ‘football has lost its way’, 
since ‘Messi has not won any titles of late’. Messi’s 58 goals 
in the last season which helped Barça win their second con-
secutive Liga title and the Supercup against Seville seem to 
count for very little, as does the Argentine’s brilliant start to 
the season (28 goals in 26 matches). All that matters is the World Cup and the Champions League.
More than calling Leo’s abilities into question, the 
French and Italian media are keen to discuss FIFA’s new formula. The first criticism began back on 26 October 
when the 23 nominations were announced. How could 
Diego Milito, a key player in Inter Milan’s Italian league win and Champions League win, not have made the list? On 
the other hand, how could Asamoah Gyan (who played for 
Rennes and now Sunderland) be on the list with only three World Cup goals for Ghana?
And when the shortlist of the final three is announced 
on 5 December, the debate intensifies. The Italians don’t understand why Inter’s Dutch player Sneijder, winner of the triple (Liga, Champions League and Coppa Italia) and 
World Cup finalist with five goals during the tournament, 
has been left out of the running. (Later it transpires that if it hadn’t been for the journalists’ votes, Sneijder would 
have been the winner, with Messi in fourth place.) In any 
case, no one is expecting the Argentine to be on the win-ner’s podium, everyone thinks it will be Iniesta, who scored 
the goal which clinched Spain’s first World Cup title. But it 
isn’t … and the mutterings continue.
‘It isn’t a scandal,’ maintains UEFA president Michel 
Platini, ‘but in a World Cup year they should really have given it to one of the players involved. Like Paolo Rossi in 1982.’ (The year in which Italy beat Spain.)
But in Barcelona they disagree. ‘The undisputed number 
one doesn’t need a World Cup in order to win the prize,’ 276 Messi
insists Mundo Deportivo. ‘Gold for Messi, glory for Barça,’ 
reads the headline in Sport, emphasising that more than any 
individual player, there is one clear winner: Barcelona. The 
only dissenting opinion comes from weekly sports magazine 
Don Balón, which writes in its editorial: ‘Few people doubt 
that Messi is number one, but in 2010, Xavi – if Iniesta will excuse me – deserved to be recognised as the chosen one.’
In Argentina, for once, there is no debate. All the news-
papers sing Leo’s praises. ‘Messi is the best once again,’ says Clarín. ‘The world worships Messi,’ writes La Nación. ‘Messi 
is pure gold,’ claims Página 12.
‘El secreto de sus oros,’ or, ‘The secret of his gold,’ reads 
the front cover of sports paper Olé, playing on the title of the well known Argentine film El secreto de sus ojos – The secret 
in their eyes – directed by Juan José Campanella and starring 
renowned Argentine actor Ricardo Darín.
‘I didn’t go to Zurich because I was afraid of witness-
ing an enormous injustice,’ declares the president of the 
Argentine Football Association Julio Grondona. ‘But in the end, the gap between first and second place was huge. I 
wouldn’t have been able to bear it if Messi hadn’t won.’
‘If there had been three trophies, they would have given 
one to each of them, but there is only one and they gave it to the best. People will always complain, but let them 
talk,’ reasons Diego Armando Maradona from where he is  
staying in Mar del Plata. ‘Xavi always looks like he’s in con-
trol, he plays with authority, but it’s Messi who scores the 
goals. Yes, Iniesta scored in the World Cup final, he’s a great player, fantastic, talented. I would want him in my team. But 
out of those three, I would choose Messi ten times over.’ 
And when asked about the Spaniards’ annoyance regard-ing Messi’s triumph, the Pelusa replies: ‘They might be 
the champions of the world, but we have the best player in  
the world.’Surprise  277
The day after the gala, responding to criticism over 
FIFA’s decision and the feeling that the Rosarino has 
snatched the title away from Spanish football, Guardiola 
repeats Maradona’s convictions that Leo is the best. ‘How 
can anyone say they’ve been robbed by Messi?! Messi  
gives us so much,’ declares the Barcelona manager. ‘He 
allows everyone to sit down and enjoy themselves every 
weekend. He makes La Liga better and more respected. 
Could Xavi or Iniesta have won it? Of course, but Leo won it because more than 400 people voted for him. If  
people think it’s unfair, it’s just because they had a different preference.
‘Look, this is an art – people sit down to watch a match 
and they say “That was a great match, and that one, and that one”. At the end of the year they close their eyes and they remember a guy who gave them a hell of a show. And they 
vote. And there’s no point in rehashing it all. Spain is the 
world champion, and they were represented by six players in the “best eleven of the year”. How much more recogni-tion for Spanish football could you ask for?!’
Despite having two such heavyweight advocates in his 
corner, Messi still has to speak out and explain to one and all that he has no reason to justify himself because has not 
‘robbed’ anyone of anything, and he has done enough to 
merit lifting the trophy. He is speaking at a press confer -
ence, straight after a long France Football interview con-
ducted at home just after the ceremony in Switzerland. He 
pays no attention to those who object to his win.
‘It doesn’t faze me,’ he says. ‘I have the respect and rec-
ognition of my team-mates and my fellow countrymen. All my colleagues are happy for me and that’s the main thing. Spain should be happy because they are world champions 
and European champions and they have the best league in 
the world.’278 Messi
Regarding his team-mates, he says: ‘There is no jealousy 
between us. In the dressing room we are completely united. 
We are more than colleagues, we are friends. We know what 
relationship we have with each other, we know how well we 
all get on, we don’t have to explain ourselves to anyone. 
Everything will continue exactly as before, and that’s all that matters.’ He adds that in his opinion Xavi and Iniesta 
are the best players in the world. He regrets not getting up 
and hugging them on the night after hearing that he had won the prize, but he explains that he had a panic attack 
and his legs were shaking. The press want to know how he 
feels about his new trophy. ‘I’m very happy and very proud. Two Ballon d’Or awards at my age is fantastic. Or rather, I 
should say, unexpected.’
It’s Wednesday 12 January 2011, and the Nou Camp is 
getting ready for the Copa del Rey quarter final against Real Betis. It’s an opportunity to celebrate with the fans, to 
toast the trophy win with the Barcelona faithful. A gigantic Ballon d’Or made of golden balloons occupies the centre circle of the pitch. Leo, Xavi and Iniesta are on the pitch, 
listening to messages from their respective families being 
broadcast over the loudspeaker. Blaugrana captain Carles Puyol comes up to his number 10 and presents him with the 
trophy. Messi lifts the Ballon d’Or, waves to the crowd and 
poses for photographs while the coaches and staff give him a standing ovation. The entire stadium claps and cheers.
Eighty-five minutes later, the sound of ‘Messi! Messi! 
Messi!’ is even more deafening. The Flea has celebrated in the way only he knows how – with a hat-trick.