279Chapter 39
Simply the best
28 May 2011
What can you say? What more is there to say about Leo after 
the final at Wembley? The only thing left to say is that Messi 
is simply the best. And it’s unanimous. So much so that for 
once the English and Argentine media are in agreement, both using the word ‘king’ to describe him. ‘God save the 
king’ reads the headline in Olé, hopping on board with the 
current British love for royals, while the Sunday Times runs with ‘King Messi reigns’. Back in 2009 when he had already 
been crowned ‘King of Europe’, a fan in Valencia was dar -
ing enough to try to confer on him the title of King of Spain 
– in front of King Juan Carlos himself.
At the home of English football, the Flea leads a wonder -
fully lively performance, exquisite and lyrical, and the Brits leave the ground convinced that they have just witnessed 
what can truly be called a beautiful game. A match to tell your 
grandchildren about. A performance rewarded with the man of the match title, presented on the pitch, a performance 
which exhausts all the media’s best adjectives. It is so con-
vincing that the Guardian compares it to Nándor Hidegkuti’s performance at the same stadium, when he scored a hat-trick 
in Hungary’s 6-3 victory over England in the autumn of 1953.
Above all, Messi has been a team player. He finds spaces 
and moves between the defence to strengthen Barça’s posi-tion and unravel Man United’s game plan. He demonstrates 280 Messi
his wide repertoire: quick runs, passes in from the touchline 
to get round the opponents, assists, and attempts at goal. He 
gives the Reds’ defence a run for their money and he’s Vidic ´  
and Evra’s worst nightmare. ‘To be honest, we’ve never been 
able to keep Messi completely in check, so we had fair warn-
ing,’ concedes the Red Devils’ manager Sir Alex Ferguson at the post-match press conference. ‘We’ve never managed to 
close off the midfield enough to stop them in their tracks.’
During the first nine minutes the Flea, like the whole 
team, seems trapped on the line. He tries three times in a row to steal the play from Park … but on the fourth he 
comes out dribbling and Barça finally begin to implement their master plan. They destroy Manchester United, stay-
ing true to their signature style of quality, movement and 
exceptional class. Rarely has anything like this been seen in a Champions League final. ‘We’ve never been given such a 
thrashing before,’ admits Ferguson.
Lionel works with Xavi and Iniesta, and together the magic 
threesome begin to do some damage and take control of the 
ball, denying Manchester United any chances. Together, they 
delight the crowd with their creativity, precision and speed.
With a spectacular dodge to the right of Víctor Valdés, 
Wayne Rooney equals Pedro’s goal and offers some short-lived excitement to the fans whose hopes are still high. But 
it is just an illusion which barely impacts what the Blaugrana have achieved in the first half and what they still have left to 
do. All they need to do is go back to building up momen-
tum, passing back and forth and pressing their opponents. They just need to finish it off once and for all. And nobody 
can do that better than Messi.
Back again to the two midfield magicians. Xavi to Iniesta; 
Iniesta passes it to Leo. A seemingly inoffensive pass. One of the 812 (726 good, 86 bad) racked up by Barça in the 
final. Leo is 35 yards from goal. Three touches, and before Simply the best  281
United’s defender has realised the danger, he moves into the 
centre and closes in at 20 yards. Evra tries to get close, but he 
cuts past him and shoots. Clean, powerful. A left-footed shot 
from outside the area. On the last day of his long and glorious 
career, 40-year-old Edwin Van Der Sar sees the ball too late. 
He has no time to react. He dives and stretches as far as pos-sible, but the ball ricochets off the ground and swerves into 
the net. ‘I got some space, the goalie came out and luckily it 
went in,’ says Messi later. It is not the most stunning goal the number 10 has ever scored for Barça, but he celebrates like 
never before. This is the one that puts Barça ahead just when 
they need it the most. The United fans’ hopes are already melting away, even before David Villa later seals the deal with 
a perfectly timed arc which soars into the goal.
After his goal, Leo screams like a madman, he shoves 
away a microphone which is blocking his route to the cor -
ner flag, he kicks the advertisement boards, and if it hadn’t 
have been for his team-mates catching him and hugging him, he would have been on his way to celebrating directly with the Blaugrana fans in the stands.
He has scored 53 goals in 54 games this season (31 in La 
Liga, twelve in the Champions League, seven in the Copa del Rey and three in the Spanish Supercup). He is level with 
Cristiano Ronaldo, who has claimed the title of top Liga 
scorer with 40 goals – a title which doesn’t seem to matter much to the Flea. In terms of individual achievements, he 
places more emphasis on the various cups.
In the Champions League, he is in the lead: twelve goals, 
equalling Ruud van Nistelrooy’s record. The Dutchman scored the same number with Man United in 2002–03. 
For the third consecutive year, Messi is the top Champions League goal-scorer. In 2008–09 he scored nine, and despite 
not reaching the final in 2009–10, he was crowned top 
scorer with eight goals. The only others to reach the same 282 Messi
heights were the German Gerd ‘The Nation’s Bomber’ 
Müeller and Frenchman Jean Pierre Papin.
He has scored a total of 39 goals in his 59 Champions 
League matches, a fantastic achievement. And that’s not all. 
He has finally broken a curse: in all the eight matches he 
had played on English turf, he had never once managed to score until now. ‘Gaby Milito said that I was going to end 
my run of never having scored in England in this match – 
and luckily it happened. Scoring another goal in a final and helping to win an important title is really wonderful and I 
hope all the fans enjoyed it,’ says the Flea later.
Twenty-three years of age, top Champions League scorer 
for the third time, not to mention winner of fourteen other titles. But statistics and trophies aside, it is worth noting that 
when it matters most, Messi is there when needed, he is always a game-changer and he always plays to the best of his abilities.
‘He is the best player I have ever seen, and will ever see,’ 
says Pep Guardiola after the final. ‘We could compete at a very high level, but without him we wouldn’t be able to play such a high quality game. We have demonstrated that we are 
capable of working very hard, we have talent, and we have 
Messi. He is a unique and irreplaceable footballer. I hope he doesn’t get bored, I hope we can continue to make him feel 
comfortable and I hope the club continues to surround him 
with good enough players. I also hope that he can stay happy in his personal life, because when that happens Leo cannot fail.’
No, Messi has never failed and he has never been bored, 
not even for a single minute at Wembley or during the entire 2010–11 season. It has been a year tempered by the eternal 
duel with Real Madrid and Cristiano Ronaldo. Five derbies, 
four of them in the space of a particularly eventful month.
The first encounter takes place on Monday 29 November 
2010. It is a strange day for a Barça-Real match, but there are general elections in Catalonia on the Sunday, so it is better  Simply the best  283
not to compound the politics with added drama. Adverts 
about the game have hailed it as the most closely matched 
Clásico for years, indicating the possibility of a transfer of 
power from Barcelona to Real Madrid. Why? Because, they 
say, Cristiano is better than Messi, because Özil is a gen-
ius, because di María and Benzema are the two best strik-ers. Because Mourinho is not Manuel Pellegrini, nor is he 
Bernd Schuster or Juande Ramos or even Fabio Capello.
The Portuguese coach is the one who was capable of 
crushing the Blaugrana’s collective efforts from the Inter dugout just six months earlier, denying Guardiola and co. 
their ticket to the Champions League final in Madrid. He is the man chosen by the Real president as the antidote to the 
Catalan magic. A coach who, from the highest position in 
La Liga (unbeaten, and one point ahead of Barça on 32), questions Barcelona’s successes and accuses the referees 
and rival managers of handing them all the power.
Classic propaganda from the Special One – a show of 
bravado that costs him dearly. By the end of a cold and 
rainy night at the Nou Camp, the goals number five and 
they could have easily been six, seven or eight without any-
one calling foul play. The Whites have been tangoed in every direction. Cristiano Ronaldo’s free kick from 45 yards 
which grazes the outside edge of Valdés’s goalpost, and a 
shove against Guardiola after an offside decision – which creates a general commotion and an argument between the 
managers – have all been long since forgotten. He leaves 
Barcelona without having notched up a single goal in the six games he has played against them.
Messi hasn’t scored either, breaking a run of ten consec-
utive games in which he has scored, but he has been gener -
ous and helped set up goals three and four for David Villa 
with surgical precision. The Flea has ruffled Carvalho, Lass, 
Pepe and Sergio Ramos’s composure, and after a senseless 284 Messi
foul on the Argentine in the 92nd minute and a punch-
up between Puyol and Xavi, the red card finally comes 
out. Ramos has lost control, which is not unusual in such 
a game of nerves, particularly when the Whites know that 
Mourinho’s game plan is still under construction, his ideas 
still need fine tuning, and he still doesn’t know how to beat his eternal rivals. Interestingly, this is the first time a team 
led by Mourinho has been beaten 5-0.
At the press conference, the manager assumes an air of 
calm for once. ‘It is a very easy defeat to get over,’ he says. ‘It is not one of those games where we deserved to win and 
then lost, or where we continually hit the woodwork. There was one team that played well and another that played badly. 
You have to be good natured. When you win important 
titles then you have a reason to cry with happiness. When you lose like we did today you don’t have a right to cry, you 
have to get back to work. We’ll live to play another day.’ But 
the Special One will have to wait until 16 April 2011 for his next duel with Barça, the first in a marathon of Clásicos.
From 29 November onwards Team Pep has retained its 
place at the top of the league. With sixteen consecutive victories they have beaten the record set by Real Madrid’s 1960–61 team (which included Puskas, Di Stéfano, Gento 
and Santamaría) and they are eight points clear of their 
rivals. On 12 April, four days before their next Real derby, they beat Shakhtar Donetsk 0-1 in the first leg and 5-0 in 
the second, to make it to the semi-finals of the Champions 
League where the draw dictates they will meet Real. The Whites beat Lyon in the final sixteen, and in the quarters 
they dispatched Spurs with ease (4-0 at home, 0-1 at White 
Hart Lane). So now, as well as the usual Liga derby, there will be two more in the Champions League semi-finals, the 
first leg on 27 April and the second on 3 May. And on top of 
that, the final of the Copa del Rey is on 20 April.Simply the best  285
Let’s start with the 32nd Liga match day, the last chance 
for Mourinho’s team to get back into the race for the title. 
Eight points is a lot but who knows … a victory for the Whites 
could help to bring down their rivals’ morale and could 
have an effect on the remainder of the season. On 3 April 
Real Madrid suffered a devastating loss against Sporting which put them further out of reach – Mourinho’s first 
home league loss in nine years. But the Clásico is another 
story. Mourinho has been preparing for this as though it were a stage production.
The night before the derby, he appears at the press con-
ference in Valdebebas and does not utter a word. He lets Aitor Karanka, his second in command, do all the talking. 
He doesn’t even greet the journalists and some of them 
leave as a sign of protest. In response to the Madrid manag-er’s silence, Guardiola offers some praise of the opponent’s 
game: ‘I have never seen a team as good as this Madrid team. 
In four or five seconds the ball can go from Casillas to the opponent’s goal. They are better and stronger than they were the last time we met, they shoot more, they pass more, 
and in the second half of the year they have spent more time 
playing as a team. They use a diverse range of tactics which makes them more difficult to control.’ And with regard to 
the coach he adds: ‘Mourinho is very powerful. He knows 
how to play a wide range of styles. We should watch closely because this dictates the way we attack and defend.’
The Portuguese’s presence has intensified the atmos-
phere. He will undoubtedly be the decisive Clásico pro-tagonist off the pitch. On the pitch, that role belongs to 
Messi. At this point in the season, the little number 10 has 
achieved a fantastic score of 48 goals in 45 matches. He is the highest scoring Barça player in a single season, beat-
ing Ronaldo Nazario’s 1996–97 record when Bobby Robson 
was the coach. And he is ahead of rival Cristiano Ronaldo 286 Messi
by thirteen goals. The Flea has also made eighteen assists 
as compared to Cristiano’s seven and 43 successful runs 
against the white number 7’s 34, but his contribution to the 
team is worth more than statistics. ‘Messi gives us so much 
more than goals,’ maintains Víctor Valdés. ‘In the way he 
supports the team both in defence and attack. His hard work has a positive effect on everyone.’
Every time he plays he demonstrates more skill, bet-
ter teamwork. He gets more involved in the action and he knows when to speed up the game and when to slow it down. 
‘He turns the mundane into the extraordinary,’ explains 
Guardiola. But he has never scored against a team led by Mourinho and this will be his ninth game against him.
Penalty in the 52nd minute. Albiol brings down Villa 
in front of goal. He is sent off, and when it comes to the penalty the Flea doesn’t miss. In the 82nd minute, rival 
Cristiano Ronaldo doesn’t miss either. Another penalty lev-
els the score – it’s his seventh match against the Blaugrana and his first goal.
The score is 1-1 at the end of a weak and unpleasant 
match. Fearing another goal, Real put up a backline defence intended to block the opponent and create a struggle. It is a Catenaccio-style defence tactic worthy of the Italians. The 
only way to win is from set pieces or counterattacks. Despite having been ahead and having the extra man, Barça strug-gle and don’t know how to seal the game. It’s a draw which 
still leaves Barça an arm’s length away from their 21st Liga 
title, giving Real confidence in terms of what’s to come. So much confidence that the fans at the Bernabéu celebrate 
the draw as though it is a win.
It’s a rough match which has unleashed a string of con-
troversies. The first is prompted by Mourinho, who criticises the referee at the press conference and paints a picture of a 
web of hidden powers which penalise any team he manages, Simply the best  287
be it Chelsea, Inter or Madrid. ‘I’m tired of finishing every 
match against Barça with ten men. It was a very balanced 
game while we each had eleven. And then, as so often hap-
pens, with eleven against ten it’s practically mission impossi-
ble against a team whose possession of the ball is the best in 
the world. Once again, I am witnessing unbelievable double standards on the part of the referees.’
Mourinho aside, there is another controversy which must 
be taken more seriously. This time it’s Leo Messi in the spot-light, for kicking a ball into the stands. The ball runs away 
from him on the touchline, and instead of letting it go out, 
he sends it flying, hitting some fans in the crowd. The referee doesn’t caution him, but the fans voice their disapproval. ‘Are 
you crazy?’ exclaims Pepe, rushing over to him. The fans are 
amazed, they cannot believe what they have just seen. What’s going on with that Rosario boy? He rarely loses his cool on 
the pitch. Why did he pull such a nasty stunt?
The boy in question gives no explanation and he doesn’t 
seem to apologise either. His team-mates come to his res-
cue. In his defence they cite the extreme tension on the 
pitch, Leo’s sense of frustration in the face of Pepe’s close 
marking, and they highlight the Real midfielder’s five fouls against their number 10 without so much as a booking. 
These recurring themes will be heard again and again as 
the soap opera continues.
It’s 20 April, the day of the Copa del Rey final in 
Valencia. The game at Mestalla stadium breaks down into three distinct parts: in the first half, Madrid play superbly; in the second half, Barça shine; but in extra time it’s 
Cristiano Ronaldo and Mourinho who are the winners. The 
Portuguese number 7 gets round Adriano and nets a pow-erful header after a curling cross from di María. It’s the win-
ning goal, clinching the cup for Real for the first time in 
eighteen years.288 Messi
And where was Messi? ‘He was desperate. He tried to 
get things going from wherever he happened to be in the 
attack, but with no luck,’ says El País in its evaluation of 
his performance. ‘His zigzags invariably landed him in the 
clutches of the Real players. The Flea was controlling the 
play far too much – in the first half the team hardly passed the ball at all. After the break everything changed and the 
deep passes to Pedrito were excellent. Unfortunately, the 
solitary goal was ruled offside. In the end, he took advan-tage of his position as a leader, trying to control the play too 
much, and this allowed Real Madrid to make a comeback.’ 
It is a fair assessment, and it is also the first defeat in a final for Barça under Guardiola.
Seven days later, it is the first leg of the Champions League 
semi-finals. In the press conference at the Bernabéu the day before, Pep Guardiola loses his rag. Mourinho has sent him 
some message or other about the quality of the refereeing at 
the Mestalla match and the choice of referee for the semi-final, and Pep explodes, ranting for more than two minutes. This is unheard of for the coach. ‘Since Mr Mourinho has 
addressed me in such familiar terms and called me “Pep”, 
I’ll call him “José”,’ he begins. ‘At 8.45 tomorrow evening, we have a game to play. He has already been winning all year off 
the pitch. Let him have the Champions League. He can take 
the trophy home with him. We will be playing, whether we win or lose. Normally, he wins because his career is guaran-
teed. We are happy. With our little victories, which everyone 
admires, we are happy. In this room, he’s the bloody boss, the goddamn master. He knows more than everyone else put 
together. I have no desire whatsoever to compete with him.’
The next day, Lionel Messi is the master on the pitch, 
but at the press conference it’s Mourinho once again. Two successful plays, and two goals by the Argentine, bringing 
down a Real Madrid team which has resorted to conservative  Simply the best  289
tactics and possessive guarding of the area. Right from the 
start, the Whites move to block Messi’s game, but they don’t 
make any attempt to play their own. So much so that after 
a quarter of an hour, Cristiano Ronaldo is signalling des-
perately to his team-mates to move out of their positions 
so that he can play with them, and so that they can create chances for him. At the end of the first half, he is the one 
who creates the most dangerous opportunity for Real. He 
launches the ball from far out, creating plenty of difficulty for Valdés – difficulty matched only by a shot from Özil later 
in the game. But at this point, Ronaldo’s attempt is their 
only chance worth mentioning.
At the other end, Messi is playing as deep as midfield, 
being kept far away from the box where he can do the most damage. He keeps himself busy with runs and dodges which go nowhere. But things change in the 60th minute when 
Pepe falls with full force onto Dani Alves’s leg. He is imme-
diately shown the red card. He can argue all he wants, but German referee Wolfgang Stark will not be deterred. And two minutes later he has no qualms about removing José 
Mourinho from the dugout either. Expelled for his over-
the-top reaction.
Barça now have eleven men against Real’s ten, and Leo 
is able to get into the opponent’s area. In the 77th minute, buzzing between white shirts like a careless wasp around the edge of the area, he takes a shot. It’s deflected, Xavi 
retrieves it and passes it out to Afellay on the wing. The 
Dutch midfielder makes a run and crosses it in towards the penalty spot. Messi gets there first, beating Sergio Ramos to 
the ball. He taps it into the goal with his toe and it’s 1-0. Ten 
minutes later the Flea completes his encore. This time it’s magnificent: he leaves the centre circle, passes to Busquets 
who passes it back, he sets off on a slalom leaving Ramos 
behind and breaking free from Albiol, changes direction, 290 Messi
gets into the box, dodges past Marcelo and before Ramos 
can catch him he finishes it off in spectacular style.
Game, set, match. He is certainly the master of this par -
ticular match. Once again, Mourinho outdoes himself in 
the art of provocation, determined to dominate the press 
conference. ‘Real Madrid is out of the Champions League,’ he says. ‘We will go to the Nou Camp with our pride intact, 
with total respect for our footballing world, albeit a world 
which every so often makes me feel a little bit disgusted. We will go without Pepe, who didn’t do a single thing wrong, 
and without Ramos, who didn’t do anything wrong, and 
without the coach, who is not allowed to be in the dug-out … with a scoreline which is practically insurmountable.
‘And if by chance we score a goal over there and we get a 
little closer to staying in it, I’m sure they’ll quash us all over again. My question is, why? Why aren’t other teams allowed 
to play against them? I don’t understand it! If I told the ref-
eree and UEFA what I think about what has gone on here, my career would be over immediately. I don’t know if it’s because they’re patrons of UNICEF, or because they smile 
more sweetly, or because Villar [president of the Spanish 
Footballers’ Association] has so much clout within UEFA. The fact is that they have something which is very difficult 
to come by – power.
‘Why was Pepe sent off? Why weren’t Chelsea given four 
penalties they deserved? Why was van Persie sent off? Why was Motta sent off? Where does this power come from? 
Their power should be due to their footballing talent. That they do have. They should win because of that. It must taste 
very differently to win the way that they win. You have to be really rotten to enjoy that kind of win. Guardiola is a great manager, but he has won a Champions League that I 
would have been ashamed of winning. He won it thanks to 
a scandal at Stamford Bridge. And this year he’ll be winning Simply the best  291
his second thanks to a scandal at the Bernabéu. That’s why 
I hope that one day Guardiola has the opportunity to win 
a Champions League with integrity. Clean. He deserves it.’
Mourinho has put on quite a show. He has launched into 
a tirade which will again cost him dearly. On 6 May, UEFA’s 
Commission for Control and Discipline fines him €50,000 and decides to suspend him for five matches. One has 
already passed, on 3 May – the second leg of the Champions 
League semi-finals at the Nou Camp – Mourinho is not even in the stands. He watches the match on TV from his hotel 
room. And he witnesses his team being more daring and 
ambitious than in the other derbies. They have Barça on the back foot and in the first quarter of an hour they man-
age to keep them firmly in their own half.
But little by little Barça start to chip away at their usual 
game. Messi finally comes face to face with Casillas, who miraculously manages to block three attempts in five minutes, 
to keep his team out of danger. Messi doesn’t manage to score this time, but he is running all over the shop and keeping up the pressure. He provokes a warning against Carvalho and yel-
low cards on Xavi Alonso and Adebayor. He is fouled twelve 
times and he looks absolutely shattered. With or without the goal, he has been the definitive player in a match which ends 
in a 1-1 draw and sends Barça on their way to Wembley.
While the Blaugrana are celebrating the end of an 
exhausting month, the Whites are complaining about ref-eree bias and that network of hidden power which has once 
again favoured their rivals. They protest about Gonzalo Higuaín’s goal which was disallowed due to a supposed foul 
by Cristiano. Everyone, from Karanka to Iker Casillas, seems 
to have learned Mourinho’s tirade by heart. ‘This is Mission Impossible 4,’ asserts Cristiano Ronaldo. ‘Barça have a great 
team, but there is something else going on here. I don’t 
want to suggest any kind of corruption, but it bothers me.’292 Messi
Amid all the chaos, Messi is happy to be carried along by 
the atmosphere at the Nou Camp. And just when it seems 
like the excitement is about to become too overwhelming, 
Pep Guardiola comes over and envelops his star player in a 
bear hug.
It’s time to celebrate once again on 11 May. At the 
Ciudad de Valencia stadium, Barcelona win their third con-secutive league title with a 1-1 draw against Levante. ‘It has 
been a very tough year and we have worked extremely hard against Real Madrid, our biggest rival,’ comments Lionel. 
‘We have experienced some very difficult circumstances but 
we always know how to come out on top.’
But when he is handed the microphone at the Nou 
Camp celebrations on the Friday, he yells: ‘It is wonderful to celebrate another Liga title, but I’m saving my comments for the 29th, when we get back from London. Then I’ll tell 
you how I feel!’
And he is true to his word, one day early. He is at Wembley 
with the ball at his feet. He cheers when, in a noble gesture, 
Carles Puyol offers his captain’s armband to defender Eric 
Abidal so that the Frenchman he can wear it as he lifts the 
trophy. It’s a fitting tribute to a man who has just overcome liver cancer. Diagnosed in March, he underwent surgery 
and has returned in order to play at the home of football. 
Messi is laughing as he hugs the cup, holding up three fingers  for three European trophies. And he tells everyone 
that it has been a match they will never forget.
‘Today we were the best and we deserved to win. It is 
incredible what this team has achieved. Right now, I don’t 
think we know what’s hit us. We just want to keep winning 
things. Now it’s time for a holiday. Or rather, I’m going to the Copa América. But when we get back, we’ll pick up 
from where we left off.’