223Chapter 35
Happiness
27 May 2009
Between Lexington Avenue and Fifth Avenue, Pakistani cab 
driver Happy Cabby offers customers his life philosophy: 
‘To make others happy, you must be happy yourself. That is 
where happiness lies,’ he says, turning in his seat to face the passengers and tapping his head with his index finger. ‘Yes, 
it all depends on you to make other people and the world 
happy.’ Perhaps Leo has also felt this good news, conveyed over the noise of Midtown; one thing for sure is that the 
happiest year of his life began precisely here, in New York, 
on the corner of Fifth Avenue and 53rd Street, in the Saint Regis hotel suite, when Pep Guardiola convinced Laporta 
and Begiristain to let Messi stay in Beijing. Permission to 
participate in the Olympic Games has been without a doubt the biggest motivation for the Argentine and has created 
a special relationship between the Flea and the Blaugrana 
coach.
‘Everything began over there in Beijing, with the gold 
medal. He has been happier than ever before,’ says his father, Jorge. ‘Yes, that’s what Pep wanted, for him to get his dream.’ ‘I don’t know … to me he seems very happy – I 
think we succeeded,’ admits Guardiola. Indeed, the young 
manager was conscious of the fact that the key to the Flea being able to make the Barcelona camp happy was first to 
make him happy. And he has managed it. Txiki Begiristain, 224 Messi
sporting director of Barça, confirms it: ‘If, when he sees 
you, he jokes with you, then he’s happy, if he doesn’t seem 
to see you and looks the other way, something’s wrong. Leo 
has spent the whole year joking with me and with whom-
ever he comes across.’ And his team-mates say the same. 
‘He can only play his best football when he’s happy and comfortable,’ says Xavi. ‘He has been happy,’ adds Puyol, 
the captain, ‘but I have also seen him angry. You have no 
idea what he’s like when he doesn’t win!’ But this has not happened during the 2008–09 season, since Barcelona 
have won everything: La Liga, the Copa del Rey and the 
Champions League, the first Spanish team to win the triple. In addition, they have won the Spanish Super Cup and the 
European Super Cup. Leo has scored more goals than ever 
before in his professional career. Twenty-three in La Liga, the fourth-highest scorer after Diego Forlán, Samuel Eto’o 
and David Villa. And let’s not forget the 5,000th goal in the 
Catalan club’s Liga history, which Leo scores on 1 February 2009 in Santander against Racing. His second of the match, which secures a victory for Barça. Next up: six more in the 
Copa del Rey, the tournament’s top goal scorer, and he only 
played 452 minutes (an average of a goal every 75 minutes), and two in the Spanish Super Cup. And nine goals in the 
Champions League, highest goal scorer in the European 
tournament. In contrast to the previous two years, he did not sustain even a minor injury in all his 51 matches. In 
addition to all that he garnered individual recognition. The 
Spanish coaches voted him the best Liga foreigner, over Forlán, Dani Alves and Kanouté, and according to the club 
coaches who reached the previous season’s Champions 
League final sixteen, he was the best footballer and best forward of the continental tournament, beating Cristiano 
Ronaldo to the punch. It’s true that the team’s (spectacu-
lar) performance has helped him to win these trophies, but Happiness  225
ever since he put on the number 10 shirt, Messi has taken 
a step forward, he has taken up the mantle in the dressing 
room and on the pitch, he has given it his all, and done 
it all in an unassuming manner. ‘Ever since I met him, at fourteen,’ declares Blaugrana defender Gerard Piqué, ‘he 
has always been the same. He has never thought of himself 
as the best, but he has always known that we all consider him the best.’
At the Grimaldi Forum in Monte Carlo – dressed ele-
gantly in a dark suit, matching tie and white shirt – after having received the honour of best 2008–09 Champions 
League player, Leo comments: ‘It has been an incredible 
year. I have thoroughly enjoyed it.’ And to those who ask him what has been the most magical moment, he responds: 
‘There were so many wonderful moments that it would be 
impossible to pick one.’
Seeing as the champion does not know how to choose 
between so many happy occasions, we will give it a try.
27 May 2009, Olympic Stadium, Rome. Champions League 
final: Barcelona-Manchester United
Although Messi has one European Cup to his name, it has never felt like his. Because he was not there on the pitch on 
the evening of 17 May 2006 at the Saint-Denis stadium in 
Paris. The Flea was not granted permission to play by the medics, despite having repeated over and over that he was 
fine, that his thigh injury did not hurt any more. He watched 
the final, against Thierry Henry’s Arsenal, from the stands. And during the moments of joy, the hugs and the celebra-
tions, he shut himself into the dressing room in a huff. 
His friends Deco and Ronaldinho were the ones who got him out of there and tried to make him see that the victory 
belonged to him as well. Without much success, because to 
him you have to play in order to feel like a champion.226 Messi
This time it is different. Leo knows it and feels it. He has 
been a decisive contributing factor in bringing Barcelona to 
Rome. With eight goals which make him the tournament’s top goal scorer, ahead of Henry who has five and Berbatov, 
Rooney and Cristiano Ronaldo who have four apiece. Messi 
scores five goals in the group phase: two against Shakhtar Donetsk in Ukraine, to reclaim a match which had been 
an uphill struggle for the Blaugrana; another two against 
FC Basel: one in Switzerland, which ended up being a Barcelona attack-fest (0-5), and the other at the Nou Camp. 
The final one is against Sporting Lisbon. The Portuguese 
team suffered at the hands of Barça’s goal-scoring ability when they were dealt a 2-5 blow on their home turf. And 
in the knockout rounds Lionel adds another three, all in 
front of the home crowd at the Nou Camp: one against Olympique Lyonnais in the quarter-final and two against 
Bayern Munich, among which he displays without a doubt 
his best football of the whole season. The Flea does not score in the semi-final against Chelsea. The Blaugrana hero 
is Andrés Iniesta with his heavenly shot in the 93rd minute, 
but it was Leo Messi who supplied the ball to the Blaugrana number 8 in the ‘D’. At long last … after working day and 
night, the Barça number 10 has earned the right to be a 
team leader. The final pits the Liga champions and the 2008–09 Premier League champions against each other – 
two teams full of great players. Here are the teamsheets. 
Barcelona: Valdés, Puyol, Touré, Piqué, Sylvinho, Busquets, Xavi, Iniesta, Messi, Henry, Eto’o. Manchester United: Van 
Der Sar, O’Shea, Vidic, Ferdinand, Evra, Park, Anderson, 
Carrick, Rooney, Giggs, Cristiano Ronaldo.
Sir Alex Ferguson faces the final with his infinite experi-
ence, and Pep Guardiola, as the new sensation of the season. It is a match European football fans could only dream of, the best fixture possible, between two teams that put on Happiness  227
the best show out of anyone on the continent. And, as Leo 
declares, it is ‘the most important game of my career’. He 
says it just before catching his flight to Rome. It is his first 
time in the Eternal City, but he doesn’t like sightseeing – he is only going to the Italian capital to win. Although he says 
that ‘they are the title holders, so if there is a favourite in a 
match like this – which there isn’t always – then they are the favourites on this occasion’.
The media is promoting the match as the great duel 
between Cristiano Ronaldo and Leo Messi. They show each player’s Champions League statistics and maintain that they 
are playing for the Ballon d’Or in Rome. It is a chance for 
the Flea to overtake a rival who beat him by 165 points in France Football ’s Ballon d’Or vote on 2 December 2008, and 
who confirmed his place at the top by winning FIFA World Player of the Year on 12 January 2009. But Lionel doesn’t see it that way. ‘It would be reductive and disrespectful to 
two great teams, who are currently playing the best foot-
ball. Two teams who have many other players who can be decisive.’ In other words, there is no personal contest with 
Cristiano to see who is better. ‘I am sure he thinks the same 
as I do: the important thing is the prize at stake for the team. One thing for sure is that whoever wins in Rome will 
be heralded as the best team in Europe.’
All true, but the two know that they are being watched by 
half the world. Cristiano Ronaldo, who, despite not having had a wonderful season, is longing to show that he is still 
number one, is really buzzing at the start of the match. In the first minute he takes a free kick from 35 yards. Five steps 
back as usual, rocking on his left leg, and the Portuguese 
shoots. A great shot. The ball spins, hitting Víctor Valdés on the chest, and he’s unable to control it. In a final attempt 
to salvage the situation, Piqué anticipates the Korean 
Ji-Sun Park at the corner flag. Cristiano puts his head in his 228 Messi
hands. Before Messi has touched the ball, the white-shirted 
number 7 has given quite a performance: three shots and 
a yellow card for Piqué, who had tried to stop him with an obstructive foul. Manchester United’s best play is coming 
from Cristiano’s boots. In contrast, Lionel has yet to enter 
the game. His father, Jorge, sees it too: ‘I saw that Leo was out of the game for quite a while, and only once we scored 
the goal I began to see him get more involved.’ In fact, the 
Flea does not make an appearance until nine minutes after Eto’o has put Barcelona in front. He leaves the right-hand 
touchline, looks to move into the centre, and unleashes a 
cracking shot from 35 yards – gliding low just above the ground. Messi is playing as a dummy centre forward to force 
the Manchester United central defenders out of position – 
something Ferguson would later say ‘surprised us and made it difficult for us to mark him’. It seems to be true, because 
every time the Argentine has the ball between his feet, he 
causes problems for the English team’s defence. Barça begin to take control of the game and although it is not his 
best night and he only manages to infiltrate the forest of 
white shirts a few times, Messi is getting better and better. Manchester United’s French left back, Patrice Evra – the 
man who won them the duel with Lionel in April 2008 (0-0 
in the first leg, 1-0 in the return leg) – had already predicted it: ‘Messi is “hungrier” and he is a better player now than he 
was a year ago.’ He is right: 84 per cent of Leo’s passes are 
on target. His angles are close to perfection, so much so that a veteran like Ryan Giggs says: ‘When you see how they 
move you can’t help but be amazed.’ Then comes the 70th 
minute, when the Flea ascends to the Roman heavens. The smallest (it is worth noting that he is 1.69m) becomes the 
greatest.
The action: Xavi recovers the ball after a short rebound 
from the English defence, he heads towards the box, lifts Happiness  229
his head and sends in a cross with spin – smooth and pre-
cise. With his back to the defenders, Messi goes up for it, 
very high, and heads the ball in at the opposite post from 
where the goalie is. It’s 2-0.
The explanation: ‘When Xavi got the ball I got in posi-
tion because I thought he would pass it there: I saw that Van Der Sar was a little off his line and I headed it.’
The photo: Messi suspended in the air, immobile, high, 
very high, leaning back. The ball, travelling on its arc, seems like it’s going over the bar. In front, Van Der Sar, in yellow, watches it, open-mouthed, with a look of terror on his face. 
Close, very close, although out of focus, Rio Ferdinand, 
twenty centimetres taller than the Argentine, could do nothing to prevent that jump.
The precedent: Many people were betting on the 
number 10 scoring for Barça in the final. The bookies were offering very short odds. But few would have predicted a 
header. Up until that point he had only scored two. Pep 
Guardiola – who psyched up his players before the final by showing a clip from Ridley Scott’s Gladiator – had been the 
only one to prophesy it. At a press conference in Santander 
on 1 February 2009, the day before the match against Racing, when asked if Messi needed to score more headers in order 
to become the best player in the world, the coach from 
Santpedor replied: ‘I advise you not to test him because one day he’ll score an incredible header and shut you all up.’
The curiosity: ‘I didn’t see my son’s goal,’ admits Jorge 
Messi, in the stands with his wife Celia, Leo’s siblings and their respective families. ‘At that moment I looked down, 
I don’t know if it was due to nerves. I saw it afterwards on 
TV and I had honestly never seen him jump so high. But when did he take off his boot?’ Because no sooner has his 
son come back down to earth – and before being inundated 
with hugs from his team-mates – than he does a lap holding 230 Messi
up his new blue boot, as homage to Argentina. Meanwhile, 
the 20,000 Barça fans in the Olympic stadium chant his 
name. At the end of the match, he is the first to be hugged by Guardiola – the man who has been so good to him. And 
what of the other competitor in the duel? Cristiano Ronaldo? 
He finishes the match powerless and wound up, he argues with Rooney, and receives a yellow card for a pointless foul 
on Puyol. Later, hurt, and already in his suit, he says: ‘It 
wasn’t a match between Messi and me, but his team was bet-ter than us, and he was too because he scored.’
The defeated pays homage to the victor. This time, 
Leo does feel that the cup is his. He kisses it, he hugs it, he adores it, he takes it on a lap around the ground, and 
he parties until three in the morning with his team-mates, 
friends and family. ‘I feel like the happiest man in the world. It’s like I’m dreaming, it’s the most important victory of my 
life. I dedicate it to my family and to Argentina. This team 
deserves it after the great work they have put in all year,’ declares Messi. Great work, and some marvellous football, 
exquisite, as recognised by the media across the world. But 
the front cover photos and the big headlines are reserved for the Flea. ‘Messi, king of Europe,’ runs the headline in 
Corriere dello Sport, the Rome sports paper; ‘SuperMessi,’ says 
the Gazzetta dello Sport; ‘Messi and Barcelona on top of the 
world,’ reads the headline in La Nación in Buenos Aires. 
Meanwhile, Buenos Aires sports paper Olé carries a picture 
of Leo with the cup, with the caption: ‘Don’t ask me to head it.’ ‘Marvellous Messi is too much for United,’ reads 
the headline in The Times, which opts for the same photo as 
El País. A smiling Messi, pointing his fingers in the air, and a matter-of-fact headline: ‘Messi is the best’. And no one 
argues.Happiness  231
2 May 2009, Bernabéu stadium, Madrid. The 34th match day 
of La Liga: Real Madrid-Barcelona
There is no contest; no possible comparison can be made. 
Two completely distinct worlds. Two different ways of under -
standing football, but when they eventually come face to 
face, there is no league position that matters, and no run 
of winning results that counts. The cruel, numerical reality unfolds on the pitch at the Bernabéu: six goals against two 
– something that has never been seen before. The greatest 
humiliation in the Whites’ history. The Blaugrana had never previously scored six goals at the Bernabéu; the result that 
came closest was 0-5 in 1974, when one Johan Cruyff played 
for Barça. And to think that before that sweltering Madrid night, Whites coach Juande Ramos and his boys thought 
they could win it. They were intending to close the gap, 
move within one point of Barcelona and joyfully sing their way through their last four Liga fixtures. Deep down they 
have reasons to be optimistic: they have come a long way 
since Barça beat them at the Nou Camp on 13 December 2008 (2-0, with goals from Eto’o and Leo, obviously), rel-
egating them to twelve points. Despite an internal crisis 
which has affected the club, leading to Ramón Calderón’s dismissal, the Whites have broken records: 52 points out of 
a possible 54, eighteen games without loss. In contrast to 
the Champions League (they were eliminated in the final sixteen 0-5 by Rafa Benítez’s Liverpool), when it comes 
to La Liga they are still hopeful. True, this Barça team, 
together with Messi – who has already scored 21 goals in the championship – inspire fear. But when asked if he has 
thought about copying Chelsea manager Guus Hiddink’s 
plan (implemented in the first leg of the Champions League semi-finals) the Real Madrid manager insists: ‘I 
have no anti-Messi plan because taking him out doesn’t 
guarantee anything. We have to try not to let Barcelona 232 Messi
have a good day and work hard together as a team.’ It is 
hard work that seems to bear fruit in the thirteenth minute, 
when Pipita Higuaín puts them ahead. But it’s an illusion. The teams are worlds apart, because the men in blue-and-
claret shirts emanate football from every pore. They rep-
resent the beauty of the game in its purest form, the art of sophisticated play to the nth degree of potential. They 
play with ease, the passes are so precise and fluid it is as if 
they are in a training session. They ridicule the Whites. The white ball slides from side to side across the green carpet, 
bam, boom, until it finds someone who transforms it into 
an idea, into something magical, or simply into a chance at goal. Like Leo, for example, who lifts the ball lightly; it sails 
over Sergio Ramos, who tries desperately to reach it, and 
lands delicately at the feet of Henry, who puts it elegantly and efficiently past Casillas to finish. Good grief, where 
would Real Madrid be without ‘Saint’ Iker? The shots are 
coming from every angle and there are too many to count. It is a real nightmare for the Real goalie. Guardiola’s men 
waste opportunities: out of selfishness, as is the case with 
Messi, who really wants to score against Madrid (in his pre-vious three trips to the Bernabéu he has never once scored) 
and who fails to see his unmarked team-mate; or out of too 
much generosity, as is the case with Iniesta’s yellow boots, which, after a duet of one-twos all the way up the pitch with 
the Argentine, do not seal the deal, and give the ball to the 
Flea who shoots at close range – blocked by Iker. But in any case, by the 45th minute there have already been three 
goals scored. After one from Henry, and one from Puyol, 
the captain, the half-time scoreboard is closed by Leo, who finally experiences the joy of scoring on the Whites’ home 
turf. Xavi, the king of the night, steals the ball from Lass 
Diarrá in the middle. He offers it to Leo, who finishes it with a shot at the near post. The Bernabéu falls silent and Happiness  233
the sandwich which is traditionally eaten in the break before 
kick-off tastes more bitter. The game recommences and it 
seems that Pep Guardiola’s men do not want to be cruel to 
such renowned opponents. The Liga chasers bounce back momentarily when Sergio Ramos heads in a Robben free 
kick to close the gap. But it lasts for a matter of minutes. 
The Barça players control the game as they please. And the goals score themselves: because Xavi, the ‘doctor’, creates 
ever more beautiful assists; because Iniesta makes one drib-
bling run after another; because Henry makes a laughing stock of Ramos and scores his second goal; because Messi is 
like a spirit who appears on any part of the pitch, wherever 
you least expect him. Casillas is not expecting him either, and finds himself on his backside, while the ball slides into 
the net. That makes five, and the kid from Rosario can run 
towards the cameras, holding his blue-and-claret shirt up between his teeth, showing the one beneath, which has a 
flower and the words ‘Síndrome X Frágil’. For a while now, 
Leo has collaborated with the Catalan organisation that helps families who have children affected by fragile X chro-
mosome syndrome (FXS) – also known as Martin-Bell syn-
drome. It is a genetic disorder passed down through families that can cause serious difficulties: from learning problems to 
diminished intellectual capacity. It affects one in every 4,000 
boys and one in every 6,000 girls, and one in 250 women is a carrier without having any symptoms. It is not the first 
time that Messi is helping this organisation. In 2008 he was 
a patron of the book 39 historias solidarias alrededor del deporte  
(39 Stories of Solidarity in Sport), written by Catalan journalists 
who donated the proceeds of its sale to the organisation. But this gesture of solidarity and this goal dedication is beamed around the world and tells millions of people about a genetic 
problem as yet under-researched. It is an example of how a 
ball in the back of the net can serve as something more than 234 Messi
just a football result. But let’s return to a game which has no 
precedent, because Barça are unstoppable. Gerard Piqué is 
a good example, he is majestic at the back – he doesn’t make a single mistake – and up front he manages to score the sixth 
goal, the goal that brings sadness. Real Madrid’s Liga career 
is over. And no one will knock Barcelona off the top spot, since they are now seven points clear. And perhaps no one 
would have knocked them off even if the result had been dif-
ferent. But this match serves as a reminder of the show put on by Leo Messi and Guardiola’s Blaugrana team through-
out the entire season, in Spain as well as in Europe. And it 
closes a dark chapter for Madrid: the Whites just have to wait for the elections, a new president, or better still, a saviour 
(Florentino Pérez), who, with a few million, will rebuild this 
weak team, who up until this point had been champions. But there is something more: the 2-6 scoreline also tastes of 
revenge. The last time Barça visited the Bernabéu, on 7 May 
2008, the players stood in two lines to form a walkway onto the pitch in order to honour Real Madrid, who had recently 
been declared Liga champions. It was a morbid match. And 
it finished in a resounding 4-1 defeat – a double humilia-tion for the Catalans. ‘Before the match,’ declared Leo to 
the Gazzetta dello Sport, ‘we said we weren’t thinking about 
getting “revenge” for the walkway from the previous year, 
but evidently, deep down, there was still a thorn in our sides 
which bothered us. More because of the result and the way 
in which we had lost than because of the walkway … We removed the thorn brilliantly.’
13 May 2009, Mestalla stadium, Valencia. Final of the Copa del 
Rey: Athletic Bilbao-Barcelona
‘Messi is the king’ proclaims a yellow placard, which is being 
waved in the curve of the stadium where the Barcelona fans are sitting. No offence intended to Juan Carlos, king of Spain, Happiness  235
who is watching the match from the stands, but the Barça 
fans are right. In his first final since he joined the Blaugrana 
first team, Leo is crowned king of the pitch. He plays and 
he creates play, he scores and he creates goals. Nothing like Diego Armando Maradona did 25 years previously, on 5 May 
1984, in the same final against Athletic. At the final whistle 
(the match had ended with the Bilbao Lions winning 1-0 thanks to a goal from Endico), Maradona aimed a kick at 
Sola and set off an impressive fight on the Bernabéu pitch. 
Practically all of the players were implicated in the battle. Maradona – who was appearing in his last fixture in a Barça 
shirt and was packing his bags for Napoli – wanted revenge 
over Athletic defender Andoni Goikoetxea, who had bro-ken his leg nine months earlier. The result: an incredible 
punch-up and a three-month ban for six players. At that 
time the Golden Boy was 24, while the Flea is still only 21, but he seems more mature than Diego. He shows no sign 
of nerves and, together with Xavi, he is the central figure 
in the Blaugrana performance. He has a hand in three of Barcelona’s four goals, which put paid to Athletic’s dreams 
of winning their 24th cup. The Bilbaoans have the advan-
tage, and they proudly resist until the second half when, just at the right moment, Messi appears. Leo makes a beautiful 
pass to Eto’o – the Cameroonian shoots hard across goal, 
Gorka Iraizoz responds, the ball rebounds freely. Keeping incredibly cool, the Barça number 10 goes for the shot and 
scores. It is 1-2 – the deciding goal of the match. The Flea’s 
show continues: a perfect pass to Bojan, which he finishes like a pro to make it three. He also plays a part in the fourth: 
Leo provokes the foul, which Xavi converts with a fantastic 
free kick into the net. Then Messi looks for the pass that allows Eto’o to score – a reward for his self-denial through-
out the entire match. And were it not for Gorka, who saves 
it with his foot, the Cameroonian almost would have made 236 Messi
it. Barça win their 25th Copa del Rey. Mestalla is a scene 
of celebrations and Leo’s name is the most chanted. And 
next day Marca writes: ‘Messi hardly ever fails in this type 
of fixture, and yesterday he showed once again that he is 
the most decisive player of the Spanish Liga. The titles are 
beginning to rain down on this footballer who, without a doubt, will be the symbol of an era.’
23 August 2009, Nou Camp stadium, Barcelona. Return leg of 
the Spanish Super Cup: Barcelona-Athletic Bilbao
He didn’t play in the first leg in San Mamés, but in the return 
leg, a week later, Lionel is on the pitch from the first minute onwards. Alongside him is the brand-new Blaugrana sign-
ing: Zlatan Ibrahimovi´ c, signed in exchange for 45 million 
euros and Samuel Eto’o’s transfer to Inter. Without Leo, Ibrahimovi´ c and the injured Iniesta, Pep’s team returned 
from Bilbao with a 1-2 result (goals from De Marcos, Xavi 
and Pedro) and the Super Cup almost in the bag. In reality it is a strange final, since Barça should have had to play against 
themselves, being both Liga and Copa del Rey champions, 
but the organisation has stipulated that they should face the Copa del Rey runners-up, Athletic Bilbao. It makes no differ -
ence, because in front of their fans, Barça are in fact playing Barça: although they are persistent and they put up a noble fight, the Athletic players are mere testimonial witnesses. The 
Flea is on hand again to make an impact and, as on other 
occasions, starts off slowly, but when he gets going he is lethal – when he passes as much as when he finishes. He starts off 
by wasting a face-to-face chance against Iraizoz, the Bilbaoan 
goalkeeper. He follows that up by setting up the new arrival (Ibrahimovi´ c) in a brilliant sequence, where the Argentine 
passes and the Swede controls it on his chest, before finish-
ing it by shooting over the goalie. He sums it all up with a sen-sational move that breaks through the Lions’ defence. Xavi Happiness  237
passes to Ibrahimovi´ c, the striker back-heels it to Messi, and 
the Argentine dodges past the central defender with his left 
foot, in order to bounce the ball into the goalmouth with his 
right. He creates an impossible, fantastic goal – the goal of a real superstar. It is the advantage that has been a while com-
ing, because throughout the first half, Barça have not been 
very precise when it comes to finishing. They had been lack-ing shots on target, but along comes Messi, who kick-starts 
the party with his incredible goal and finishes it up from the 
penalty spot in the 67th minute. After a confusing exchange that results in a foul on Alves – according to the referee – Leo 
places the ball on the spot and makes no mistake in getting 
it in the back of the net, to the right of Gorka. The game is already won, but before the festivities begin, Bojan is able to 
add his goal to the celebrations. It is Barça’s fourth consecu-
tive title. And it’s not over yet.
28 August 2009, Stade Louis II, Monaco. UEFA Super Cup: 
Barcelona-Shakhtar Donetsk‘Leo left it to me. The assist was practically a goal, I just had 
to tap it in,’ says Pedro Eliezer Rodríguez Ledesma, better 
known as Pedrito. He is a 22-year-old Brazilian player, and Barcelona’s number 17. He arrived at Barcelona as a boy of 
fifteen, and is one of eight called upon by Pep Guardiola 
for the seemingly endless UEFA Super Cup match. The eternal reserves player just signed his first professional con-
tract with Barça on 20 August; he is the striker who won the 
Champions League after only playing one minute of foot-ball and without even touching the ball. Well … in the 81st 
minute Pedrito comes on for Zlatan Ibrahimovi´ c and in the 
115th, after a back-and-forth with Messi, he finds the perfect angle, the gap just by Pyatov’s goalpost, in order to draw a 
line under a gruelling match and win Barça their fifth cup 
of the season. But in reality, and with great humility  , the 238 Messi
little Brazilian recognises that the credit belongs to Messi. 
It has not been an easy match. The strategy designed by 
Mircea Lucescu, the sly dugout veteran, is working. The defence organised by the Romanian coach blocks succes-
sive attacks by Guardiola’s men. They have to wait until half 
an hour into the game before seeing their first result. After a free kick, Leo, dribbling quickly and craftily, sees his shot 
blocked twice by the Ukrainian goalkeeper. But the Barça 
number 10 and his team-mates never tire of looking for the gaps, undeterred by the fact that Lucescu’s men turn the 
counter-attack into their greatest weapon.
And here goes Leo Messi again, free kick just on the edge 
of the area. The ball is intercepted on its arc by the players in the wall. Leo and the other Blaugrana players protest. They 
demand a penalty. According to them, a defender has blocked the ball with his elbow. The first half ends and in the second 
half things are not much different. On the Stade Louis II 
pitch, in terrible conditions, the scoreline does not budge. The nerves are starting to show – so much so that after break-
ing away into the area only to end up in a tangle of opponents, 
Leo pushes a Shakhtar defender and finds himself head to head with Darijo Srna – an offence that earns him a caution.
There are five minutes of extra time remaining, five 
minutes until penalties, when Leo creates a brilliant pass to Pedrito. It is shot number 21 for Barça, and it is the vic-
tory shot. The Brazilian kicks it with his right while falling 
to the ground and sends this Barça team on their way to being legendary. It is the goal that brings Pep’s team in line 
with Barça’s five-cup team: the magnificent team made up 
of Ramallets, Martín, Biosca, Seguer, Gonzalvo III, Bosch, Basora, César, Vila, Kubala and Manchón. In the 1951–52 
season, coach Ferdinand Daucik won La Liga, the Copa de 
España, the Copa Latina, the Copa Eva Duarte (named after Evita) and the Copa Martini & Rossi. It’s a team that lives on Happiness  239
in the collective memory of the Blaugrana fans. Although, if 
truth be told, that group, led by Ladislao Kubala, won three 
titles on the pitch and the other two without playing. They 
did not play the Copa Duarte (which is today the Spanish Super Cup), since they were both Liga and Copa del Rey 
champions, and the Copa Martini & Rossi was the cup given 
to the team that scored the most league goals. By contrast, Leo’s Barça have won all five cups on the pitch. All that 
remains is the FIFA Club World Cup, in December, to com-
plete the set and break all the records. It will be the final chapter in the incredible Blaugrana saga.
But man cannot live on trophies and cups alone … 
although, for Messi, football is very important. But first and foremost are his family, both present, and perhaps … 
future. On this note, this year more than others, Leo has 
had his ups and downs. He has been extremely preoccu-pied with regard to the health of one family member (luck-
ily everything has been resolved, it was a big scare and 
nothing more), but he has also been lucky enough to spend almost two months with his family. ‘They were all here in 
Castelldefels, my uncles and aunts, my cousins, and it’s always 
lovely when the house is full of family,’ says Leo. And there’s more: he has begun a romantic relationship. He admits to it 
on 25 January 2009 on Hat Trik, a Catalan TV programme. 
In front of the cameras, a boy asks him the most difficult question: ‘Do you have a girlfriend?’ And, after sticking 
out his tongue, he replies: ‘I have a girlfriend and she’s in 
Argentina. The truth is, I’m OK and I’m calm about it.’ On 22 February, a month after his TV interview, he is seen in 
the streets of Sitges with his arm around a tanned girl with 
long hair. It kick-starts the race between the tabloids to find out the identity of the mystery  girlfriend. She is the first offi-
cial one after all the supposed squeezes attributed to him by the Argentine tabloids. Like the Rosario model Macarena 240 Messi
Lemos, before the 2006 World Cup, or eighteen-year-old 
Nerina, or the Argentine sex bomb Luciana Salazar.
Antonella Roccuzzo is a nineteen-year-old from Rosario, 
she is a Newell’s fan, she studies nutrition and she is noth-ing like any of the fantasies concocted by the tabloids. ‘I 
have known her since I was five, she is the cousin of my best friend (Luca Scaglia), and she’s a Rosarina like me. I have 
seen her grow up and she has seen me grow up. Our fami-
lies know each other, so I didn’t have any doubts,’ Leo tells Buenos Aires newspaper Clarín in May. He says that they 
have been in a relationship for a year. He has managed to 
keep it a secret because ‘I’m discreet,’ he says, adding: ‘and if we hadn’t decided to walk through Sitges during the carni-
vals, nobody would have known.’ But the news is official and 
the two are photographed again in June in Buenos Aires, where Argentina are playing two qualifying matches for the 
South Africa World Cup. There is a family photo taken in 
the city streets, with Antonella arm-in-arm with Celia, Leo’s mother. Marriage on the horizon?
No. ‘I’m not getting married for the moment,’ declares 
Leo. But the romance continues. We will wait … Leo has all he needs in order to keep both them and future generations 
comfortable: on 18 September 2009, he renews his contract 
with Barcelona for the fourth year running. He will receive more than 10 million euros a year – the highest amount for 
any Blaugrana footballer, and his buyout clause is increased 
from 150 to 250 million euros. A new contract that will ter -
minate on 30 June 2016, when the Flea will be 29 years old. 
The future is guaranteed. All that is missing is the cherry on 
the cake of the happiest year of his life: the Ballon d’Or and the title of best player in the world. ‘A dream. The best you 
can achieve as an individual,’ as he says in an interview with 
L’Equipe TV. ‘Who is your favourite for this year?’ they ask him. ‘I hope that this year it will be my turn.’