25Chapter 4
The same as always
Conversation with Cintia Arellano
She has bright blue eyes, fine facial features and a slim figure. 
She lives at 510 Ibañez passage, a modest house, where she 
receives her visitor with a friendly smile. A black dog wags its 
tail and studies the new arrival before leaving the bare living room and going out into the courtyard that backs onto the 
Messi family courtyard. Cintia has always been Leo’s friend. 
‘Our mothers were “womb sisters”,’ she says. Silvia Arellano became pregnant around the same time as Celia. ‘We kept 
each other company,’ Silvia explains. ‘We would go shop-
ping together and we chatted about the future of our chil-dren. It was my first. We were good friends.’ She puts a glass 
of soda on the table and retires, leaving the story to her 
eldest  daughter, who is 22 years old and who went to nurs-
ery, infant school and primary school with Lionel, always 
going to, and coming home from, school together, as well 
as to birthdays, parties and matches.
What was Leo like when he was little?
‘He was a typically shy child and he talked very little. He only stood out when he played ball. I remember that at 
break time in the school playground the captains who had 
to pick the teams always ended up arguing because they all wanted Leo, because he scored so many goals. With him 
they were sure to win. Football has always been his passion. 26 Messi
He often used to miss birthday parties in order to go to a 
match or a practice.’
And what was he like at school?
‘We called him Piqui because he was the tiniest of all of us. 
He didn’t like languages or maths. He was good at PE and art.’
They say you used to help him …
‘Yes, sometimes … In exams he used to sit behind me and 
if he was unsure about something he would ask me. When 
the teacher wasn’t looking I would pass him my ruler or my rubber with the answers written on it. And in the afternoon 
we always used to do our homework together.’
Then later, in secondary school, your paths separated and Leo 
went to Barcelona …
‘We all cried that summer afternoon when he and his fam-ily left for Spain. I couldn’t believe it, I was losing my best friend. When we would speak on the phone we would get 
very emotional and it seemed to me that living over there 
in Europe was very hard for him. But when he returned we chatted and I realised that it was a very important experi-
ence for him, it helped him to mature a lot. It put a strain 
on his family, so much so that Celia and María Sol came back. He told me that he integrated because there were kids 
his age who played football. And for him that was funda-
mental. He wanted to be a footballer and he’s made it.’
Cintia gets up, and returns with a folder full of pho-
tos and newspaper cuttings. There the two of them are as babies: Leo with a dummy and a blue bib; behind them, an enormous doll dressed as a bride; next to him, Cintia, in 
nappies and pigtails. And there, at infant school in 1992, 
in the class photo, all of them dressed in blue uniform. The same as always  27
Dressed up for the carnival, him in a policeman’s helmet 
with a fake moustache, her made up, with huge glasses  
and a white dress. And then there are numerous newspaper cuttings: ‘The new Maradona’, ‘Waiting for the Messiah’, ‘What planet have you come from’, until we reach the head-
lines of July 2005, the victory in the FIFA Under 20 World 
Cup.
‘I was the one who organised the party here in the neigh-
bourhood. We went round all the neighbours and asked for money to buy confetti, firecrackers and paint. We wrote “Leo, the pride of the nation” in white letters on the ground, 
and we put up a banner in his street that said “Welcome 
champion”. He was supposed to arrive at one in the morn-ing, the whole neighbourhood was waiting for him, it was 
winter, it was bitterly cold and he didn’t arrive. Some people 
got tired and went home. We stayed there waiting until five in the morning, when a white van turned into the street 
beeping its horn. At that moment all the television cameras 
were switched on. People started to scream, people were throwing firecrackers, playing the drums and yelling: “Leo’s 
here, Leo’s here.” He was exhausted. He wasn’t expecting 
such a reception, but it made him really happy.’
Yet more cuttings and more photos of Leo, as well as 
some tough pages full of criticism after the Argentina-Germany match at the 2006 World Cup, after that image of Leo sitting alone on the bench.
‘They said that he was impulsive, that he didn’t integrate 
into the group. They tore him to pieces. But it’s not like that. Only someone who knows him knows what he feels. 
When he’s not doing so well Leo is a little bit solitary, he 
retreats, he withdraws into himself. He was like that even with me sometimes. It was like drawing blood from a stone 
trying to find out what was going on inside. But no matter 
what, Leo always made me smile.’28 Messi
And he hasn’t changed?
‘No, to me he’s the same as always, shy and quiet. He’s the 
same Leo I grew up with. The only difference is that before when he used to come here he would grab his bike and 
come through town; now he takes the car because people  
don’t leave him in peace. He can’t believe the madness he 
generates. The same people from his neighbourhood now 
take photos of him, the girls wait outside his front door to 
say hello to him. The boys want to be like him. It surprises and amazes me when I hear what they scream in Spain or 
when he plays with the national team. So when someone 
asks me about him, I usually prefer to keep quiet. I don’t want them to think I’m gossiping or trying to get myself 
noticed. No, for me Leo is a humble, lifelong friend, who 
still has no idea that he is so famous.’