111Chapter 19
A breath of fresh air
Conversation with Fernando Solanas, Head of 
Sports Marketing at Adidas Iberia
Is it true that Nike and Adidas, the giants of the sports store 
world, ended up in court over Messi?
‘It’s true, but let me tell you the story from the beginning. 
It was in 2003 that I first made contact with Jorge, Lionel’s father and agent. At that time Messi had a contract with 
Nike, just for sportswear: in exchange for his image, they 
supplied him with trainers, clothes, etc. Jorge told me that they were happy with the American firm, who had made the 
bid for him two years earlier when he was only fourteen and 
played in the FC Barcelona youth team. It had not occurred to him to change sponsor. But I did not want to lose the 
contact and the following year (when Nike’s sportswear 
contract was ending) I spoke to him again, making him see that there was good profit to be made if he negotiated with 
us.’
Let me see if I’ve got this right. In 2003 Messi was only sixteen 
years old and already a multinational company like Adidas was 
trying to ‘steal’ him from the competition …‘It’s our job to be on the lookout for the stars of the future. 
That’s why we go to the experts in every sector. I played 112 Messi
football. I love the sport and I might have a fairly good eye 
for players, but when it comes to deciding where to invest, 
I trust only the opinions of the coaches, the scouts, the  
“talent-hunters”: in short, those who work alongside  
the youngsters. And five years ago all of them were saying 
that Messi was the gem in the Barça youth squad. They pre-dicted his explosion … I couldn’t waste any time.’
OK, let’s continue with the story …
‘Once the Nike contract has ended, Jorge decides not to 
sign with anyone else. He keeps receiving sports products 
from Nike because they sponsor Barcelona, but he wants to wait before making a deal for his son. I see him play in the 
Under 20 World Cup in 2005, wearing Nike gear. Messi is 
already a first-team player at Barça and things go very well for him in Holland. At that moment I think some very inter -
esting offers start to land on Messi’s doorstep from other European clubs, like Juventus.’
And what happens in terms of sponsorship?
‘Two days before leaving for Holland, Jorge signs a letter 
of intention with Nike. Then things get complicated: they negotiate for many months without reaching an agree-
ment … until we intervene. We make an interesting offer, 
both in terms of money and in terms of representing the Germany World Cup. And in January 2006 we sign a con-
tract until June 2010.’
They say that in terms of money … Adidas offered five times the 
annual income offered by Nike … and we’re talking more than a 
million dollars – true or false?‘The figures are always confidential, we can’t reveal the con-
ditions of the contract.’A breath of fresh air  113
Alright, let’s continue with the story because this is where the war 
between Adidas and Nike begins. Why, when Messi first wore his 
Adidas Predator outfit and scored a goal against Zaragoza in the 
Copa del Rey did Nike scream at the top of their voices: ‘Messi has a deal with us and we’re going to do whatever it takes for him to 
honour it’?
‘Yes. Nike took the case to the courts and the judge cau-tiously ruled that Leo had to play in Nike equipment, so as 
not to hurt the supposed rights of the American firm.’
But in the end you won the battle, correct?
‘I wouldn’t call it a battle, but yes, the latest ruling was the 
one that determined Messi had no obligations towards Nike. Since then we have gradually started working with Leo.’
What does Leo represent to the football world and to sports 
marketing?
‘Leo is something new, a breath of fresh air, the new 
Maradona. On the pitch it is like he is animated. In short, a very attractive personality.’
No one disputes his appeal on a footballing level, but as a 
personality … isn’t he a very shy and modest kid?
‘That’s exactly what people like about him, that he’s normal, 
he’s a kid who loves being with his family and friends, who plays PlayStation and doesn’t notice the buzz he generates. 
His simple nature is his greatest advantage. Too often sports 
stars seem to inhabit their own universe, very far from us. Leo, with his shyness, is close to all the fans.’
Let’s talk about your campaign, ‘Impossible is Nothing’, in which 
Messi is one of the key figures.
‘They are real stories that our icons tell. The idea is to con-
vey to the consumer that nothing is impossible. And in this 114 Messi
case Leo tells his life story: an eleven-year-old boy who had 
the physical stature of an eight-year-old, but who didn’t let 
that stand in the way of succeeding. Through hard work, perseverance, willpower, nothing is impossible. Leo is a per -
fect example. It is worth remembering that at thirteen he crossed an ocean, arrived at Barcelona, and after starting in the youth teams he has made it as a global football star.’
What does Leo sell?
‘Authenticity.’
Where does he sell?
‘He is strongest in Latin America, Spain and Asia, especially 
in Japan.’
Why Japan?
‘Because Leo is small. It sounds silly, but it isn’t. The Japanese 
identify with a little player who is skilled with the ball.’
How are things going in Europe?
‘His image is growing. He has a lot of clout – in England, for example, thanks to the Champions League matches against 
Chelsea and Manchester United.’
Aren’t you worried that he will burn out, that media overexposure 
and publicity could damage such a young footballer, as has 
happened in many other cases?‘We will have to take good care of him and treat him well.’