205Chapter 34
The long journey towards gold
22 May 2008
‘I’m excited because it’s the Argentine national team. And 
I always said that I want to play for my country. It’s the 
Olympics … it’s an opportunity a player gets once in his 
career, if he gets it, right? It’s possible that I might get the chance to be there and I would love to go. What if there’s 
a conflict with the club? I don’t think there will be. I think 
the club understands how I feel and … there won’t be any problems.’
It is just after 1.30pm on a grey Thursday. There is 
quite a buzz in the Hesperia Tower hotel in Barcelona, close to El Prat airport. Today sees the first gathering of 
the Argentine Under 23 squad. It is the beginning of an 
Olympic adventure for Sergio ‘el Checho’ Batista’s boys. There is an atmosphere of reunion and re-acquaintance, 
between players, between players and coaches, between 
footballers and journalists – who have been positioned in the foyer for a while now in order to get an interview.
An exhausting initial training session is followed by a 
procession of white shirts towards the dining room; after the meal there is a press conference in the enormous audi-
torium. In theory it is only an introduction to the Catalunya-
Argentina friendly, which will be played two days later at the Nou Camp, on Saturday 24 May. The adverts are promoting 
it as a challenge between two extremely young Barça stars 206 Messi
– Lionel Messi on the one hand, and Bojan Krki´ c on the 
other. But the sixteen-year-old from Linyola will not be on 
the pitch. Catalan selector Pere Gratacós would prefer not 
to play him to avoid a headache, since Bojan turned down 
Luis Aragonés’ call for him to play for the Spanish national 
team in the European championship, claiming tiredness. Leo is there, however, and becomes the main protagonist 
before a crammed audience of Catalan and Argentine 
journalists. Checho is sitting beside him and observes the reporters pestering him with questions about all the issues 
currently facing Barcelona: the new coach, the possible 
departures of Ronaldinho and Deco – two team-mates with whom he is very close – before finally arriving at the topic 
of the Olympics. Messi speaks openly. He wants to go to 
Beijing. He doesn’t think that missing Barça’s Champions League qualifier will be too much of a strain on the team 
(the first leg is on 12 or 13 August, the return leg is on 
the 26th or 27th, against an unknown team). On the con-trary he maintains that ‘Barcelona do not depend solely on me to win matches. They want to form a team that aspires 
to win all the titles, if a player is absent on one particular 
day I don’t think anything will come of it.’ He is convinced that the club as much as the Barça fans will understand his 
decision.
He is wrong. Very wrong. It is immediately apparent 
upon hearing the comments from those in the room. While the journalists who have come from Buenos Aires might be 
satisfied with the position Leo has taken, happy that he has announced his Olympic dream and reaffirmed his desire to 
go for gold with the Albiceleste, the Catalan reporters are 
annoyed. They are coming off the back of two bad seasons for the club. The titles have vanished into oblivion one by 
one; the team that once dazzled the world has disappeared 
among dressing-room disputes and diatribes; its stars have The long journey towards gold  207
been extinguished, and others, like Ronaldinho, have not 
made the headlines for months; Frank Rijkaard, the coach 
who directed the show for five years, has been dismissed; 
they have announced the departure of the superstars who led the Blaugrana to victory in the Champions League and 
La Liga; in summary, Barça – as a club and as a team – is 
going through a critical stage of much instability. At a time like this, it is difficult to digest Leo’s decision. ‘But how … 
can Barcelona play the Champions League qualifiers with him not there? Who is paying him, Barça or Argentina?’ And they dredge up the topic of the possible 8-million-euros-a-
season ‘megacontract’, which Messi is to sign. And there’s 
more: ‘Messi is the player around whom the Blaugrana want to reconstruct a winning team, and he says “ciao” and he 
goes off to China. And if he gets injured, as has happened 
to him twice in this championship, who will pay?’
All this, and more, can be heard in the hallways of the 
Hesperia hotel. Few can stand the idea that the future Barça number 10 (everyone reckons he will inherit Ronaldinho’s shirt number), the player who was so needed during long 
weeks of misfortune, can abandon them in this way.
The following day, in the Catalan sports papers, the 
headlines about Leo’s declarations are mounting up. But they seem to understand the Flea’s position. In keeping 
with their journalistic duty, many of them recall the regula-tions. ‘In Messi’s case, it is not possible for Barça to refuse 
because he is under 23 years old,’ writes Sport.
In the offices of the Nou Camp they do not get the 
message. They have no intention of losing Leo during the Champions League qualifiers. They immediately consult 
the guidelines to see if there is any possibility of not con-ceding to the Argentine team. Leo’s father Jorge Messi, who 
meets with Barça technical secretary Txiki Begiristain a few 
days later, announces: ‘Leo will do whatever he is obliged 208 Messi
to do, to avoid being penalised by either party.’ In other 
words, the decision to go to the Games does not depend 
solely on his son. If the Catalan club finds a way to prevent him, Lionel will have to resign himself to the fact and kiss 
his Olympic dream goodbye.
This is just the beginning of a tug-of-war between the 
AFA and Barcelona, which will go on for more than two months. In the meantime, having played the friendly against 
Catalunya (a match won by Pocho Lavezzi with one of his usual goals), Leo leaves for Argentina in a hurry. Coco Basile 
and the national team await him. The programme includes 
a mini tour of America and two qualifying matches for the 2010 World Cup. First, an important victory over Mexico; 
then a goalless draw against the United States at the New 
Jersey Giants’ stadium. And then come the matches that matter: against Ecuador at the Monumental stadium and 
against Brazil at Belo Horizonte’s Mieirão. The Albiceleste 
do not shine: two hard-earned draws.
Messi’s commitments with the national team have fin-
ished; it is holiday time, time for advertising promotions and matches like the one he arranged with Ronaldinho on 28 June at the Monumental de Maturín in Venezuela, 
the second instalment of a charity match between Messi’s 
friends and Ronnie’s friends. A 7-7 result and a farewell to them being team-mates.
It is 2 July. Sergio Batista announces the list of the 
eighteen players who make up the national squad for the Olympics. Leo Messi is on it. It could be an end to the dis-
pute. Julio Grondona, president of the AFA, also wants him 
there. ‘Argentina will call up Messi in accordance with FIFA regulation, which states that he has to be with his national 
team at the Olympic Games. If I don’t have Messi I don’t 
have a team, and if he doesn’t come and play with us, it will spark a precedent which will prompt other teams to ask for The long journey towards gold  209
their players and we don’t want that to happen either. It is 
logical for him to play for Argentina, since Barcelona have 
him for the whole year. There are very few competitions in 
which Messi can play with his country.’
Sounds straightforward, doesn’t it? But Barcelona have 
no intention of waving the white flag. ‘We have read up on it, we have attended meetings with the AFA and, ultimately, the regulations will be adhered to. If the regulations favour 
us, Messi will play in the Champions League qualifier,’ 
maintains Begiristain.
On 15 July, Barcelona is back in session, with Pep 
Guardiola and without Ronaldinho. The Brazilian only has to complete his medical before he can play for Milan. It is a transfer which allows him to go to the Olympic Games. 
Barça had refused, since Ronnie is over 23 and FIFA does 
not oblige clubs to relinquish players older than 23. But Berlusconi’s club will relinquish him. ‘He’s so lucky,’ Leo 
must be thinking, not knowing what fate has in store for 
him. ‘The club will not talk to him about the matter, it’s a negotiation between Barcelona and the AFA,’ says his 
mother, Celia. ‘And Leo won’t speak, he won’t ask. He just 
waits for their answer.’ And for the moment he goes to St Andrews, Scotland, where Barcelona’s pre-season begins. 
It is 21 July. Two days later, Leo should be in Tokyo with 
the Olympic squad: a friendly against Japan is scheduled for 29 July. But Barça have not agreed. They have pro-
posed to the Argentine Federation that they will relinquish 
the player after the American tour and after the first leg of the Champions League qualifier. If the result is good 
and favourable, of course. Messi would miss the first three 
matches of the Olympic qualifying stages, but as long as Argentina qualify, he could be there for the quarter-finals. 
It is a proposition that the AFA does not want to consider. 
The most they will accept is that Leo will take part in the 210 Messi
Barça pre-season, and then join the national team before 
the first match. They will not entertain the possibility that 
Messi won’t go to the Games. They think that Barça will not want to come up against them, FIFA and, above all, the 
player, who has always expressed his desire to participate in 
the Olympics.
On 23 July, Joseph Blatter makes his contribution to 
the drama. ‘The relinquishing of players under 23 has always been compulsory for all clubs. This same principle applies for Beijing 2008,’ says the FIFA president, adding: 
‘Obstructing the participation of players under 23 years of 
age in the final phase of the tournament could be inter -
preted as an attack on the spirit of the Olympics.’ But this 
still is not the final word, since the PFL can refute this 
argument. ‘There is no legal obligation to relinquish foot-ballers. In contrast to the female football tournament, the 
male Olympic football tournament is not included in the 
international calendar of matches approved by FIFA for the 2008–14 period.’
The only one who suffers from this push and pull is 
Lionel. He is nervous and acts ‘a little strangely’, according to his team-mates. So much so that after a forceful tackle 
during a practice in Scotland, he ends up in an altercation 
with Rafa Márquez. Pep Guardiola has to intervene to calm the excitement and ask a bad-tempered Leo to end things 
once and for all. It is a minor incident, it’s silly; nonetheless 
it affects the new Barça coach. Guardiola takes the boy to one side. He talks to him, he wants to know what’s going 
on, why the bad mood, why he’s unhappy. He doesn’t want 
to see him like this. He wants him to be happy playing foot-ball with Barça. A few words are enough to make Leo con-
fess. He says, loud and clear, that he wants to go to Beijing. 
Guardiola promises to do everything possible. And he starts to take a stand after the first friendly against Hibernian The long journey towards gold  211
(6-0 to Barça with a great goal from the Flea). ‘In the end,’ 
declares Guardiola, ‘Leo is the one who is worst affected in 
this story. There are only two or three weeks to go, some 
are saying one thing and others are saying something else. Blatter will have to sit down and look at the regulations 
and decide if he’s staying with us or going to the Games.’ 
Despite the demands, FIFA’s decision takes another six days. In the interim comes Barça’s second friendly against 
Dundee United, with three Messi goals, as well as words 
from Joan Laporta, the Barça club president, who restates the club’s position, the consensus solution offered to the 
AFA, and announces that in the event of a negative verdict 
from FIFA, Barcelona will ‘turn to the legal guidance of the CAS (Court of Arbitration for Sport) so that our claims are 
taken into account’.
In short the tug-of-war continues. There is less than a 
week remaining until Argentina’s debut at the Games and no one knows if Leo will be there. On the websites of the 
Spanish and Argentine newspapers, the polls appear in abundance: ‘Should the national team keep waiting for 
Messi?’ asks Clarín of its readers. Evidently tired of this soap 
opera, they respond with a resounding ‘no’: 70 per cent, against 29 per cent who are willing to continue waiting.
‘What should Barça do about Messi? Should they let 
him compete in the Olympics, or try to keep him for the Champions League qualifier?’ replies El País from across 
the pond a few days later. Seventy-three per cent think Messi 
should participate in the Olympics.
On Tuesday 30 July Leo’s first words are heard. His total 
silence has generated all different types of response. Gabriel Batistuta, for example, defends him. ‘He is doing the right thing by not saying anything, because after the Olympics 
he is going to go back to playing with Barcelona and the 
national team.’ Maradona, on the other hand, attacks him.212 Messi
‘He has to decide for himself. This is the moment to be 
more of a man. It is a great opportunity to grow. Either way, 
Barcelona will wait for him. That’s why they gave him the number 10 shirt: because they want him. If they gave it to 
him, it’s not because Messi is a movie star, it’s because he 
is a phenomenon, a great player.’ And, on the other hand, there is his family, who do not know which path to take. 
Jorge Messi confirms it: ‘There is a conflict of interest here 
in which the player is being put in the middle. And they are using my son as cannon fodder. You can’t generate preju-
dice towards a 21-year-old footballer, you never know how it 
will end. It’s crazy that the player should have to make the decision. It can’t be the case that those who are in charge 
of managing the football cannot reach an agreement. We 
don’t know what to do.’
Finally, before travelling to Florence, where the team 
are playing a friendly against the Purples (Fiorentina), Leo speaks his mind and says what he proposes to do. ‘If FIFA says I don’t have to go, I’m not going; if I have to go, I’ll go, 
without waiting for the CAS, because if I wait for the CAS it 
will already be too late for my team-mates and the national selection staff.’
And a few hours later, FIFA says that Messi should go to 
the Games. ‘The sole judge of the Comisión del Estatuto del Jugador, Slim Aloulou (Túnez), has ruled that the relin-
quishing of players under 23 for the Beijing 2008 male 
Olympic football tournament is compulsory,’ announces the statement from Zurich.
The news is received with great relief from the Argentine 
camp. ‘Luckily, after a lot of going backwards and forwards, it was resolved in our favour,’ confesses Sergio Batista.
After the match against Fiorentina (3-1 to Barça), 
Pep Guardiola comments: ‘We will survive without Messi. However, I have a feeling that we are a little bit stronger The long journey towards gold  213
with Messi. If he does not eventually return, we will ensure 
the team qualifies for the Champions League. And if he 
does return, we will welcome him back with open arms.’
There is a somewhat different response from the 
Blaugrana directors, whose opinion has not altered and who submit an appeal to the CAS. But in the meantime, 
instead of leaving for the American tour, Leo is off to China, promising to return if the CAS rule in favour of Barça.
In Shanghai, where he arrives on 1 August, Leo seems 
to recover the calm he had lost. He is laughing, and he finally seems happy during practice. He shares a room with 
Kun Agüero, as he did in the 2005 Under 20 World Cup. 
Thousands of PlayStation games, and cumbia music at full volume. The two get on well, they are relaxed, they let their 
hair down and do whatever they feel like. Checho breathes 
easily. The first time he saw Leo was at Barcelona, in the match against Catalunya. There were not many practices, 
and few with his team-mates, but fortunately he now has the 
chance to build up the group. For a while now, Batista has been thinking about where to position him on the field. ‘I 
want Messi to come into the centre more, not be pinned 
to the touchline the way he is with Barcelona. I want him to generate more play, in front of Riquelme and behind 
Agüero,’ he explains. Meanwhile, the Flea tells the press his 
dreams. ‘For me, and for all the players, it would be really special to reclaim the title. We came here to win the gold 
medal. We’ll take it slow and hopefully we can get it.’ He 
denies that there is any problem between him and Riquelme (just before the World Cup qualifier against Brazil there had 
been rumours circulating of a dispute between the national 
number 10 and Messi). He maintains, although few believe him, that the relationship with Román has always been 
good. Regarding the controversy that kept him away from 
the national team, he explains: ‘Batista understood me and 214 Messi
so did my team-mates, they had no problem waiting for me. 
I did what I had to do. I hope that this situation will not be 
an issue any longer.’ And it won’t.
On 6 August, on the eve of Argentina-Ivory Coast, the 
first group A match, the CAS rules in favour of Barcelona. ‘The Olympic tournament does not appear on FIFA’s official calendar, and there is no decision from the FIFA executive 
committee which establishes an obligation to make players 
less than 23 years of age available to their countries for this championship,’ explains the tribunal’s ruling. However, it 
then requests that the parties concerned find ‘a reasonable 
solution with respect to the players who wish to represent their countries at the Olympic Games’. And how do the 
parties react? Grondona is the first to make himself heard: 
‘Messi is not going anywhere.’ Sergio Batista confirms: ‘He will be on the pitch tomorrow.’ And Leo? He makes no 
statements about the ruling and it seems that, though he 
may have been willing to return to Barça, he has no inten-tion of returning to the fold now.
‘He has told me that he wants to stay with the squad and 
he asks Barcelona to be considerate of his position,’ assures Checho. Begiristain does not seem to be considerate: ‘It is 
our wish – with our fans in mind – that Leo Messi be with 
the club,’ he says. Satisfied with Barcelona’s legal victory, Laporta orders the player’s immediate return. But first, 
Guardiola wants to speak to Leo. ‘I want to listen to him, and 
we will make a decision,’ he says, ‘but I can’t relay it without having heard from the player.’ Then there is a long, inter -
continental phone conference between New York (where Barça are concluding their American tour against the Red Bulls) and Shanghai. Leo Messi asks Guardiola – who, after 
Barcelona ’92, knows what it means to win an Olympic gold 
– to help him: he wants to stay in China and participate in the Games. Pep promises to find a solution. No sooner said The long journey towards gold  215
than done. At the meeting, which takes place in a suite at the 
Saint Regis hotel, on the corner of Fifth Avenue and 53rd 
Street, he convinces Laporta and Begiristain. Messi is to stay 
in Beijing. But not without a few conditions. The first is that the AFA will take responsibility for medical insurance in case 
Messi is injured. The same clause that was demanded by 
Schalke 04 and Werder Bremen for Rafinha and Diego, the two Brazilians who were in the middle of a similar dispute 
between the clubs and the Brazilian Federation. The sec-
ond is a ‘personal agreement with Julio Grondona that the player will be relinquished from all the season’s friendlies’. 
Guardiola is the one who announces Barcelona’s decision 
to Leo. He calls him from the plane a few minutes before takeoff from New York. ‘You’re staying. Enjoy it,’ he says.
On 7 August the Blaugrana expedition is on its way 
back to Barcelona. It falls to Begiristain and Guardiola to make the official announcement regarding the resolution 
of Messi’s case. ‘He found himself in a difficult position 
and he himself had expressed a desire to be with us for the pre-season,’ explains the coach. ‘But when he arrived in 
Beijing, he asked me personally not to request his return to 
Barcelona. I noted a lot of emotional tension. He has suf-fered brutal pressure, as has his family. I saw that he seemed 
very uncomfortable with the situation, and it also was not a 
good idea to bring him here if his head was in Beijing. Now, after this whole drama, the best thing is for him to play, to 
enjoy it, to be happy and for him to return content. The 
Barça fan-base knows that we have an extraordinary player and that he will do wonderful things when he returns. The 
people will be understanding towards him.’
Messi goes onto the pitch to face the Ivory Coast wear -
ing the Argentine number 15 shirt. And he demonstrates why his presence at the Olympic Games was so important. 
Towards the end of the first half, he receives a 45-yard pass 216 Messi
from Riquelme, he picks up the pace and, almost from the 
penalty spot, places it delicately into the net. Five minutes 
from the final whistle, when the scoreboard seems stuck at 1-1 (Cissé responded to Leo’s goal), the Flea takes a quick 
free kick with Román on the edge of the area and it takes 
a wicked deflection. The Elephants’ goalie makes the save and Lautaro Acosta – who secured the team’s qualification 
for the Games – then finds it easy to score the final goal to 
make it 2-1.
A few seconds from the end, Batista substitutes Leo and 
in doing so gives him the opportunity to be applauded by the Chinese crowd. They did it throughout the match and, when his picture appeared on the Olympic stadium screen, 
regardless of the fact that the Argentine national anthem 
was playing, a chant of ‘Messi, Messi’ began to pick up in the stands. He is one of the best-known sportsmen in the 
People’s Republic of China. He sells well, from shirts to 
Pepsi Cola, and the children want to be like him. For the moment, let’s leave aside his popularity, which grew expo-
nentially during the Olympics, to the point that he joined 
FIFA’s ranks as one of the best-known sportsmen, and at the end of the tournament will be chosen by the online users of 
MyBestPlay as the most favoured footballer of the Olympics, 
alongside athletes such as Michael Phelps, the swim king, or Usain Bolt, the fastest man in the world. Let’s return to the 
match. Beneath the question of favourite footballers, which 
dominates the conversation, there is also a sense of happi-ness at the resolution of the conflict. This time it is Leo’s 
turn to speak, and to thank Guardiola. ‘He was a player and 
he knows how a player feels at those moments,’ he says. ‘He knew that I was in a situation that was difficult for me and he 
has supported me ever since he arrived at Barcelona, since 
the first day when I spoke to him. He has been outstanding, and the truth is that I am very grateful.’ With the chapter The long journey towards gold  217
closed once and for all, his thoughts now turn to his friend 
Ronaldinho’s Brazil, the other favourite to win the title: ‘If 
we reach a final against Brazil, it will be much more difficult 
because Ronnie will be there. It is always great to win a final, and even more so against Brazil,’ jokes the Flea, but before 
that, there is ‘Australia, tough competitors, strong, who play 
well in the air and who will create a tricky match. It’s going to be extremely difficult.’
It certainly is. Fifteen minutes from the end, the score at 
the Shanghai Olympic stadium still stands at 0-0. Argentina, at least in the first half, play better than in the debut match, 
they create chances, but Federici, the Australian goalkeeper, 
is difficult to beat. Then, in a few seconds, after various touches between Riquelme and Messi, Román plays the ball 
out to the left to Di María, who crosses into the centre and 
Pocho Lavezzi converts it. It’s the victory goal.
On the other side of the world, two days after 12 August, a 
Messi-less Barcelona also win: 4-0 against Wisła Cracovia in the first leg of the preliminary round of the Champions League. The Blaugrana fears vanish. But let’s go back to China. With 
their pass to the quarter-finals in the bag, the Albiceleste relo-
cate to the Olympic Village in Beijing. Nothing fancy for the spoiled footballers, but lots of encounters. ‘We were eating,’ 
recalls Oscar Ustari, ‘and we saw him arrive, queue for his 
food and sit down at the table. “Hi, I’m Kobe” (Bryant), he said to us. He spoke to us in Spanish, looked for Messi, and 
chatted to him for a bit. And we took the opportunity of tak-
ing a few photos. When it came to saying goodbye, he made the gesture of taking off his hat, looked directly at Leo, and 
said to him: “Messi, you’re the best.” We were in awe. Nadal 
(Rafa) also came over. When you’re with Leo, you can’t just cruise along, they stop you everywhere you go.’
But there are not only encounters with celebrities from 
all over the world. In Beijing they also have to face Serbia.218 Messi
Checho rests Leo, keeps the already-cautioned Riquelme 
and Agüero on the bench, and lets the subs play. Seven 
changes, an overhaul which nonetheless leads to victory. 2-0 (a Lavezzi penalty and a Buonanotte free kick); nine 
consecutive Olympic victories (beating the record held by 
Uruguay for 80 years); first place in the group. The only ones who lost out were the 60,000 spectators who rushed 
to the Beijing Workers’ Stadium to see Messi in action. 
During the first half they chant his name and when, at the end of the match, they see that the Flea is not coming on, 
they begin to whistle at the Argentine team. In the end, the 
coach has to justify himself. ‘The people of China have to understand that we came here with an objective, that of win-
ning the gold medal. It wasn’t only Messi who didn’t play 
today. Riquelme, Agüero and Garay didn’t play either. I was thinking of the best for Argentina. If they were annoyed, it’s 
bad luck. I hope they forgive me.’
The next fixture, also at the Beijing Workers’ Stadium, is 
against Holland on 16 August. Maradona is also in the stands, to cheer for the national team, and for Kun, who is the boy-
friend of his daughter Giannina. There is no room for mis-takes. Leo knows it and puts on a show. Here is how Clarín  
describes it: ‘How many wishes will be granted by this genie, who appears during the national team matches? If there were three in the original story, perhaps Batista’s team will be left 
short of what they need from this magical figure who arrived 
from Barcelona and who did very well again today, with a fan-tastic goal and an incredible pass – to resolve a story that had 
become difficult and in which Holland was very close to steal-
ing the dream of reclaiming the Olympic gold.’ But what did the Flea do this time? He settled an extremely complicated 
match. Dodging around one defender, dummying the goalie 
to leave him in the dust, and blasting it into the net before any desperate Dutchmen had the chance to intervene. 1-0. The long journey towards gold  219
Then, in the fourteenth minute of extra time, he invents 
perfect geometry so that Di María can predict the course 
of a strong shot, a low cross, which secures the 2-1. And 
Argentina are to face Brazil in the semi-finals.
The Clásico par excellence, the anticipated final, the per -
fect occasion to avenge the most recent historic encounters (the defeats in the finals of the 2004 Copa América in Peru, in the 2005 Copa Confederaciones and again in the 2007 
Copa América in Venezuela). The Olympic champions 
Argentina, against Brazil, who have never won the gold; it is the match that Leo dreamt of, although one stage earlier 
in the competition. And as if that weren’t enough, there 
is the duel between Leo and Ronaldinho: two friends, two ex-team-mates, the talented youngster against the former 
Ballon d’Or winner, the present against the past, the cur -
rent star against the champion who is looking to be reborn 
from the ashes. The list could go on and on. The debate 
over who is greater is wide open. Everyone has their own 
opinion. Even Kun gets involved: ‘Lionel, nowadays, is bet-ter than Ronaldinho. He’s the best player in the world.’
Messi avoids the topic, but he does not shy away from the 
avalanche of questions: ‘I’m not one to make predictions, but Ronnie: remember the gold belongs to Argentina! My 
dream is the dream of the whole Argentine team. And more 
so now, for Ustari, for my friend [Oscar has been injured in the match against Holland and cannot keep goal for the 
Albiceleste]. It will be hard,’ he says, ‘it is always difficult 
against Brazil. We are both extremely worn out from the extra time in our quarter-finals matches. Brazil has an incredible 
team, but our team is immense. We are playing for the same 
thing, to see who gets the gold, and they won the last final we played. I’m still cross about the final of the Copa América. 
Now it’s our turn …’ And indeed it is Argentina’s turn, but 
in a way no one had imagined. They quash, humiliate  and 220 Messi
make fun of Brazil. Agüero, with two goals and a hand in 
the third (he is fouled and Riquelme converts the penalty), 
and his celebrations – where he mimes putting a dummy in his mouth (Giannina is expecting a baby) – are all evidence 
of the weakness of Dunga’s team and Ronaldinho’s decline. 
‘Nowadays,’ writes El País, ‘the Brazilian is a false player, more given to pulling faces, cheerful chatter and other similar ges-
tures, which are only an attempt to win front pages and the 
applause of a Chinese crowd who are novices when it comes to football. As much as he disguises his decline with lots of 
theatricality, the football he has left in him does not guar -
antee him a performance, except for when the ball is dead 
as he is: he still manages to take free kicks.’ A cruel portrait 
of someone who was once the world number one. But even 
more cruel is the photo that appears in the media across the world the following day: Ronnie in his yellow number 10 
shirt and captain’s armband, finding solace, head bowed, in 
the arms of his ‘little brother’ Messi. Lionel is standing on tiptoes in order to console his idol. There is a lot of affec-
tion in that picture, but there is also a lot of melancholy. 
Without making a big impression, Leo has won that highly anticipated duel. He is happy. Ronnie only wants to hide, to 
disappear from the face of the earth. ‘I’m sad, very sad,’ he 
will say later. For him, this was the opportunity to be seen again in the world. He has failed. Leo, on the other hand, is 
making his way towards gold.
At twelve o’clock on Saturday 23 August (one in the 
morning in Argentina) at the National Stadium, nicknamed the Bird’s Nest, the final of the Olympic Games football 
tournament begins. Opponent: Nigeria – just like in Atlanta ’96 and in the 2005 Under 20 World Cup in Holland. In the 
American Olympics, Nwankwo Kanu’s Nigeria took home 
the gold after a 3-2 final, considered by FIFA to be one of the ten most memorable matches in a century of Olympic The long journey towards gold  221
football. Argentine revenge comes in 2005, in Holland. And 
the protagonist, the one who defeats the Green Eagles, is 
Lionel: two penalties. Fifteen players from that final (includ-
ing Messi and Kun) find themselves at the ground in Beijing. ‘We’re going to win, I have no doubt about it. 2-0 would be 
perfect,’ prophesies Diego Maradona. It is not that easy.
The heat is so oppressive that after 30 minutes of the 
first half, Hungarian referee Victor Kassai calls a basketball-style timeout so the teams can cool down. A break that is 
repeated in the second half. The pitch is hard, dry and the Green Eagles leave no spaces uncovered. Messi and 
Agüero are alone up front. Their tiny runs with touches 
and dodges make no impression on the giant Nigerians. Riquelme is not having a good day. Midfielders Gago and 
‘Chief’ Mascherano are working hard. The match is bad, 
wretched, boring, tiring. Until the 57th minute: there is 
a scuffle between an Argentine and an African, the ball 
rebounds towards the centre of the pitch, Messi recovers it, 
turns, and passes it perfectly, out deep, to Ángel Di María. The ex-Rosario Central currently at Real Madrid, the sensa-
tion of the Games, gallops away freely on the left. And on 
the edge of the area, in front of Vanzekin who desperately comes off his line, he is inspired to lift the ball softly with 
his left foot and send it lightly through the heavy Beijing 
air. The Nigerian goalkeeper can do nothing but get up and, motionless in the penalty area, watch from afar as the 
ball bounces into the net – a work of art that deserves the 
gold. Argentina return to the top after four years on the highest step of the podium at Athens. Messi, with his arms 
around Kun, celebrates the fulfilment of the dream. He has 
triumphed over all the legal objections, over all those who didn’t want to let him experience this fairytale. And he says 
it out loud: ‘After everything that was said and discussed, it 
was worth coming.’