93Chapter 16
The football is his toy
Conversation with Francisco ‘Pancho’ Ferraro
With an air of intelligence in the dugout and a soothing, 
calming voice, Pancho – as he is known to everyone in the 
footballing world – has an enviable CV, between national 
youth teams, and clubs in both South America and Europe. But some of his best memories are still of those days in June 
and July 2005, when he led the Under 20s to their fifth 
world title.
‘It’s true, I am proud of that victory on both a personal 
level and as part of the team, I’m proud of what the boys did, and of players like Messi, Agüero and Gago, who made a name for themselves at international level.’
Do you remember the first time you saw Messi?
‘Yes, it was in the South American qualifiers in January 
2005, I was lucky enough to spend almost 40 days with the 
team. José Pekerman had asked me to take over the Under 20s and Hugo (Tocalli, the coach) wanted me to be there 
alongside him in Colombia to see how things were run.’
What was your first impression?
‘That of a nice, polite, shy boy. He was the youngest of 
the group. He came from Europe and he still wasn’t fully integrated, and he didn’t have the physical stamina to play 
90 minutes. That’s why, after discussing it with Hugo, we 94 Messi
always brought him on in the second half, where he could 
make a difference.’
You didn’t bring him on in the first game in Holland against the 
United States either …
‘He had a slight injury, which is why he was on the bench, but from the second match against Egypt he was in the 
starting line-up, and indisputably so. He had come better 
armed both physically and mentally from Barcelona. He had debuted with the first team, he was stronger and he 
knew how to handle a higher-level match. He played in mid-
field, not as a playmaker; from three-quarters  of the way up 
the pitch he could create risky situa tions at any moment. 
His presence on the team made all the difference.’
And how did he get on with the group?
‘He was happy, and even happier when he was on the pitch 
with the ball. He shared a room with Agüero and he never bothered us. On the contrary, we could all see that they were happy and they got on very well. They were very considerate 
to their peers and to the staff. Very respectful. They brought 
sobriety to the group and kept low profiles – they were very humble. In fact, within a team full of honest people, they 
were two extremely respectful and professional boys.’
You say that Messi was always happy when he was on the pitch 
with the ball …
‘Yes, it bears repeating that Leo loves to play, and the foot-ball is his favourite toy; he has so much fun with it and he 
can control it like nobody else. It’s incredible to see him on 
the pitch with the ball glued to his left foot; he drives it for -
ward at a dizzying speed and he’s aware of everything that 
is going on around him; he reads and anticipates the play. 
That’s very difficult – only the greats can do that.’The football is his toy  95
Like Maradona?
‘Diego was one of a kind. It’s true that for some time now 
everyone has been comparing the two of them, especially 
after Leo’s goal against Getafe. All I can say is that both have truly been bewitched by a magic wand. But Messi doesn’t 
need to be compared to anyone, he is a brilliant and unique 
footballer, a great one, one who can create surprises in every game and that is what people love about him.’
What did that Under 20 World Cup mean to Messi?
‘It was his explosive moment as a footballer. It was his chance 
to make himself known across half the world. Before he 
went to Holland, very few people in Argentina knew of his talents; when he returned he was an idol. Best player, high-
est scorer of the tournament, those two goals of his in the 
final … He was already a star, the footballer that an entire nation had been waiting for.’
And an entire nation was hoping that he would play in the 2006 
World Cup against Germany. But Messi stayed on the bench. You 
were at the World Cup with the kids who were sparring with the 
team; you’ve known José Pekerman for years – what happened in that final match?
‘We were down one substitution due to Pato’s [Abbondanzieri’s] 
injury and at that moment José will have decided to go for some other play, a different footballer, a different tactical 
move. But I have no doubt that Pekerman has been one of 
the best youth coaches. Who else could have brought the best out of an eighteen-year-old boy like Messi?’
Let’s leave polemics to one side and talk about his development 
after that World Cup.
‘I think Messi keeps on progressing and for the moment 
he has no limits. He progresses while keeping the same low 96 Messi
profile as always. He doesn’t like being evaluated, he doesn’t 
do things just for the sake of doing them, he just wants to 
play in peace. He surrounds himself with his loved ones, his 
parents and his siblings, and they support and protect him, 
just as they did in Holland during the World Cup.’