159Chapter 27
Leo and Diego
18 April 2007
‘Barcelona Football Club are regaining ground.
Xavi …
Messi swerves round Paredes.He’s hanging onto the ball, he’s gone past Nacho as 
well.
Messi makes it all the way to Alexis, still with the 
ball.
Inside the box … he swerves again.The ball looks like it’s going wide …Messi scores!What a goal!He has left four Getafe players and the goalie in the 
dust.
A right-footed shot. Nothing like the usual Messi!Just look at that goal!It’s the 28th minute, midway through the first half.Without a doubt, that could be the goal of the 
season …
Amazing. The whole world is smiling and does not 
know what to make of that display of drive, speed, abil-ity, dodging and finish. It really was truly impressive …
I don’t want to compare, but it reminds me of Diego 
Armando Maradona’s goal against England in the  160 Messi
1986 World Cup. They are two different goals. They are 
two different players. I don’t mean to say that Messi is Maradona, but it reminds me of that goal.’
That was the TV commentary of the Barcelona-Getafe 
game, on 18 April 2007, on Digital +.
And this is the voice of Víctor Hugo Morales on Radio 
Argentina on 22 June 1986 at the Argentina-England game, Azteca stadium, Mexico City.
‘Diego’s turn.
Maradona has the ball.
There are two men on him, Maradona’s on the ball, 
the world footballing genius heads to the right, he gets past the third and there’s only Burruchaga left to face him …
It’s all Maradona!Genius! Genius! Genius! C’mon c’mon c’mon c’mon 
and
Goaaaal! … Goaaaal!Spectacular!Viva!What a goal!Diegoal! Maradona!Please excuse me, I’m quite emotional …Maradona makes a memorable run, the best play of 
all time … cosmic kite … What planet did you come 
from? To leave all the England players by the wayside, so that the country would be a clenched fist screaming for Argentina … Argentina 2, England 0.
Diego! Diego! Diego Armando Maradona …Thank God for football, for Maradona, for these 
tears …
For this score, Argentina, 2; England, 0.’Leo and Diego  161
The shirts are different. So is the importance of the two 
games: one is a Copa del Rey semi-final, the other was a 
World Cup quarter-final against an opponent like England, 
whom Argentina were facing for the first time since the 1982 Falklands War. Although everyone denies it, non-foot-
balling factors are making themselves felt, quite substan-
tially … at least in the hearts of the fans.
The protagonists are different: Maradona, the cosmic 
kite, is 25, he is God, he is the world superstar. When the Golden Boy scored that goal, Messi the Flea still had not been born yet. He is a nineteen-year-old kid who debuted 
in the Spanish league and with the Albiceleste less than two 
years previously.
The excitement of the commentators is incomparable: 
the tears, the epic feelings and the South American rhetoric versus the rigour, at least on this occasion, of the Spanish commentators, and yet … the two goals are really quite sim-
ilar, very similar, one seems to have been learned from the 
other. The first impression is correct.
The next day, the whole world sees history repeating 
itself. On global video archive YouTube, the goal unsettles Internet users. It is viewed thousands of times, as well as alongside Maradona’s goal. It opens up an online debate 
as to which of the goals is better. Everyone has their own 
opinion, from expert ones to impassioned ones, while the media compares the two clips from every possible perspec-
tive, praising Leo’s performance.
Headlines, commentaries and linguistic inventions of all 
shapes and sizes are to be heard and read: from ‘Messidona’, to ‘The Foot of God’, or even, ‘Messi shocks the world’. 
There is no bias to speak of: the evidence is enough for even the Madrid sports papers, who are generally reticent about 
dedicating the front cover to their eternal rivals Barcelona. 
This time, however, they do not hesitate. The Marca front 162 Messi
page headline reads: ‘Twenty years, ten months and 26 
days later, Messi repeats Maradona’s goal.’ And inside are 
quoted Víctor Hugo Morales’ words: ‘What planet did you come from?’ It has not escaped anyone’s notice that this is 
one of those events rarely seen on a football pitch.
Take the 53,599 Nou Camp spectators, for example: 
they are on their feet, grabbing hold of anything that can be waved, from the newspaper to the programme, a hand-
kerchief or a scarf, waving en masse. And those who do not have anything of the appropriate colour still partake of the 
collective ritual, applauding until their hands hurt. A full-
blown tribute.
Or take those who are on the pitch, like Eto’o, Deco, 
Gudjohnsen. The three of them hold their hands up to their faces. ‘Oh my God, what did he just do?!’ is the best translation of their disbelieving expressions. And it doesn’t 
end there – in the live interviews at the end of the match, 
team-mates and opposition alike are brimming with praise.
‘It was the best goal I have ever seen in my life’ – Deco.
‘He has eclipsed us all’ – Jorquera.
‘I only hope I don’t see myself on TV in 30 years’ time’ 
– Paredes.
‘Words do not exist to describe that goal. From over 
there on the bench I was awestruck’ – Güiza.
Bernd Schuster, Getafe coach at the time, does not agree, 
but everyone knows what the German is like. ‘We should have fouled him in order to stop him, even if it would have earned us a booking. You can only be so noble.’
The debate has begun and within a day it has spread all 
over the world. Although football is aesthetic and fantasti-cal, some people insist on analysing it with numbers, figures 
and statistics.
So here they are: Leo’s goal took twelve seconds com-
pared to Diego’s 10.8; he ran 60 metres, while in the Leo and Diego  163
Azteca stadium it was 62; he made thirteen touches against 
Maradona’s twelve; he slalomed round five of the opposi-
tion, while Maradona left six England players in his wake. 
The pictures of the action are superimposed, they are ana-lysed side by side in order to compare and understand. 
People look for the similarities as if it were a children’s 
game. Buenos Aires newspaper La Nación does it best, pointing out ten coincidences, from the spot where the play 
begins right up to the celebration (both run towards the 
corner flag on the right hand side of the pitch). Websites, TV stations and newspapers launch their polls. The ques-
tions are more or less the same: which goal was more spec-
tacular, that of the Flea or that of Diego? Which did you prefer? Which did you think was better? Marca’s poll attracts 
55,000 respondents: 60.62 per cent prefer Messi’s goal, while 39.38 per cent opt for Maradona’s goal. The result is the same on the Cadena Ser radio station, although the 
margins are closer: Messi wins with 52 per cent to Diego’s 
48 per cent. Mundo Deportivo’s poll records an overwhelm-ing majority in favour of the Barcelona striker: more than 
three-quarters of the voters. Argentina’s Olé website users 
award Maradona 74.3 per cent of the vote. It was predict-able, because that goal is engraved in the country’s collec-
tive memory – there isn’t a single household in which that 
goal hasn’t been watched on video or DVD at least once. In Argentina they have even made a ‘flickbook’ with the 
goal of the century. It’s a ‘handheld movie’, you flick the 
pages and it is as if you are watching the film in action (in addition, the Icons of Argentina collection also includes 
the ‘Hand of God’ goal, Maradona’s tricks with the ball 
in Villa Fiorito and Maxi Rodríguez’s goal against Mexico; Leo Messi and his moment of glory are not yet part of this 
exclusive selection). And it should also be noted that in 
Argentina, Maradona is not just a footballer, but a people ’s 164 Messi
hero, a living legend, a faith (the Maradonian Church paro-
dies religion and worships Diego as a supreme god), and a 
national historic icon, like José de San Martín (the general who fought for independence from Spain), Carlos Gardel 
(the famous tango singer), Evita, Jorge Luis Borges (the 
famous author) or Ernesto ‘Che’ Guevara. It’s natural that the Argentines should feel reticent about trading him in as 
if he were a mere football sticker.
What is certain is that these polls perfectly illustrate the 
extent of the passion felt on both sides of the pond. As well as the debate over which goal is better, another question 
arises: that of Messi’s intentions, or in other words, to quote La Nación, ‘Was Messi trying to imitate Maradona? Was it or 
wasn’t it a big coincidence?’
The man himself will erase all doubts. ‘Perhaps the play was 
similar, I have only seen it once on television,’ declares Messi, ‘but I never thought it could be the same as Diego’s goal. They 
told me afterwards, but at that moment I wasn’t thinking about anything, only of the joy of having scored a goal.’
And there’s more, when they ask him to describe his 
achievement, Leo describes it thus: ‘I saw a gap and I went forward, as always, to get forward and try to score. The two 
defenders were closing in on me and I wasn’t getting any-
where, so I looked for someone to play a one-two and when I saw the gap I got past. Luckily it worked.’
That air of simplicity, as if it was something normal 
(and deep down it is, it is part of his job), is reminiscent of Maradona in ’86, or at least it is if we go by the memories 
of Jorge Valdano. ‘Diego insists that he tried to pass me the 
ball various times, but he kept finding obstacles that pre-vented him,’ he says, although he is convinced that in real-
ity Diego ‘was never willing to let go of that ball’. Valdano 
offered Maradona the chance to pass; in Messi’s case it was Eto’o. The parallels and similarities between the two goals Leo and Diego  165
are infinite, including the issue of the kick suggested by 
Schuster and supported by another Getafe defender. Listen 
to what ‘el Negro’ Enrique, who was present at the famous 
Azteca game, has to say. ‘They say that the England players didn’t try to foul Maradona. That’s because they couldn’t! 
Whenever they got there, he had already passed them.’
The same holds true in Messi’s case. Let’s stick with the 
anecdotes. In the Mexico World Cup it was Héctor Enrique who laid claim to his contribution to the goal and the pre-
vious pass; here, Xavi does the same. ‘He told me,’ reveals Messi, ‘that with all the great goals everyone talks a lot about 
the goal, but he passed it to me and yet no one mentions 
it.’ By contrast, there is no parallel whatsoever between what happened afterwards, among other things, because 
naturally the two situations were different. Perhaps there 
is not even any link between the words of the two protago-nists. After the match, Leo says that it ‘wasn’t a big deal’ 
and quietly goes out to dinner with his father and his friend 
Pablo Zabaleta. Unfortunately, the media attention forces him to move restaurant. There are too many people waiting 
for him at the usual one. At a jam-packed press conference 
at the Nou Camp the following day, a wet-haired, recently showered Leo says into the microphones that he has slept 
soundly and that ‘he really has not stopped to think about 
the goal and what it means’. He is immune to the persist-ence of journalists, adding that the goal doesn’t change a 
thing. ‘I don’t feel any kind of pressure, I am going to keep 
playing and enjoying myself as I have always done.’ There is one thing, however, which he does not forget: the dedi-
cation, which he had already made at the time and now 
repeats. ‘I dedicate it to Diego. I want to send him all my support and best wishes and hope that he gets out of there 
as soon as possible and recovers, because that is what the 
whole of Argentina and all football fans everywhere want.’166 Messi
Diego Armando Maradona is in hospital. He was admit-
ted as a matter of urgency during the night of 1 April. 
An alcohol relapse has caused acute alcoholic hepatitis. According to his personal physician, Alfredo Cahe, he was 
on the brink of death. In Argentina they even announce his 
death. Luckily it is not the case, and during the beginning of May Maradona is discharged from the Avril neuropsychi-
atric clinic where he had voluntarily submitted to therapy 
to help overcome his alcohol dependence. The first thing he does upon leaving is to appear on the TV programme 
ShowMatch to recount his version of events and attack those 
who tried to bury him before his time. And during the inter -
view with his friend Marcelo Tinelli, he also finds time to 
talk about Messi’s goal. Let’s hear from Maradona: ‘Those 
who made that comparison were exaggerating. They really over exaggerated. To start with, my goal was more beautiful 
than Messi’s. And what’s more, I scored it against eleven 
internationals from England, a world champion team, and in a World Cup. Leo scored his against Getafe, in the Copa 
del Rey in Spain. It’s not the same.’ Maradona restores his 
goal’s reputation and accuses everyone who has dared to make comparisons as having exaggerated. Months later, in 
an interview with El Gráfico, a weekly Buenos Aires sports 
paper, he is even harsher. ‘What was the first thing you 
felt after seeing Messi’s goal against Getafe?’ they ask him. 
Annoyed, he replies: ‘It has nothing to do with mine.’ ‘The 
circumstances no, but the action itself was similar, Diego …’ they insist. ‘No, no, leave it, they are nothing alike. I scored 
millions of those kinds of goals in training, they’re just not 
on tape. If we’re going to talk seriously about this, don’t make me say something I don’t mean …’
Unfortunately the debate doesn’t end there.It is 9 June: Barcelona-Espanyol, in the 43rd minute of 
the first half.Leo and Diego  167
Here is the commentary that was broadcast on one 
Argentine TV station:
‘Now it’s Messi.
It’s Messi who faces up to the opposition,
Messi to Eto’o in the area.Eto’o has his back to goal and is surrounded by four 
defenders.
Eto’o takes the ball out wide to the touchline.Zambrotta …Messi couldn’t get there …With his hand, with his hand, like Diego.I’ll yell it anyway:Goaaaaal!It’s Diego! Tell me it isn’t! To me it’s Diego. It’s the 
same guy …
He’s reincarnated, I don’t believe in that but … he’s 
reincarnated. There can’t be so many coincidences. Explain to me how two things can happen again in such, but I mean such a similar way, to two different men … 
Messi, or Maradona dressed as Lionel Messi, goes down, puts on a Barcelona shirt, and levels the game with his left hand.’
And for those who are still in any doubt, here’s Michael 
Robinson’s commentary from Digital +: ‘He has scored two 
Maradona-style goals in the same season. The two against 
England – one against Getafe, one against Espanyol. He has repeated them both.’
The Hand of God strikes again, with all its similarities 
and debates. On 22 June 1986, Maradona anticipated Peter Shilton, 15cm taller than he was, coming off his line. With 
his jump, Messi overpowers Carlos Kameni, who is 19cm 
taller than he is. Despite the protests of the England players , 168 Messi
Tunisian referee Alí Bennaceur allows the goal when his 
assistant points to the centre spot. Despite the technol-
ogy available in 2007 and to the Espanyol players’ despair, Rodríguez Santiago also allows the goal. Maradona is reluc-
tant to admit what everyone already knows, ‘that the Hand 
of God was the hand of Diego! And the same hand that also stole from England.’ Just after the match, Messi is only 
sorry that the goal ‘didn’t gain anything; it only won us one 
point’ and not the league. He celebrated ‘in a normal, joy-ful way for having drawn the match’. There is certainly no 
reason to be ashamed at having done something sneaky.
Diego and Lionel, Messi and Maradona, the disciple 
and the master. Ariel ‘the Tiger’ Zárate, a 29-year-old from Entre Ríos, who performs in a group of four Argentine 
musicians, has dedicated a song to the subject, called ‘El Pie de Oro llegó’ (‘The Golden Foot has arrived’ – a play on 
Maradona’s nickname ‘El Pibe de Oro’, meaning Golden 
Boy). It goes like this:
On 24 June in ’87
A year after Argentina became championsA star was born, a new dreamThe Golden Foot was born in Rosario.
With a magical dodge, a great, little player
At seven in the juniors for Newell’s Old BoysOver here they turned their back on his problemAnd he had to emigrate and go to Spain,He made his second home in BarcelonaAnd he made it, thanks to sacrifices and love.
In 2004 he debuted with Barça
And his dream was realised with the Under 20s(The Golden Foot has arrived!)Leo and Diego  169
(Chorus)
Go for it LionelThe world is waiting to see you run again.We want to see the magic in your feet.(repeat)
He has a heart as big as a lion
When he comes on there’s hopeThe fans want to cheer his goalIn a match with the sky-blue and whites,We cheer you on from every corner,The national team are hopeful,We want to see you with Argentina, as champion!
(Chorus)Passion is awaking throughout the world
We want to see you with Argentina, as champion!
Now Messi has his own songwriter, just as Maradona had El 
Potro Rodrigo. Apart from songs, the similarities between 
the two have been talked about and written about numer -
ous times, too many to count, even before that April 2007 
goal. Lionel has always been compared to Maradona in one 
form or another. The first to draw parallels were his Newell’s 
coaches, from Enrique Domínguez to Ernesto Vecchio, via Adrían Coria. ‘I have seen him do stunning things with the 
ball, which not even Maradona could do at that age,’ insists 
Vecchio. Guillermo Hoyos, his coach in the Barcelona youth B team, makes the same point. ‘Messi is the closest I 
have seen to Diego. In drive, in determination. Leo single-
handedly altered the outcome of dozens of games! He is like Diego, they attack him, they attack him again and he 
keeps going practically from the ground. You’d have to kill 170 Messi
him to stop him. He has no problem handling himself. The 
ball gets carried along by the arch of his foot and the only 
thing he has to worry about is speed. He already has a good feel for the ball and he does it in a different way to everyone 
else.’
Since then there have been many who have talked about 
it, in every stage of the Barça number 19’s career. River Plate ex-number 10 Norberto Alonso says, for example: ‘There 
are things about him which remind me of Maradona. Like the way he bursts forward explosively. And the speed with 
which he plays. But Diego had that game-altering vision 
which Messi lacks.’
Arsenal coach Arsène Wenger has no doubts. ‘Messi is 
like Maradona but with a turbo attached to his feet.’ Nor do footballers past and present, like Eto’o: ‘Messi is the Diego Armando Maradona of the future’, or Deco: ‘He 
reminds me a lot of Maradona. Sometimes I hear people 
say that he should beware of the fame so that what hap-pened to Diego doesn’t happen to him. But Leo’s situa-
tion is different, because he is in a healthy environment in 
which he is loved and protected.’ And Franz Beckenbauer: ‘When we see him run with the ball we are reminded of 
Diego Maradona at his best, with good reason.’ Some do 
not deny the parallels, but they have words of warning for Messi. ‘Between Messi and Maradona,’ maintains Héctor 
‘El Negro’ Enrique, ’86 World Champion with Argentina, 
‘there are two things they have in common: their running style and their speed. Diego has that run and that short 
sprint, which makes mincemeat of you, and it’s difficult to 
take the ball off Leo. On top of that, he doesn’t just shoot for the sake of shooting, rather, he looks for the far post and 
dodges from right to left like Diego. The bad thing is not 
that he’s compared to Maradona, but that Leo believes he is Maradona.’ Something that also concerns Gabriel Batistuta. Leo and Diego  171
The ex-Fiorentina striker and highest-ever goal scorer for 
Argentina says: ‘Leo shouldn’t try to imitate Maradona, he 
only has to be himself and do the best he can. Because oth-
erwise, even if he reaches Diego’s level, he will only be seen as the second Maradona.’ The discordant voices are few in 
number, one of them being Pelé, although it is fairly natural 
bearing in mind the issue relates to Maradona. O Rei (‘The King’ – Pelé’s nickname) is convinced that ‘Messi is a dif-
ferent guy. Maradona used to come from behind. Messi is 
a bit quicker. On the other hand Diego was a better armed footballer.’ Another discordant voice is that of César Luis 
Menotti, ‘el Flaco’, selector of the Argentine World Cup 
1978 team. ‘He is not the new Maradona. In Argentina, and in other countries as well, every time a kid comes along who 
has good technical skills and abilities and who is decisive, 
the whole world declares him as the next Diego. Messi is a very good player, left-footed, skilled, powerful, he plays for 
Barcelona and he’s Argentine. But he is not Maradona, he 
is Messi.’ Writer, journalist and psychologist Walter Vargas is categorical, maintaining in his book, Football Delivery: ‘Messi 
is not and never will be Maradona. I say he will not reach 
those heights, and I even think that it will be difficult for him to come close.’ There are many contrasting opinions. 
But there’s more: the Argentine Olympic Committee even 
carries out a study, overseen by Miguel Toderi, in order to scientifically compare the two players. The result? A truism. 
They show that Messi and Maradona share a series of physi-
cal traits: low centre of gravity, muscle mass, height, weight, development and, of course, they are both left-footed.
In these cases it is better to leave science to one side 
and stroll through La Boca, Buenos Aires, around the Bombonera (the Boca Juniors ground), to chat to fans great 
and small. Rodrigo, in his blue and yellow Boca Juniors shirt, 
does not want to hear or speak of the matter. He has seen 172 Messi
Maradona play and he won’t hear of any comparisons. He 
lists Messi’s weaknesses, from his taking of free kicks to his 
vision of the game, and he glorifies Maradona’s gifts, asking his inquirer if he remembers the number 10’s first goals 
with the Argentinos Juniors. Let’s move on to Luis, who 
has a photo of Maradona in action in his completely bostero 
(Boca fan) shop, with the inscription, ‘Your children and 
your children’s children will ask about him.’ But then, while 
walking through the streets, you see some little kids playing with a ball. Two of them are wearing Barcelona shirts with 
Messi’s name across their backs. Julián, aged ten, the most 
chatty of them all, says emphatically: ‘I’m a Boca fan, but I like Messi, I like the way he plays.’
Perhaps preference has to do with age? ‘In one of his 
most beautiful verses, El Poeta murió al amanecer [The poet died at dawn], Raúl González Tuñón writes: “Some people, 
the oldest ones, denied him from the start. Others, the 
youngest ones, denied him later on.” That is what hap-pens in the footballing world generation after generation. 
And the same thing happens to Messi,’ explains Horacio 
Del Prado, commentator for Radio Nacional in Argentina. ‘The old folks who maintain that Messi will never reach the 
level of Maradona forget what everyone always says when a 
new superstar appears: he’ll never make it. They said that Maradona was chubby, too small and that he would never 
become a champion at the level of the greats. The great 
goalie Hugo Gatti was one of the ones who talked inces-santly about how round Maradona was, and Diego scored 
four goals against him.’
Let’s leave opinions aside and examine other reasons 
for the perpetuation of the comparison. It’s simple: ever since Maradona retired in 1997, the Argentines – and oth-
ers too – are always in search of a successor. It’s not unusual, it always happens when a great player goes. First, time is Leo and Diego  173
needed in order to accept the dissolution of the legend, 
then time is needed in order to find someone who is remi-
niscent of them, who makes us relive the lost magic. And 
who makes us think back to old times – because memory is a fundamental aspect of football; because in order for 
a young player to sell, it is easier to hang a tag around his 
neck saying ‘New Pelé’ or ‘New Maradona’. That way eve-ryone knows what we’re talking about. Often they get it 
wrong, the name designation doesn’t work, or the candi-
date for successor does not fulfil all the promises. As was the case, just in terms of ‘New Maradonas’, with Ariel Ortega, 
Pablo Aimar, Juan Román Riquelme, or the ‘Apache’ Tévez. 
It is a difficult crown to bear. Even more so when there are so many coincidences, as there are in Messi’s case: little; 
left-footed; grew up at Newell’s, where Maradona spent a 
brief stint; matured at Barcelona, the first European club to experience ‘Maramondo’; Under 20 world champion, like 
Maradona in 1979. And debuted with the national team 
against Hungary, exactly like Diego. And it is even more difficult when Maradona himself invites you onto his TV 
programme, La Noche del 10 (Number 10 Night) and singles 
you out as his heir. ‘Leo has been chosen to be one of the 
greats. Many think that he already is, but in my opinion,’ 
says Maradona, ‘he has hardly begun playing. He can give 
even more than he has already given and, when he does, it will be his moment.’ When they ask him about it in El 
Gráfico, he responds that of course Leo is the best current 
Argentine player, but in response to the next question – ‘Will Leo be able to overtake you?’ – he offers: ‘If it is for the 
good of Argentine football, let him overtake me.’ Despite 
all his proclamations and blessings, the old king is reticent to concede his sceptre. It is up to the pretender to show that 
he will grasp it with honour.