101Chapter 18
Soap opera
3 October 2005
The 2005–06 Liga begins on 26 August. The 75th Liga sea-
son has a new protagonist in the form of Robinho, the jewel 
in Real Madrid’s crown, who it is hoped will sparkle along-
side the other Brazilians in the league, Ronaldinho and Ronaldo. It is a league marked out as always by an eternal 
Real Madrid-Barcelona duel. The reigning champions play 
the first match away, against Alavés at the Mendizorroza stadium. Messi is neither on the pitch nor on the bench. 
Strange, given that only two days previously the young 
Argentine was the indisputable star of the Gamper Trophy. The explanation is given via an official announcement:
‘FC Barcelona has decided not to play Leo Messi in the 
match against Alavés as a matter of caution, in light of the outstanding legal issue that will shortly be resolved within 
the confines of federal regulation relating to non-EU 
players.’
What has happened? On 8 July the Spanish Football 
Federation modified its general regulations regarding ‘nat-uralised’ players: in other words, non-EU players between the ages of seventeen and nineteen who have moved up 
through the youth teams of a Spanish club. The modifica-
tion should allow the young player in question to play in the league, even if by doing so their club exceeds the three-
foreigners-per-club limit in their line-up. Messi meets all of 102 Messi
the required criteria to fulfil this regulation, which means 
that despite the club’s three non-EU positions already being 
filled by Ronaldinho, Eto’o and Márquez, he should be able 
to play. But the new ruling – criticised by certain clubs, who 
see it as an ad hoc measure for Barcelona and Leo – must 
first be accepted by the Professional Football League (PFL) and ratified by the Consejo Superior de Deportes – the 
High Sports Council. In other words, ‘due to the temporary 
situation, the FC Barcelona legal department have advised against allowing him to play’.
It is a difficult scenario to comprehend, given that in the 
2004–05 season Leo played in a Champions League game with the first team against Shakhtar Donetsk, as well as in 
seven league games – with no professional licence and no 
EU documents, only his contracts for the youth team and the Barcelona Second Division B team. He had debuted 
in the Catalan derby against RCD Espanyol on Saturday 
16 October 2004 in the Olympic stadium in Montjuïc. He comes onto the pitch to replace Deco and gets his first touch ten minutes later, after a pass from Belletti: some interest-
ing action, but nothing exceptional that merits recording. 
Nonetheless, it is an unforgettable night for Leo – the reali-sation of a childhood dream, just as he was quoted in La 
Capital as saying that his goal was to ‘make it into the first 
team’. Although, at that time, he thought he would do it at Newell’s, his favourite team.
And he not only gets his premiere, he also scores his first 
league goal. It is 1 May 2005, the Nou Camp scoreboard indicates that there are three minutes remaining, and 
Barça are 1-0 up against Albacete. Frank Rijkaard brings off 
Samuel Eto’o, substituting Messi into the unusual position of centre forward. The youngster, only seventeen years and 
ten months old, takes advantage of a ball from Ronaldinho 
and beats the keeper, Valbuena, with a smoothly-timed shot. Soap opera  103
It is a moment of pure elation: Leo does not know what to 
do with himself, and ends up being hoisted onto his friend 
Ronnie’s (Ronaldinho’s) shoulders, screaming joyfully. 
He is the youngest player in the club’s history to score in a league game (a record later broken on 20 October 2007, 
when Bojan Krki´ c scored against Villarreal).
Things have gone well for him in the first team, but after 
that 1 May match, the Argentine will not play another offi-cial match that season – not even after Barça have done 
enough to ensure their seventeenth league title.
At the start of the 2005–06 season, he does not even play 
in the Spanish Super Cup against Betis. In the first leg he is on the bench, in the return leg he is not even on the teamsheet. In fact, even before the official communication 
from the club, something is not right and the board knows 
it. Messi is an unresolved case. Complaints begin pouring in to the club. Why wasn’t this dealt with before? Why hasn’t 
he been naturalised, given that Argentines can opt to take 
on dual nationality (Spanish-Argentine) after two years of residence in Spain?
With news of the possibility that Leo might not be able to 
play in the league come other suggestions, such as forfeiting him to another club who have a non-EU spot open. A sug-
gestion that is immediately dismissed. The rumours about 
possible interest from other European clubs, like Inter, become more and more persistent. The Italian club’s presi-
dent, Massimo Moratti, has never tried to hide his interest 
in the player and has even made a financially attractive offer to Jorge Messi – who tries to use this bargaining chip to put 
pressure on Barcelona to resolve the issue.
Meanwhile, on 31 August (the closing date for new team 
signings), FC Barcelona renew Messi’s licence as a youth player naturalised in the team that plays in the Second 
Division B. And on 16 September, the news that the player 104 Messi
has signed a professional contract goes public. It will last for 
nine years, until 2014. According to various sources, his fees 
will increase to 3 million euros per season and the buyout clause to 150 million euros.
In reality, the announcement about the contract had 
already been made in June. ‘A week after his eighteenth birthday, Leo Messi has received his greatest present. Team 
secretary Txiki Begiristain has travelled to Utrecht, Holland, 
with the player’s father, in order to draw up his new con-tract, which guarantees him a place at the club until 2010,’ 
reads the Barça website on 30 June, while the youngster is 
playing in the FIFA Under 20 World Cup.
There are various theories about this discrepancy over 
dates: some maintain that Messi, now legally an adult,  
simply  accepted the new deal; others reckon that the  
contract was ultimately modified in September, because 
the player’s father was not satisfied with some of the clauses 
about incentives; there are those who think that the length of the contract was increased, from the usual five years 
to the final nine; still others believe that the September 
agreement was nothing more than a declaration of intent, implying that a professional contact would be signed in 
accordance with all regulations the following year. The 
fact remains that the issue of the contract adds new mate-rial to the ongoing soap opera, which takes a new twist on  
20 September. An overwhelming majority of the PFL  
committee votes against: the rule proposed by the Spanish Football Federation and the Association of Spanish 
Footballers concerning naturalised players will not come 
into effect. Those who are firmly in agreement with the Blaugrana president talk of a conspiracy against Barça, 
hatched by the powers that be in Spanish football. One 
thing for sure is that Messi cannot play in the league. He can play in the Champions League, however, without any Soap opera  105
problem. After examining the documents sent over by 
Barcelona, UEFA has agreed that he can play. They rec-
ognise his naturalised status. There is nothing extraordi-
nary about it – Leo has already played many games in the European competition the previous season. And in the first 
Champions League match, against Werder Bremen, the 
most dangerous Group C opponent, the Argentine shines. He comes on in the second half. He wins a penalty, which is 
converted by Ronaldinho, and which puts paid to the hopes 
of the Germans. It is an important moment, which can only point towards him being placed in the starting line-
up for the next match, against Udinese at the Nou Camp. 
But on the following day, 26 September, news arrives that puts an end to previous issues. At 1.00pm, Lionel Andrés 
Messi Cuccittini appears before Fernando Alberti Vecino, 
the judge presiding over the civil register, and proclaims ‘that he does not renounce his Argentine nationality; that 
he swears allegiance to the King and obedience to the 
Constitution and Spanish laws; that he chooses Catalan civil residency; and that he petitions for the right to be inscribed 
into the Spanish civil register’.
In short, Leo has secured Spanish nationality: he is now a 
citizen of the EU. Barça presents the documentation to the Spanish Federation. The response is immediate and posi-
tive: ‘In accordance with the rule in force [the Federation] recognises the aforementioned footballer’s right to play 
with his club, taking into account his Spanish status, which 
is valid for any purpose.’
On 1 October, the sixth match day of the league, Leo will 
be able to join his team on the pitch against Zaragoza, with a weight lifted from his mind. That Saturday the Nou Camp crowd treat him as if he is a national hero. Barça is losing 
2-0. Leo comes on in the second half but does not produce 
any miracles, although in the final moments Rijkaard’s 106 Messi
team manages to pull off an extraordinary draw. All should 
be well that ends well – but not this time.
Two days later, on Monday 3 October, Deportivo de  
La Coruña – Barça’s next opponents – send a letter to the PFL, copied to the Spanish Football Federation 
Competition Committee, in which they petition for an injunction, requesting an investigation into the Barcelona 
player’s naturalisation case. ‘The player’s national licence,’ 
write Deportivo, ‘has been obtained (and therefore given)  
outside the usual period for obtaining licences, which  
ended on 31 August and will not open again until  
December.’ The crux of the demand ‘is the reestablishment of equality in the competition, which it is believed has been 
violated, although of course once the inquiry has been car -
ried out, this matter of undue infraction of the rules will 
come to an end’. The Alavés bosses, who had already threat-
ened to kick up a fuss, go even further: they petition the 
Professional League to ban Messi from playing. From their point of view, his licence to play is null and void ‘in the eyes 
of the law, given that processing it implies an evasion of the 
law’. Why? Because ‘Barcelona could not arrange Messi’s professional licence before 31 August, the date when the 
window for such licences closes, since at that point he was 
still a foreigner,’ explains Javier Tebas, who is not only the legal advisor for Alavés, but also vice president of the PFL. 
‘Now they have given him Spanish nationality and have 
obtained a youth licence for him, with the intention of backdating it to 31 August and with the hope of playing 
him, despite the fact that the window for new signings is 
closed.’
In other words, Leo cannot rely on his EU residency 
until January. Moreover, ‘given the contract that has been signed, how can Messi play with his youth team licence for the first team?’ asks Tebas.Soap opera  107
Joan Laporta loses his patience, declaring: ‘We have suf-
ficient legal basis for playing him. I don’t know what else 
they want from us. We tried to do everything by the book 
and now that he has a Spanish passport they keep creat-ing problems. I don’t know why everyone is taking such an 
interest in damaging the player’s career. They are stirring 
up trouble to prevent Messi from playing with Barça.’
The Blaugrana president goes on the counter-attack, 
making historical references: ‘I don’t want to imagine the possibility that nowadays, in an era when democratic rights and liberties exist, we are going to drag up the past, like the 
Di Stéfano case.’
A few details to refresh the memory: Alfredo Di Stéfano, 
known as the Blond Arrow, arrived in Spain from Argentina in 1953 to play for Barcelona. But the intervention of 
people in high places ended up turning the matter into a national issue and invalidating the signing. Even the advi-
sory board got involved in the matter, stating that, given the 
player’s importance, he shouldn’t be given an exclusively Catalan residency, and putting forward the ‘fair’ proposal 
that the footballer play alternating seasons for Barça and 
Real Madrid. Luckily for the Whites, it was a solution the Catalan club rejected.
But the past does not come back to haunt Barça. 
Laporta’s concerns are only phantoms that do not reappear  . One thing for sure is that the Messi case ends up 
all over the sports pages across the country and provokes 
a scandal in Argentina. The first ruling from the Spanish Football Federation’s Competition Committee appears on 
18 October, stating that ‘due to his naturalisation, Messi 
can continue to play as a Spaniard’. This last is followed by outrage from Alavés and Deportivo, appeals and counter-
appeals, rulings and fierce debates, but in the meantime, 
Leo keeps playing. With the exception of the match against 108 Messi
Deportivo, when Rijkaard decides to rest him because he 
has just returned from a match with the Argentine national 
team, and because the Galician team had threatened to con-test the fixture if the Argentine was playing, the Blue and 
Claret number 19 continues his hard work in the league. 
The issue continues in dispatches until the following year, but does not really make itself felt on the pitch. And so the 
Flea debuts at the Santiago Bernabéu on 19 November. It is 
his first time playing in this classic derby. Less than a month later, on 14 December, he receives the Golden Boy award 
at the Nou Camp, the annual prize awarded by the Turin 
sports publication Tuttosport to the best Under 21 player. 
Thanks to his achievements in the Under 20 World Cup, 
Messi steamrollers his opponents: Wayne Rooney only 
scores 127 points against the Argentine’s 225. It is another source of recognition, which comes at just the right time: 
the Germany World Cup is only six months away and all 
these honours transform the Flea into a more desirable entity in the eyes of both small and large sponsors.
From McDonald’s to Pepsi, Spanish oil and gas com-
pany Repsol YPF to La Serenísima yoghurts, Lays crisps to Storkman shoes, Garbarino electrical appliances to 
MasterCard, dozens of them are bidding for Messi, who has 
just shared a set with Maradona. They are pictured together signing a television: ‘Look at what they’re signing, they’re 
the best.’
Lionel plays with everyone and everything. ‘Football: 
30 pesos. Tennis ball: twelve pesos. A kilo of oranges – three pesos,’ runs the MasterCard advert while showing clips of 
the youngster having fun with a football, a tennis ball and an orange, concluding: ‘Discovering there’s hope after 
Diego – priceless.’
He plays with sad children for Bubbaloo, he dances with 
the ball to a tango rhythm for Pepsi. And that’s nothing Soap opera  109
compared to the latest campaigns, like the one with the 
Messiah who ascends to the heavens for A-Style, an Italian 
caps and sportswear brand, or the one where Messi appears 
disguised as a footballing grandma for an Air Europa advert at the end of 2007.
But there is no point wasting time describing images, it 
would be easier just to go to YouTube to see how advertisers have made use of the image and abilities of Messi the jug-
gler to sell anything and everything.
By the end of 2005 and beginning of 2006, it is undeni-
able that in the public sphere Leo is considered a coveted trophy – as proven by the war sparked between American 
sports giant Nike and German triple-stripers Adidas.