189Chapter 31
An electric kid
Conversation with Alfio ‘El Coco’ Basile
Seated at his usual table in the back corner of the La Raya 
restaurant in Buenos Aires, Coco is chatting with a group of 
friends. Among them are players, journalists, old acquaint-
ances – a regular get-together. Every so often, the unmis-takable deep, rough voice of the Argentine coach is heard 
above the background hum and the noise of glasses clink-
ing and cutlery scraping. Claudio Codina, the owner of the restaurant who is like a son to Basile, gently interrupts 
the gathering and joins him in talking about Messi. With 
a cigarette between his fingers and a glass in his hand, the words flow thick and fast from the mouth of the Bella Vista 
ex-defender.
‘I love Leo very much, because he’s a great lad. He’s 
humble, he doesn’t think highly of himself, he doesn’t think of himself as a star and the fame hasn’t gone to his 
head. He’s a good person. He’s the son every parent would like to have, or the one you’d want to date or marry your 
daughter. People everywhere love him and not just because 
he’s an incredible footballer, but because of his personality. Incidentally, let me tell you a story.’
Tell it, tell it … please.
‘We were in Oslo, in a little field surrounded by huge build-
ings. It was an evening training session, almost nightfall, 190 Messi
and there was no one around. But something happened 
that you don’t expect in a country like Norway, where you’d 
think even the football fans are cold … All of a sudden the 
lights went on and the windows opened in houses around and we started to hear people yelling from all directions: 
“Messi! Messi! Messi!”’
And what did he say?
‘Nothing … it embarrasses him, in the best sense of the word, when people call out to him or praise him. You can see him 
practically suffering when the spectators shout his name. 
And the girls … they go crazy, as we saw in Venezuela … Such affection for that little face, for that shyness, for the 
humanity he exudes … Those are attributes that he gets 
from his parents. He has an incredible family, who really 
protect him. When I saw his mother, she said to me: “Look 
after him for me Coco, please look after him for me.”’
And did you look after him?
‘Of course. I tried to help him, I tried to relieve as much of 
the pressure as possible, the way they do at Barcelona. They 
also protect him because they know what he means to their team. But Leo doesn’t get overwhelmed by the pressure. 
When he gets onto the pitch he doesn’t think about what’s 
going on around him, he only thinks about playing with the football. He loves the football.’
While we’re on the subject, let’s talk about Messi in terms of 
football.
‘I met him when he was only fifteen years old and I thought 
he was very good; now he’s an outstanding footballer. He has speed, acceleration; he can dodge, he’s always capable 
of creating something new; he is in great shape and has An electric kid  191
enormous talent. He’s an electric kid. As I always say, I find 
it exciting to watch Messi play.’
As you did in the Copa América when Leo scored that goal against 
Mexico, and you said: ‘They should pack up and go home. That’s 
what geniuses do.’
‘Was I wrong?’
We don’t even need to answer that … Let’s move onto another 
genius, Maradona, whom you know well and with whom you have shared ups and downs. Can Messi be compared to the 
number 10, the way everyone is doing?
‘We have to wait and see. Leo is not yet Maradona. He has only just begun. He hasn’t forged a career path yet. He 
plays a similar game, but there’s no need to compare them 
because people will want him to play like Maradona now. He has all the right criteria to be one of the greats, but we 
have to wait, for now he just has to keep doing what he’s 
doing and enjoy playing.’
When he talks about you, Messi says again and again that you 
put up with him from the beginning, that you always let him play and gave him a lot of freedom …
‘From three-quarters of the way up the pitch Messi has the 
freedom to go anywhere, freedom to be inventive, to play the way he knows best, to make challenges, to dribble up 
the pitch, to soar. The best players need to soar.’