37Chapter 6
He was a Gardel
Conversation with Adrián Coria
The television is on. On the table, the computer is running. 
Adrián Coria, ex-Newell’s player and ex-coach of the lepers’ 
youth teams, is on vacation and working from home. But it 
is always a pleasure to reminisce about one of his ex-players.
Let’s begin with your first impressions when you saw him play.
‘At that time there was a lot of talk about Leandro Depetris, a little blond boy who went to Milan aged eleven. Everyone 
was saying wonderful things about him. I disagreed. I always 
used to say to a friend of mine: “Leo will be ten times bet-ter than Depetris. When he grows up he’ll be greater than 
Maradona – and I’m a huge fan of Diego.”’
How could you be so certain about predicting such a great future 
for a twelve-year-old boy?
‘When you saw him you would think: this kid can’t play ball. He’s a dwarf, he’s too fragile, too small. But immediately 
you’d realise that he was born different, that he was a phe-
nomenon and that he was going to be something impres-sive. Why? Because he was explosive, he had a command 
that I had never seen on a football pitch. He’s Formula One, 
a Ferrari. He anticipated the next step, he had moves – one-on-one he’d make mincemeat of you. He dominated the 
ball, always on the ground, always glued to his foot. He left 38 Messi
behind all the big boys who still didn’t have good control of 
movement and coordination. He was 1.2m tall. He dazzled 
against central defenders of 1.8m. He made a huge differ -
ence. And he had a strong temperament – he was competi-
tive, he liked to win. I have never seem him resign himself 
to any result. He wanted to win every game.’
What position did he play?
‘Behind the strikers. I used a 4-3-1-2 formation; with me, Lionel always played freely or in the hole. During a match it 
was impressive to watch him pick off his opponents. The oth-
ers wanted to take him down, they knew of his abilities and they tried to stop him. He’d get kicked at from all sides. But 
him … nothing. He never complained. On the contrary, it 
seemed that fouls spurred him on, the more they went for him, the more he stood up to them. He would go after the ball 
and within a few moments he was already in front of goal. He 
won matches all on his own, so much so that they used to say to me: “You don’t direct this team when Leo’s on the pitch.”’
Any goal or match that stands out in particular?
‘There were goals of all different types. Matches? With him 
we won them all. He was a Gardel [in other words, a legend, like the famous tango singer Carlos Gardel].’
Did he listen to the advice of the coach?
‘Yes, he was respectful. He paid attention. He never said 
“I’m playing”, he never said “I’m the best”. His team-mates adored him. The only thing was … he didn’t like exercises. 
He loved the ball. That’s why I once had to send him off dur -
ing training. I’m not an ogre or a sergeant major, but I’ve 
always liked people to take things seriously. We were doing 
a lap, and he kept playing around with the ball. I called to 
him once, twice, but it was like he took no notice … Finally I said to him: “Give me the ball, get changed and go home.” He was a Gardel  39
Ten minutes later I saw him with his bag on his shoulder, 
glued to the wire fence, watching the pitch. I felt bad and it 
saddened me to see him like that. “You left without saying 
goodbye,” I yelled over to him. He came over to say goodbye and I sent him back to the changing room so that he could 
rejoin the practice. He was a shy kid with a tough character, 
but that was the only time I had to say something to him.’
What did you think when he went to Spain?
‘That Newell’s didn’t take a chance on him, they didn’t 
make enough of a financial effort, they didn’t want to spend money on a thirteen-year-old kid. I think they didn’t realise 
the value of what was right in front of them.’
And now, what do you think of him?
‘It seems to me that he has grown an enormous amount in 
Europe – in terms of football. But he still hasn’t reached his full potential.’
Fame, celebrity, money … can they detract from the game?
‘I think fame has helped him grow, because he knows how 
to use his head. And he hasn’t changed. He is still the same 
humble boy. I ran into him recently. We were just finish-ing our training, they were starting. He saw me. He left the 
warm-up. He came over to say hello and gave me his shirt. 
My players couldn’t believe it and they asked me if they could meet him, or if I could ask him for another shirt.
‘That’s just one example. It had been a while since I had 
seen him … but he seemed to me to be the same kid who trained at Bella Vista.’