11FATHER OF THE WIRELESS (1893)The day when we shall know exactly what “electricity” is, will chronicle anevent probably greater, more important than any other recorded in thehistory of the human race. The time will come when the comfort, the veryexistence, perhaps, of man will depend upon that wonderful agent.NIKOLA TESLA1Tesla disembarked from the August Victoria in the last week of August 1892.2The trauma associated with the death of his mother was alleged to have caused ashock of hair on his right temporal lobe to temporarily turn white.3 Whether thisoccurred cannot be determined; however, what is clear from studyingphotographs taken before and after the excursion is that a qualitative alteration inhis appearance took place, the virginal look of adolescence supplanted by thecocksure demeanor of manhood.After three years at the Astor House, Tesla moved on to the Hotel Gerlach.Set up on the “European plan” by Charles A. Gerlach, its manager, the Gerlachwas equipped with “elevators, electric lights and sumptuous dining rooms.” Theestablishment was family oriented and fireproof.4Located on Twenty-seventh Street, between Broadway and Sixth Avenue,the Gerlach was just a few blocks from the new, magnificent Madison SquareGarden, a modern galleria with shops, theaters, restaurants, a thirty-story tower,and a coliseum with a seating capacity of seventeen thousand. The Garden,which was still under construction, was financed by banker J. Pierpont Morgan,who was funding Edison at the time; and it was designed and managed byStanford White, the flamboyant architect of the prestigious firm of McKim,Mead & White, who would later become an important associate of Tesla’s.Having unpacked his bags and cache of missives at the new hotel, on hewent to South Fifth Avenue to his lab, which he had been away from for so long.In long strides, the inventor weaved his way through “Washington Square, [to]the heart of that picturesque neighborhood known as the French quarter. [Thestreets were] teeming with cheap restaurants, wine shops and weather-beatentenements,” establishments Tesla would never frequent himself. To his surprise,he noticed shop owners waving, whispering among themselves; some evendisplayed awe. Having been elected to the Royal Society of Great Britain, nowhe had become a célébrite internationale and the neighborhood had beenawaiting his return. He came upon what one reporter described as the“uninviting…huge yellowish brick building of some half-dozen stories”5 whichhoused his lab. Eagerly, the “murky interior” was entered as Tesla traversed thestairs, taking two at a time. He climbed past the oily, smelly lower floors, whichwere devoted to a pipe-cutting factory, even managed a smile for the owners ofthe dry-cleaning service on the third floor, and then entered his secluded havenon the fourth.The inventor had brought a number of books which he had purchasedabroad, and he placed them in his library before proceeding into the machineroom, where he spent some time removing dust and cobwebs. Tesla’s primeconcern was to exploit his advances in fluorescent lighting and wirelesstransmission of power. Over the next few weeks he hired several workers and asecretary and began by dictating an article on experiments he had conductedwith Hertzian frequencies and their relationship to the surrounding medium.6 Herefined his oscillators and designed an experiment whereby one of the terminalsof a sizable transmitter was attached to one of the city’s water mains, and herecorded electrical vibrations at different positions around town. “By varying thefrequency,” he said, “I was able to watch for evidence of resonance effects atvarious distances…I think that beyond doubt it is possible to operate electricaldevices in a city through the ground or pipe system by resonance from anelectrical oscillator located at a central point.”7 Using vacuum tubes and othertuned circuits as detectors, Tesla began to study the principles of harmonics andstanding waves, noting that his instruments would respond at certain pointsalong the pipes but not at other positions.There was also mail to answer and equipment to order. In Septembercorrespondence was begun with Mr. Fodor, a German scientist who, with Tesla’shelp, translated his world-famous discourses into German.8 Shortly thereafter,Thomas Edison sent an inscribed photograph “To Tesla from Edison.”9 Teslaalso conferred with Professor R. H. Thurston, a physics teacher from Cornellwho had expertise in thermodynamics.10At the end of the month George Westinghouse stopped by with AlbertSchmid to welcome the inventor home and discuss the fate of the Tesla ACsystem.11 In May of that year, Westinghouse had won the bid to furnish thepower for the upcoming Columbian Exposition, which was going to be held inChicago, and he reportedly had taken a million dollar loss in order to secure thecontract. But even at this juncture he was still not convinced that the Teslasystem would prove to be more useful than compressed air and hydraulic powerfor long-distance transmissions.12 Although Tesla had great respect for thedescendent of Russian noblemen, he still had difficulty hiding his dissatisfaction.Schmid was relieved that the burden of convincing Westinghouse had shifted.“My conviction, Mr. Westinghouse, is that a motor without brushes andcommutator is the only form which is capable of permanent success. To considerother plans I consider a mere waste of time and money.”13Westinghouse asked for Tesla’s help, particularly in aiding Schmid, Scott,and Lamme, and Tesla agreed.Having been assured once again that the Tesla system was all that itpromised to be and more, Westinghouse returned to Pittsburgh with a new senseof purpose. “In the early part of 1893,” Lamme wrote, “much entirely new andnovel apparatus was built for our Chicago World’s Fair Exhibit.”14 Tesla wouldcommute to and from Pittsburgh during this hectic time to guide the workers onthe construction of the large dynamos, or Lamme, Schmid, or Scott would stopby in New York for advice. They were also helping Tesla construct his ownexhibit, which would appear under the Westinghouse banner. Scott was in chargeof resurrecting Tesla’s ingenious spinning egg, a device which not only aptlydisplayed the principles of the rotating magnetic field but also paid homage toChristopher Columbus, the explorer whose accomplishments were beinghonored on this 400th anniversary of his transatlantic journey. Hence the title ofthe fair: the Columbian Exposition. The fair was slated to open in May, and thisgave them only a few months to complete what was truly a Herculean task.Westinghouse may have won the right to light the fair, but Edison wouldnot allow him a license to produce his lightbulb. Fortunately for Westinghouse,he did have a viable patent on a Sawyer-Man “stopper lamp,” which had arubber bottom where the filament was attached in place of the Edison all-glassevacuated construction. Although less efficient, the Sawyer-Man lamp worked.With less than six months left until opening day, he had to produce 250,000 ofthese inferior bulbs. Coupled with the costs of legal disputes, the company wasinvolved in a great risk venture. However, the prize, if all went successfully,would be the right to harness Niagara Falls. Potential revenues from such acontract would be immense.Tesla arranged for Mr. Luka of the Helios Company of Cologne, to come toPittsburgh to discuss supplying the German concern with AC equipment for theircontract in Germany. “He has been sent here to gather information about railway,steam and other motors,” Tesla told Westinghouse. “I believe they would beready to make a small cash payment and pay a moderate royalty, and I have donewhat I could to facilitate an understanding.”15 Tesla had also secured otherEuropean connections, and soon revenues from abroad began to roll in.Nevertheless, there remained a good deal of animosity toward Tesla bysome other members of the Westinghouse organization, partially because Teslawas paid so handsomely for an invention that they considered had also beenconceived by Shallenberger and partially because they simply did not like thepompous foreigner. There were also great financial costs incurred in dismantlingthe hundreds of profitable Gaulard-Gibbs power stations which were dottedacross the nation.In November 1892, Grover Cleveland, former hangman and sheriff ofBuffalo, running on an antilabor ticket, was re-elected president of the UnitedStates. Cleveland’s second inauguration inflamed many segments of thepopulation and no doubt helped trigger the Panic of 1893.The calamity began in 1892 with the financial collapse of four majorrailroads. Then banks failed, and tens of thousands of people becameunemployed;16 and the Westinghouse Company was just beginning a decade-long course of incurring enormous debt. Westinghouse realized that he had toback Tesla unconditionally as the sole inventor of the AC polyphase system. Hadthere been any ambiguity in the matter, competitors could seize an advantage byobscuring the origins of the invention, and thus they would be able to produceTeslaic technology without royalty payments to Westinghouse.On January 16, 1893, Westinghouse came out with an announcementtouting the Tesla multiphase, or polyphase, system which was circulated to theelectrical magazines and major competitors. Having “secured exclusive right tomanufacture and sell apparatus covered by [Tesla’s] patents” the Westinghousecompany promised to use such apparatus to economically harness the manywaterfalls which were wasting so much energy.Now that the problems in Pittsburgh were somewhat alleviated, Tesla coulddevote more time to his upcoming lectures, which were going to be held at theFranklin Institute in Philadelphia at the end of February and again, the followingweek, in March at the annual meeting of the National Electric Light Associationin St. Louis. He was met in Philadelphia by Prof. Edwin Houston, formerly thepartner of Houston’s former student, Elihu Thomson.Tesla began his lecture in Philadelphia with a discussion of the human eye,“nature’s masterpiece…It is the great gateway through which all knowledgeenters the mind…It is often said, the very soul shows itself in the eye.”17The study of the eye suggested a number of different and distinct lines ofinquiry. For instance, it enabled Tesla to envision the precursor to television,with its numerous transfiguring pixels corresponding to the light-sensitivereceiving cells of the retina. In another vein, in conjunction with instrumentssuch as microscopes and telescopes, the eye also opened up new vistas forscientific inquiry. Alluding to the concept of the plurality of worlds, Tesla wouldsay, “It was an organ of a higher order.”18“It is conceivable,” Tesla continued, “that in some other world, in someother beings, the eye is replaced by a different organ, equally or more perfect,but these beings cannot be men.”19Obtaining information from all corners of the universe, at the same time,the eye interacted with that elusive realm called the mind. Furthermore, thisorgan was also a perfect analog of Tesla’s Aristotlean worldview, as the eye hadto be triggered from an external source in order to function.20If we go back to one of Tesla’s earlier experiments with the “brushphenomena,” that is, the creation of a brush or stream of light generated withinan insulated vacuum bulb that responded to the faintest electromagneticreverberations, we see that to Tesla this precursor to the radio tube was actuallybased on the principles inherent in the construction of the human eye. The brush,we remember, not only reacted to magnetic influences but also to the approachof a person and to the torque of the earth, just as the eye also reacts to faintimpulses from near or far. It is “the only organ capable of being affected directlyby the vibrations of the ether.”21The ether was a nineteenth-century theoretical construct of an all-pervasivemedium between the planets and stars. In 1881, Michelson and Morelyunsuccessfully tried to measure the ether in their famous experiment with lightbeams and mirrors. The ramifications of their findings did not become evidentuntil after the turn of the century, a full decade after Tesla’s lecture, whenEinstein used the Michelson-Morley experiment to suggest that, by its nature,“the ether cannot be detected,”22 and further, that it was unnecessary forexplaining how light could travel through space.Physics professor Edwin Gora, of Providence College, whose mentorsincluded Arnold Sommerfeld and Werner Heisenberg, stated that the ether couldnot be detected with nineteenth-century techniques and that Einstein replaced theold ether with a new non-Euclidean space-time construct. This new moreabstract ether had such unusual properties as allowing space to curve aroundgravitational bodies.Completely disagreeing with Einstein, and never abandoning the concept ofthe all-pervasive either, Tesla said that space cannot be curved because“something cannot act upon nothing.” Light, according to Tesla, bent aroundstars and planets because they were attracted by a force field.23 Gora agreed thatthe two concepts of curved space and force field may actually be different viableways of describing the same thing.Returning to the 1893 lecture, for Tesla, the relationship of electricalphenomena to the structure of the ether appeared to be an important key tounderstanding how it could be transmitted without wires in an efficient manner.The problem of the transmission of electromagnetic energy through spacewas discussed in all three of his lectures on high-frequency phenomena. Onequestion he considered was whether the ether was motionless or in motion.When vibrations were transmitted through it, it appeared to act like a still lake,but at other times, the ether acted like “a fluid to the motion of bodies throughit.” Referring to the investigations of Kelvin, Tesla concluded that the ether mustbe in motion. “But regardless of this, there is nothing which would enable us toconclude with certainty that, while a fluid is not capable of transmittingtransverse vibrations of a few hundred or thousand per second, it might not becapable of transmitting such vibrations when they range into hundreds of millionmillions per second.”24Tesla would later claim spectacular results in wireless transmission neverduplicated by any other researcher; he states that his system was not bound to theinverse-square laws, and it appears that his success, if indeed it was a success(!),was based on the premise that above certain frequencies the ether revealed noveland heretofore unknown features. Perhaps threshold values were involved.Tesla continued his discussion on the structure of the ether and itsrelationship to electromagnetic phenomena by making two observations: (1)“that energy [could be transmitted] by independent carriers” and (2) that atomicand subatomic particles whirled around each other like little solar systems.25These two concepts, which were tied to the mystery of the structure of the ether,predated similiar ideas proposed by quantum physicists Ernest Rutherford, NielsBohr, and Albert Einstein by at least a decade.In Rutherford’s case, he is often credited as the first physicist to view theatom as structured somewhat like a solar system. It is evident, however, thatRutherford referred to Tesla’s high-frequency lectures in 1895, when heconstructed high-frequency AC equipment for conducting long-distance wirelessexperiments.26Tesla stated that he could create electromagnetic oscillations that displayedtransverse and also longitudinal wave characteristics. The first (transverse) casecorresponds to the concept of the ether as a medium for propagating wavelikeimpulses; and the second (longitudinal) case corresponds to what today is knownas a quantum of energy analogous to the way sound waves travel through air.Tesla maintained, against all opposition, even to this day, that hiselectromagnetic frequencies traveled in longitudinal, bulletlike impulses, andthus they carried much more energy than can be ascribed to Hertzian transversewaves. In fact, as alluded to before, Hertz wanted to eliminate the idea of massfrom the Maxwellian electromagnetic equations.A drawing depicting Nikola Tesla displaying wireless experiments at the Chicago World’sFair of 1893.Tesla’s idea of longitudinal waves in the ether appear to be a directoutcropping of the research undertaken by Ernst Mach, who was still at Pragueat the time. Mach’s radical views on the relationship between consciousness,space and time, and the nature of gravity were beginning to alter greatly thethinking of a number of key individuals. His idea, which came to be known as“Mach’s Principle,” hypothesized that all things in the universe wereinterrelated, for example, the mass of the earth, according to this theory, wasdependent on a supergravitational force from all stars in the universe. Nothingwas separate. This view, which Mach realized corresponded to Buddhistthinking, paralleled closely views espoused by Tesla. Although the followingquote was written almost a quarter of a century later, its link to Tesla’s 1893lecture is clear: “There is no thing endowed with life—from man, who isenslaving the elements, to the nimblest creature—in all this world that does notsway in its turn. Whenever action is born from force, though it be infinitesimal,the cosmic balance is upset and universal motion results.”27This idea was extended and interlinked between living organisms and inertmatter by Tesla. All are “susceptible to stimulus from the outside. There is nogap between, no break of continuity, no special and distinguishing vital agent.The same law governs all matter, all the universe is alive.”28 The source ofpower which runs the universe is that found within “the sun’s heat and light.Wherever they are there is life.” As these processes were electrical in nature, toTesla, the secret of electricity held the secret of life.Looking at the world around him, Tesla realized that it was a finite placeand that the natural resources which gave humans the fuel to produce electricitywould eventually run out. “What will man do when the forests disappear, whenthe coal deposits are exhausted?” he asked his Philadelphia audience. “Only onething, according to our present knowledge, will remain; that is to transmit powerat great distances. Man will go to the waterfalls, [and] to the tides,” Teslaspeculated, because these, unlike coal and oil reserves, are replenishable.29Having set up the premise that it could be possible to derive inexhaustibleamounts of energy with properly constructed equipment, that is, “to attach ourengines to the wheelwork of the universe,” Tesla described, for the first timeever, his invention of wireless transmission. Cloaking his true goals in morepalatable language, he announced, “I…firmly believe that it is practicable todisturb by means of powerful machines the electrostatic conditions of the earthand thus transmit intelligible signals and perhaps power.” Taking intoconsideration the speed of electrical impulses, with this new technology, “all…ideas of distance must…vanish,” as humans will be instantaneouslyinterconnected. “First, we must know what capacity the earth is, and what chargeit contains.” Tesla also speculated that the earth was “probably a charged bodyinsulated in space and” and thus had a “low capacity.” The upper strata, muchlike the vacuum created in his Geissler tubes, would probably be an excellentmedium for transmitting impulses.30 We see here the precursor to the discoveryby Heaviside and Kennelly of the ionosphere. Tesla had already thrust largeamounts of electrical energy into the earth to try to measure its period offrequency, but he had yet to come up with a figure that appeared accurate.Nevertheless, he knew the size of the earth and the speed of light and thus wasalready at this time formulating optimum wavelengths for transmitting impulsesthrough the planet.During his talk, Tesla demonstrated impedance phenomena by turning onand off a lightbulb by placing it at various positions along an electrified metalbar. Based somewhat on the work of Hertz, this experiment demonstrated theconcepts of wavelength and standing waves. He constructed circuits with two orthree bulbs independently connected in a row and placed metal bars at variouspoints along the way, thereby illuminating or extinguishing one or another ofthese bulbs by impeding or not impeding the electrical flow. He also displayedelectric lamps illuminated with only a single wire and therefore was able toestablish that the wire itself could be replaced by connecting the lamp directly tothe earth, which also was a conductor, as no return circuit (as found in theEdison bulbs) was necessary. As before, Tesla also displayed lamps illuminatedwith no connections whatsoever.With pure resonance, Tesla suggested, wires become unnecessary, sinceimpulses can be “jumped” from sending device to receiver. Naturally, thereceiving instruments would have to be tuned to the frequency of the transmitter.“If ever we can ascertain at what period the earth’s charge, when disturbed [or]oscillates with respect to an oppositely electrified system or known circuit, weshall know a fact possibly of the greatest importance to the welfare of the humanrace.”31Tesla proceeded to present a diagram which depicted how to set up theaerials, receivers, transmitter, and ground connection. The son of one of hisassistants described the apparatus:In the transmitter group on one side of the stage was a 5-kva high-voltagepole-type oil filled distribution transformer connected to a condenser bankof Leyden jars, a spark gap, a coil and a wire running up to the ceiling. Inthe receiving group at the other side of the stage was an identical wirehanging from the ceiling, a duplicate condenser bank of Leyden jars and acoil—but instead of the spark gap, there was a Geissler tube that wouldlight up…when voltage was applied. When the switch was closed, thetransformer grunted and groaned, the Leyden jars showed corona sizzlingaround their foil edges, the spark gap crackled with a noisy spark discharge,and an invisible electromagnetic field radiated energy into space from thetransmitter antenna wire [to the receiver antenna wire].32Tesla elaborated: “When the electric oscillation is set up,” he said, “therewill be a movement of electricity in and out of [the transmitter], and alternatingcurrents will pass through the earth…In this manner neighboring points on theearth’s surface within a certain radius will be disturbed.” Although Tesla’s maingoal was to transmit power, he also noted that “theoretically,…it [w]ould notrequire a great amount of energy to produce a disturbance perceptible at greatdistance, or even all over the surface of the globe.”33In Tesla’s autobiography, written a quarter of a century later, the inventorinforms the reader that there was such opposition to his discussion of wirelesstelegraphy at that time that “only a small part of what I had intended to say wasembodied [in the speech]…This little salvage from the wreck has earned me thetitle ‘Father of the Wireless.’”34 Tesla stated that it was Joseph Wetzler who toldhim to deemphasize his work in wireless in this lecture. Wetzler probably editedout a number of key passages which, in the long run, could have helped Teslaestablish more easily his priorities in the field. Nevertheless, the entirePhiladelphia speech runs a hundred typeset pages and covers numerous othertopics as well. What is important to realize is that for the first time ever, a majorinventor announced bold possibilities in the field of wireless communication;simultaneously, he explained in step-by-step fashion all of the major componentsthat would be needed for success.The question of who invented the radio is complex, for there was no singledeveloper. Experiments in wireless can be traced back to Joseph Henry, who, in1842, transmitted electrical energy across a thirty-foot room between magnetizedneedles and sensitive Leyden jars, and to Samuel Morse, who sent messages in1847 by means of induction across an eighty-foot-wide canal by usingsomething called “current leakage.”35The first individual to transmit messages over long distances using aerials(in the form of kites) and a ground connection was Mahlon Loomis. A dentistand experimentalist who also used electricity to stimulate growth in plants,Loomis not only received a patent on the device in 1872 but also successfullyintroduced the “Loomis Aerial Telegraphy Bill” before the U.S. Congress.Loomis made such an impact that $50,000 was appropriated to help him in hispursuit. In 1886, Loomis sent wireless messages fourteen miles between twomountains in Virginia, and a few years later, he also sent messages betweenships two miles apart in Chesapeake Bay. There is little doubt that Tesla wasaware of Loomis. For one thing, his patent was registered, and Tesla alwaysmade it a practice to study the work of his precursors. Also, it should be notedthat some of the wording from Loomis’s patent applications and publishedwritings sound eerily like the wording in some of Tesla’s discourses. Forinstance, Loomis discusses the passing of “electrical vibrations or waves aroundthe world,” and principles of harmonics and resonance, and he also refers toharnessing “the wheelwork of nature,” a favored term of Tesla’s.36In 1875, Thomas Edison, while working with Charles Batchelor, noticed anunusual sparking effect emanating from the core of an electromagnet whichleaped to noncharged bodies several feet away. By using an electroscope, he wasunable to distinguish a charge.37 In actuality, he had created a high frequencythat could not be detected by his equipment. “By charging a gas main, Edisonwas able to obtain sparks from the fixtures in his house several blocks away…Edison thought that since energy can take various forms, and it was possible tochange electricity to magnetism, magnetism might be transformed intosomething else.”38 Edison therefore announced to the scientific community thathe had discovered a new “unknown force.” Possibly, Tesla’s ideas of connectingan oscillator to the water mains of a city may have been influenced by thisresearch.In the early 1880s, William Preece, electrical engineer for the British PostOffice, began directing experiments in wireless communication by means of aninductive apparatus. He was probably also the first inventor to realize that theearth itself was an integral component in the successful implementation of anywireless system. After isolating the role of the earth as either a primary orsecondary circuit, Preece utilized telephone receivers as detecting devices andconcluded that “on ordinary working telegraph lines the disturbance reached adistance of 3,000 feet, while effects were detected on parallel lines of a telegraph10 to 40 miles apart in some sections of the country.” Preece’s work of detectingearth currents, which was duplicated by Western Union engineers in the UnitedStates, significantly influenced the theories expounded by Tesla.39Preece had displayed a long-standing interest in wireless communications.He had visited Edison in the mid-1880s, just after Tesla emigrated to America, towitness firsthand Edison’s latest invention, which he called the “grasshoppertelegraph,” a device for jumping messages from dispatch stations to movingtrains. By means of induction or resonance, a metal strip attached to a telephonereceiver on a moving railroad car would send or receive messages from a similarstrip strung parallel to the track at the station. Although the invention neverevolved beyond this primitive early stage, the patent would later have importantlegal significance in priority battles over the invention of the wireless.Thus, Edison is clearly one of the fathers of wireless transmission, as areHenry, Morse, Loomis, and Preece. Concerning the history of radio tubes,Edison also had an important invention, discussed above, of a dualfilamentlightbulb which displayed a flow of current between them, Preece having namedit the “Edison effect.” J. J. Thomson used it to help in his discovery of theelectron, and Tesla combined information from this device with Crookes’s workon radiation effects inside evacuated glass tubes to invent his “brushphenomena,” which was the first such vacuum tube explicitly created forwireless transmission of intelligence.Other precursors to Tesla included Heinrich Hertz, Oliver Lodge, andEdouard Branly. A French professor of physics, Branly, perhaps influenced bythe knowledge of the Edison effect, noticed that the gap of Hertz’s tuned circuitscould be replaced by a glass-enclosed tube which contained finely scatteredmetallic particles. When current passed through the tube by means of wirelessinduction, the particles aligned themselves along the path of the gap and closedthe circuit. A light tapping on the tube opened the circuit once again untiltransmission occurred. Lodge perfected Branly’s 1890 discovery of particlecohesion and labeled it the “coherer.”40These scientists were not thinking about “wireless telegraphy” at the timeof their initial work. They were explorers in a new field of electromagneticinduction, and it was not until 1894, by Lodge’s own calculation, that he thoughtin terms of utilizing the equipment as a means of conveying information.41 Onthe other hand, we remember that Crookes, writing in 1892, at the very time hewas meeting with Tesla in England, noted that he had experimented in thewireless transmission of Morse code from one end of a house to another at aboutthe same time as Hertz and Lodge were experimenting in the late 1880s, but henever publicized his work or furthered the invention beyond this casualexperiment.Tesla realized, as did Hertz, that the Hertzian frequencies through spacewere not conductive for long-range communication, but unlike Hertz, Teslasought a way around this limiting factor. Therefore, he devised not only themeans of securing more powerful transmitters but also “concatenated tunedcircuits,” which were, in essence, sensitive radio tubes for receivinginformation.42 During this speech in Philadelphia, Tesla also introduced theconcept of using both an aerial and ground connection and a single wire as areturn for the operation of “all kinds of devices.” This system of wirelesstransmission was outlined in detail in highly visible articles which appeared in1891, during his first public demonstrations of wireless Geissler tubes atColumbia College, in 1892 in Europe, and were explicitly delineated in 1893. Itwould be another full year before a high school boy by the name of GuglielmoMarconi would begin his first tinkerings in the field. 