42TRANSMUTATION (1918-21)I come from a very wiry and long-lived race. Some of my ancestors havebeen centenarians, and one of them lived 129 years. I am determined tokeep up the record and please myself with prospects of great promise. Thenagain, nature has given me a vivid imagination…NIKOLA TESLA1Tesla’s lifework was his World Telegraphy Center. Partially materialized onthe physical plane as Wardenclyffe, this was the inventor’s Holy Grail, the key toanointment. In 1917 the project was demolished, and in that sense, so was theinventor. Capable of recognizing the absurdities of life and drawing fromtranscendent energies, the mystic sought regeneration by consummating hisgrand plan in fantasy form and by seeking a new philosopher’s stone.One year earlier, when Tesla’s project was at its bleakest, he had formed analliance with one of his most ardent admirers, Hugo Gernsback, editor ofElectrical Experimenter. Gernsback had first heard about Tesla when he was achild growing up in Luxembourg in the late 1890s. It was at this time that theten-year-old came across the fantastic picture of the emblazoned electriciansending hundreds of thousands of volts through his body and the declaration inthe accompanying article that he was the grandest wizard of the age. Consideredby most futurologists to be the “founder and father of science fiction,”Gernsback studied electronics at Bingen Technicum in Europe, beforeimmigrating to America, at the age of nineteen, in 1903.2With his mind totally captivated by the fantastic union of science andfantasy, the exuberant youth wrote a spectacular tale which took place in the year2660 called RALPH 124C41 +, which he serialized in his new magazine ModernElectronics. Simultaneously, he also opened up Hugo Gernsback’s ElectroImporting Company, an all-purpose electronics shop located under the “el” atFulton Street. There the new breed of amateur ham operators could buywhatever they wanted and browse through “the biggest bunch of junk you eversaw.”3Gernsback’s first meeting with Tesla was in 1908, when he stopped at theinventor’s lab to view the new turbine.4Gernsback wrote, “The door opens, and out steps a tall figure—over six feethigh—gaunt but erect. It approaches slowly, stately. You become conscious atonce that you are face to face with a personality of a high order. Nikola Teslaadvances and shakes your hand with a powerful grip, surprising for a man oversixty. A winning smile from piercing light bluegray eyes, set in extraordinarilydeep sockets, fascinates you and makes you feel at once at home.“You are guided into an office immaculate in its orderliness. Not a speck ofdust is to be seen. No papers litter the desk, everything just so. It reflects the manhimself, immaculate in attire, orderly and precise in his every movement. Drest[sic] in a dark frock coat, he is entirely devoid of all jewelry. No ring, stickpin oreven watch-chain can be seen.”5In 1916 the inventor edited a consequential article for Gernsback on themagnifying transmitter. The inventor also promised to think more seriouslyabout putting his life story down on paper; in fact, he wrote a short first draft forScientific American which he embellished for the Edison Medal acceptancespeech.6By this time, Gernsback had also secured the talents of the gifted illustratorFrank R. Paul. Destined to be the most influential science-fiction artist of thetwentieth century, Paul was able to “render the possible development of anyinvention [from]…a raw idea into a picture fantasy.” With a penchant fordrawing futuristic scenarios such as Goliath-sized insects, spaceships orbitingplanets, and a variety of humanoidian mad scientists conquering galacticempires, Paul advanced to become the premier cover artist for ElectricalExperimenter, and later Amazing Stories and Science Wonder Stories.7 He wasassigned the role of completing Tesla’s tower in picture form. The drawing,replete with fully functioning Wardenclyffe transmitters and Tesla winglessairfoils beaming down death rays to incoming ships, not only became a fantasticcover for Electrical Experimenter; it also became the centerpiece of the wizard’snew letterhead.As alchemist, Tesla transformed the ruins of his station into a fantasticGernsbackian World Telegraphy Center, as he also transformed himself, leavingNew York City to begin anew with his next major creation.Before he left, in June 1917, the inventor wrote Jack Morgan, hoping,optimistically, because of new developments, to pay off his debt to the financier“in about four months…My big ship is still to come in, but I have now amarvelous opportunity having perfected an invention which will astound thewhole world.” Cryptically, Tesla said that the invention would “afford aneffective means for meeting the menace of the submarine.” Whether he wastalking about a long-range radar system, a remote-controlled torpedo, or someother invention is uncertain.8The following month, Tesla moved to Chicago, and he stayed there throughNovember 1918, working with Pyle National on the perfection of his turbines.Here, during the day, with the slate clean, the gangly mechanic could continue tobattle the demons by plunging himself into a brand-new endeavor. At night, ascreative author, the cognoscente sketched out the first draft of his expandedautobiography.Most of the time, he drew from his own capital for fear of causingdifficulties with the new partners.9 He knew he would eventually receivecompensation because the Chicago company had signed an agreement promising“cash payments and guarantees” with the expiration of their option, but carryingcosts were becoming a problem.10To handle expenses in the interim, the inventor requested that Scherff stepup the pressure on receiving royalties from the various wireless companies. Hisgreatest source of income was probably the Waltham Watch Company, whichwas now in the active stage of marketing his speedometer. Even though the warwas still going on, the inventor expected to receive compensation fromTelefunken “after the hostilities cease,” even though he would have to “apply tothe War Trade Board under the Trading with the Enemy act for a license toreceive payment.”11Progress on the turbines was hampered by numerous obstacles.Nevertheless, the inventor was delighted with the “extraordinarily efficientpersonnel” and overall organization of the Chicago firm. As the disks couldrotate at speeds ranging from 10,000 to 35,000 rpm, the centrifugal force tendedto elongate them. Thus, they were subject to fatigue and ran the risk of crackingafter performing for long periods of time. Perceived by skeptical engineers asfatal flaws, Tesla endeavored to hammer home the point that stress was a factorin all engines.12 Thus, much of the time in Chicago was spent experimentingwith different alloys and inventing means for instantaneously regulatingorthorotational speed and centrifugal pressure to minimize the stress factor. “Forinstance, suppose that the steam pressure of the locomotive would vary from say50 to 200 lbs, no matter how rapidly, this would not have the slightest effect onthe…performance of the turbine.”13In January 1918, the U.S. Machine Manufacturing Company inquired aboutplacing one of Tesla’s turbines inside an airplane, and a few months later, theChicago Pneumatic Tool Company also expressed interest. Tesla was writingScherff, expecting the invention to yield $25 million per year. However, therewas still the difficulty of perfecting it, and Tesla was still not free of thenumerous other problems of his life, such as the past debts and the continuingquagmire of litigation. During the summer, the inventor twisted his back and waslaid up for several weeks.14During Tesla’s time in Chicago, he calculated his operating expenses at$17,600, with revenues of $12,500. Pyle National tried to get out of their debt bysending a check for $1,500, but Tesla returned the token payment and threatenedsuit. Meanwhile, back at home, the sheriff took possession of the Woolworthoffice, so Tesla had to wrestle some capital from Pyle National to release hiscompany. In New York, George Scherff continued to handle all of the details.Concerning his relationship with the government (as stated in chapter 41),most of Tesla’s wireless patents had expired, and his 1914 patent wascomplicated by its clash with the Marconi claim. However, he was negotiatingwith the government on an engine for a plane, writing to the Bureau of SteamEngineering at this time.15 In litigation, Tesla won a few thousand dollars fromLowenstein, lost a $67,000 case against a Mr. DeLaVergne, in part, because herefused to travel back to New York to testify, and had to pay out $1,600 to A. M.Foster, for nonpayment of services rendered.16Before returning to Manhattan for the last months of 1918, the inventortraveled to Milwaukee to visit the Allis Chalmers people. There he was met bythe astute but pedantic head engineer Hans Dahlstrand. After providing variousarticles and records from his work at the Edison station and Pyle National, acontract was drawn up for Tesla to return to Milwaukee and develop the enginewith Dahlstrand. Skeptical from the start, the learned head engineer reluctantlyagreed to defer to Tesla’s wishes and begin a preparatory investigation of theturbine before he arrived.Throughout the period 1917-1926, the inventor spent most of his timeoutside New York City. In the years 1917-1918, he was in Chicago with PyleNational; in 1919-22 he was in Milwaukee with Allis Chalmers; for the lastmonth of 1922 he was in Boston with the Waltham Watch Company; and in theyears 1925-26 he was in Philadelphia working on the gasoline turbine at BuddManufacturing Company.17Tesla also sold a motor which was used in motion-picture equipment toWisconsin Electric in 1918 and a valvular conduit, or “unidirectional fluid flowtube,” to an unspecified oil company.18 This last invention, which can also becalled a fluid diode, could not only be used to pump oil from the ground but alsobe attached to the bladeless turbine to turn it into a combustion engine.According to Tesla expert Leland Anderson, this invention “is the only valvingpatent without moving parts. It has been used in attempts to develop micro-miniature radiation hardened logic circuits and simple fluid computers.”19Waltham Speedometers & Automobile ClocksEvery progressive automobile manufacturer is adding improvements to hiscar. This is why the only Air-Friction Speedometer in the world, inventedby Nikola Tesla, perfected and developed by Waltham…has won theunqualified approval of the world’s great automotive engineers. You willfind this…instrument upon such cars as the Cunningham, Lafayette, Leach-Biltwell, Lincoln, Packard, Pierce-Arrow, Renault, Rolls-Royce, Stevens-Duryea, Wills-Sainte Claire and others.The Speedometer of Instantaneous Accuracy20The inventor arrived at the Copley Plaza in Boston to negotiate with Mr.May, the manager of the factory, the advance and royalty schedule.21 Concerningrevenues, Tesla received $5,000 from Waltham, assigning them three of hispatents in 1922 for a speedometer and tachometer. This agreement includedroyalties which he received until at least 1929. Pyle National eventually paidhim $15,000, and maybe $30,000 in 1925; from Budd National, he received$30,000 for the turbines, and probably a similar amount from Allis Chalmers,from whom he was expecting profits on the order of a quarter of a milliondollars per year.22 George Scherff received 5 percent from most of thesecontracts.Tesla arrived back home at the tail end of 1918 in time for Christmas dinnerwith the Johnsons. He stayed for a brief time at the Waldorf and then moved tothe Hotel St. Regis, where he lived off and on for the next few years. The greatinfluenza epidemic was just in its beginning stages, and Katharine was one of thefirst to display signs of its ravages. In the next year, over a billion people wereinfected and 20 million died world-wide. She was lucky to survive. Her healthdeteriorated throughout the year, and by the following Christmas sheexperienced episodes during which she lost consciousness three times within asingle day.23 Perhaps heightened by the severity of the situation and with newincome from Waltham, Tesla paid Robert checks totaling at least $1,500 duringthis period.Throughout 1919, Tesla’s autobiography appeared in serialized form inGernsback’s Electrical Experimenter. Paired with photographs and a series ofspectacular Frank Paul drawings, the story began as an unusual tale of a wizard-child growing up in another era in a faraway land. The account of the early yearsof Tesla’s life oozed charm and wit, with its numerous Mark Twainian depictionsof amusing anecdotes, harrowing experiences, life with his inventive mother,preacher father, prodigal brother, and three doting sisters. Digging deep into hispast, Tesla explored the tragedy of his brother’s death, how it impacted his careerdecision, the traumatic move away from the idyllic farm to the clutter of Gospić,his college years, engineering training in Europe before coming to America, andhis early meetings with Edison, Westinghouse, and members of the RoyalSociety of London. Also included was an uncommon description of his peculiarpowers of eidetic imagery, out-of-body experiences, childhood illnesses,phobias, and idiosyncrasies. In month after month of fascinating reading, thepundit detailed the development of his ideas, his physical breakdown and“opening up of the third eye” experience and accompanying revelation which ledto the development of the rotating magnetic field, his creation of thetelautomaton, work in Colorado Springs, and the grand Wardenclyffe world-wireless design.This liaison with Gernsback supplied the inventor with a steady income andhelped Electrical Experimenter boost its circulation to around 100,000.Simultaneously, My Inventions also provided the world with a notableautobiographical testimony of one of the most singular and controversialpersonalities of the age.The year also saw numerous articles about Marconi’s recent experiencesintercepting impulses possibly emanating from extraterrestrials. With ProfessorPickering writing Elihu Thomson that he might have detected vegetation on themoon24 and a resurgence of interest in the “Canals of Mars” scenario, the pressjumped at the Italian’s far-out declaration and grilled him for additional details.Stealing Tesla’s thunder even on this front, Marconi proclaimed that he“had often received strong signals out of the ether which seemed to come fromsome place outside the earth and which might conceivably have proceeded fromthe stars.” As to the language problem of communicating with the Martians,Marconi said, “It is an obstacle, but I don’t think it is insurmountable. You see,one might get through some such message as 2 plus 2 equals 4, and go onrepeating it until an answer came back signifying ‘Yes.’…Mathematics must bethe same throughout the physical universe.”25Seeking redress in a variety of ways, Tesla sought publicity in ElectricalWorld, where he attributed the Italian’s signals to an undertone metronome effectemanating from other wireless operators. Anticipating the possibility that a criticmight ascribe the same mechanism to his own extraterrestrial encounter of 1899,Tesla added: “At the time I carried on those investigations there existed nowireless plant [capable of]…produc[ing] a disturbance perceptible in a radius ofmore than a few miles.”26 This, of course, was a false premise, as Marconi atthat time was already sending messages hundreds of miles.Johnson wrote Tesla that “When Marconi repeats [your] idea, it is no longerlaughed at,” but in some circles, this did not seem to be the case.Celesial MoviesMr. Tesla has small confidence in the Marconian idea of getting intocommunication by way of mathematics. He would prefer to send picturesby wireless: the human face, for example. But suppose Mars does not likeyour face. That would be a regrettable rebuff to scientific investigation. Ifcivilization on Mars is as old as we are asked to believe, the Martians haveno doubt acquired their own taste in faces.27Although the Christmas dinner of 1919 was marred by Katharine’s illhealth, it was overshadowed by good news: President Wilson had appointedRobert ambassador to Italy! With mixed emotions and Katharine apparentlyrecovering her health, Tesla’s friends left for Europe, where they stayedthroughout the following year.Now, really alone, the wizard continued his slide from public scrutiny.Copied, mocked at, and ultimately abandoned by the world he helped create,Tesla tried to keep his life in perspective and contain his anger by doing his bestto transform it; but over time the irony of it all took its toll and caused an alreadyeccentric individual to exaggerate already strange ways. Tesla would becomemore fanatical about cleanliness and spend more time walking the streets afterhours, circling his block three times before entering the St. Regis and avoidingstepping on cracks on the sidewalks. Some said he peeked in windows and likedto watch others in voyeuristic ways. Practicing “gastronomical frugality,”28 thecelibate slowly turned away from the meat and potatoes of life and eventuallyfrom eating solids altogether. Now he would rarely write in pen, preferring theless definite pencil. He would spend more time by himself, feeding the pigeonsat midnight by the Forty-second Street Library or stealing away via the StatenIsland ferry to a quiet farm where he could block out the city and search onceagain for his fountainhead.29 With the Johnsons’ departure, he left forMilwaukee to consummate his relationship with Allis Chalmers.Much of his time in Wisconsin was invested in trying to perfect the turbine.However, he had reached an impasse, what Sartre calls a “counterfinality,” orunforeseen event which opposes the goal intended, with Hans Dahlstrand, headengineer. Thwarted, Tesla had no recourse but to return to New York. So upsetwas he that he refused to talk about it when his biographer, Jack O’Neill,questioned him on the Milwaukee experience.30Allis Chalmers had issued Dahlstrand’s detailed report describing a long listof serious problems, as he saw it, in the manufacture of the turbine. Aside fromthe fatigue and cracking of the disks, Dahlstrand also cited additionalimpediments, including only a 38 percent efficiency performance, a decrease ofmechanical efficiency as steam pressure increased, a problem in designingattachment gears needed to join the turbine to other units, and a high cost ofproduction. Another factor was that the present-day motors, such as the Parsonsturbine which was being developed by Westinghouse, or the Curtis motor, beingdeveloped by GE, were operating satisfactorily.31This question of the failure of the Tesla turbine was posed to a number ofTesla experts. Leland Anderson found that manufacturers interested in the Teslaturbine “all say it is a fine concept and an excellent machine, but there [are] too[many]…support systems…to be replaced for a machine not that much better inperformance. And that is the point—the Tesla turbine is good, but not that muchbetter.”32C. R. Possell, president and chief engineer of the American Development &Manufacturing Company, one of the only existing organizations working onmanufacturing Tesla bladeless turbines and pumps, offered a somewhat differentexplanation. Mr. Possell, who initially worked on the Tesla “boundary layer dragturbine” during the Korean War for the military and who has been actively tryingto perfect the turbine for thirty-five years, stated that the main problem hadsimply to do with the high cost of research and development.According to Possell, “Tesla was about twenty-five to thirty years ahead ofhis time. Metallurgy was not what it is today. Magnetic bearings are a whole newscience. He didn’t have the right materials. Instrumentation [for measuringperformance] was in its infancy, and it was hard to demonstrate the turbineadequately. Somewhere between the first prototype and the first use of it, you aregoing to have hundreds and hundreds of man hours, and the turbine didn’t getthat.” Possell gave as just one example (and there are numerous others), the“millions of man hours” required to get a plane to fly at Mach One.At present, the Tesla pump, based on the same technology, has been used byJerry LaBine as a replacement for the motor in the jet ski recreational vehicle,and also, it has been further developed by Max Gurth, inventor of the “Discflopump.” Utilizing Tesla’s basic idea and principles associated with the structureof a vortex (responsible for such events as whirlpools and tornadoes) andlaminar flow, (i.e., the natural, gentle movement through fluids), Gurth has beenable to increase the space between the disks. Thus, he has improved its ability tomove such difficult products as solid waste and petrochemicals. Whereas anormal pump would have their blades pitted and corroded by coming intocontact with the assorted troublesome products, the boundary layer drag pumphas no blades and therefore avoids that entire problem!33Possell not only sees a day when the pump will be used inside the humanbody, as, for instance, a heart valve, but also a day when the turbine is perfected.One of the great advantages of a bladeless Tesla engine is its ability to withstandextremely high temperatures. “Bladed turbines are about at their maximum,”Possell said, meaning that they can run at about 2,000 degrees Fahrenheit,“although GE is experimenting with turbines that can run at 2,200 degrees. Ifyou could boost the temperature an additional 350 degrees, you would double itsHorse Power output.” Possell is convinced that the bladeless turbine built withnew ceramic components could run at about 2,700 degrees, which wouldeffectively “triple the Horse Power performance.” Thus, Possell is also workingto design an engine to compete with the Pegasus engine found in the VTOL(vertical takeoff and landing) Harrier jet. This VTOL of the future has beennamed the Phalanx. The vehicle will not come about, however, without largefunding and commitment from the highest levels of industry and government.34The waiter was surprised to see an elegant gentleman sitting at the breakfastcounter before the restaurant was officially opened. “Aren’t you Dr. Tesla,” thefellow inquired, amazed to see such an important man back in town after somany years.Having received permission from the owner to eat as early as possible,Tesla replied in the affirmative. He had journeyed to Colorado Springs fromMilwaukee, retracing his past and looking toward a possible future when hemight erect another wireless station. With a key from Dean Evans of the localengineering school, the inventor was able to utilize the lab to work on sometechnical calculations. Enjoying the much-needed respite, and perhaps a quickjaunt in a hot spring, the inventor had returned to his beloved retreat. There thespry mountaineer could perch himself like a phoenix on a cliff, to sit andcontemplate Thor’s design, and watch the lightning storms that crackled alongthe jagged horizon.35 