28THE HERO’S RETURN (1900)Common people must have rest like machinery but the great old Nick—theBusy One—see him go 150 hours without food or drink. Why he can inventwith his hands tied behind his back! He can do anything, in short, he issuperior to all laws of hygiene and human energy. He is a vegetarian thatdoesn’t know how to vegetate…ROBERT UNDERWOOD JOHNSON1On January 7, 1900, Tesla left Colorado Springs with every intention ofreturning. Engaging C. J. Duffner and another watchman to look after thelaboratory, the inventor departed with inexplicit promises for future payment.His funds exhausted, he also left without covering outstanding bills he hadincurred with the local power company.2The Johnsons were thrilled with the wizard’s return, and they celebrated ingrand style by dining out. With Gilder’s approval, Robert suggested that Teslacompose a discourse on his recent endeavors.Coincidentally, Marconi was in Manhattan seeking investors and planningon lecturing on his progress in wireless.3 “When I sent electrical waves from mylaboratory in Colorado, around the world,” Tesla reported, “Mr. Marconi wasexperimenting with my apparatus unsuccessfully at sea. Afterward, Mr. Marconicame to America to lecture on this subject, stating that it was he who sent thosesignals around the Globe. I went to hear him, and when he learned that I waspresent he became sick, postponed the lecture, and up to the present time has notdelivered it.”4Although fearful of Tesla, Marconi was also desirous of obtaining a greaterunderstanding of the master’s equipment. With Michael Pupin as intermediary,Marconi was introduced to Tesla at the New York Science Club.5 Pupin was inexceptionally high spirits, as John S. Seymour, commissioner of patents hadfinally retired. After six years of submissions, in his attempts to try and provethat his understanding of resonance and harmonics in the field of ACtransmission superseded Tesla’s, he had finally won. In December 1899 heapplied once again for his patent, “The Art of Reducing Attenuation of ElectricalWaves,” and the new commissioner, Walter Johnson, sanctioned it.6 Apparentlyjust one month later, the trio left after dinner to visit Tesla’s lab. George Scherffwas working late and greeted them at the door.“I remember [Marconi] when he was coming to me asking me to explainthe function of my transformer for transmission of power to great distances,”Tesla recalled. Although the inventor obviously had mixed feelings about themeeting, he nevertheless obliged with a discourse on the difference betweenHertzian radiations and Tesla currents. “Mr. Marconi said, after all myexplanations of the application of my principle, that it is impossible.”“Time will tell, Mr. Marconi,” Tesla shot back.7 Pupin was able to usherMarconi to the door before discussions became more heated.“I understand completely what you are doing, Mr. Marconi,” Pupin beganas he walked the young Italian back to his hotel. “I would like very much to actas a consultant in your operation.”“That would be an honor,” Marconi said as he discussed with Pupin a wayto “persuade Signor Edison to come aboard.” Marconi’s reason, in particular,was to obtain Edison’s grasshopper patent, which described a wireless way forjumping messages from train stations to moving trains and which Edisonpatented in the 1880s.Pupin was elated. Not only was he becoming professionally involved in anexciting international wireless enterprise; he had also begun to cash in on hisnew AC patent. In June, Pupin received a $3,000 advance for selling the rights toJohn E. Hudson, president of AT&T, and a few months later he negotiated foryearly payments of $15,000 per year, for an amount totaling $200,000 for theinvention Commissioner Seymour called “tautological” and “no more…than amultiplication of Tesla’s circuit [that utilized principles] well understood in theart.”8 In either case, the patent enabled AT&T to perfect long-distance telephonetransmissions and provided Pupin with a handsome income for many years tocome. It also vindicated his position that he had understood Tesla’s inventionbetter than Tesla did.Tesla tried again to interest the submarine designer John Holland intelautomatics; he also worked to fashion “dirigible wireless torpedoes” or smallairships which could be controlled from the ground. “Everybody who sawthem,” he revealed a few years later, “was amazed at their performance.”9After putting together a prospectus and conferring with his lawyers, theinventor packed his bags for Washington to speak in person with AdmiralHigginson of the Light House Board and Secretary John D. Long of the navy. Heplanned not only to offer his “devil telautomata” but also a scheme for“establish[ing] wireless telegraphic communication across the Pacific.” Met withridicule and skepticism, the inventor was shuffled into what Mark Twain called“the circumlocution office.” “My ideas,” Tesla said, “were thrown in the navalwaste basket…Had only a few ‘telautomatic’ torpedoes been constructed andadopted by our navy, the mere moral influence of this would have beenpowerfully and most beneficially felt in the present Eastern complication [theJapanese war with Russia].”10Tesla had hoped at least that the U.S. Coast Guard or Navy would comethrough on a smaller scale by financing the construction of modest-sizedtransmitters for their lighthouses and ships, but the agencies dodged any seriouscommitment and continued to hide behind a bureaucratic quagmire involving theneed for congressional approval.11“I’ve circumscribed the globe with electrical impulses,” he told Scherffupon his return. “Let them have the Hertzian dabblers. They’ll come backaround my way soon enough.”“What will you do with Professor Pupin, stealing your work in alternatingcurrent?”“He’s involved in sending voice over wires,” the inventor replied. “Whocan be bothered.”It was at this time that Tesla commissioned an agent in Britain to locate anappropriate place for constructing a receiving station,12 as he continued torework blueprints for his transoceanic broadcasting system. Using his Englishroyalties as collateral, he asked George Westinghouse for a loan of a fewthousand dollars; he also tried to interest him in the wireless enterprise.13Westinghouse, however, declined to get involved, but he did advance theinventor the requested funds, even though his company had overextendedthemselves nearly $70 million in their rapid expansion and changeover to thepolyphase system. Incessant legal fees due to the never-ending litigation onpatent priority battles, mostly with the countless subsidiaries were also a greatdrain. Swiss emigrant B. A. Behrend, author of one of the early standardtextbooks on AC motors, wrote in his treatise that much to the chagrin of NewEngland Granite’s (a GE subsidiary) patent attorney, he refused to testify againstTesla, “as such evidence would be against [his] better convictions.”14This letter was written in 1901, a full year after Judge Townsend’sunequivocal ruling vindicated Tesla as the sole author of the AC polyphasesystem (see chapter 3).15 Now Westinghouse could finally begin to collectdamages and pay back its enormous debt. George Westinghouse sent Tesla athank you note congratulating himself “for winning the suit” and congratulatingTesla for being “awarded the credit for a great invention.” Westinghouse endedthe letter as follows “You know I appreciate your sympathetic interest in myaffairs.”16In the early part of 1900, Tesla filed for three patents related to wirelesscommunication.17 He made several attempts to contact the elusive Colonel Astorbut concentrated most of his efforts on working on an article for the Century.Robert had requested that Tesla write an educational piece about telautomaticsand wireless communication. The plan was to decorate the essay withphotographs of the remote-controlled boat and the inventor’s fantasticexperiments in Colorado, but Tesla had other ideas. Influenced by Westernphilosophers Friedrich Nietzche and Arthur Schopenhauer about such ideas asthe creation of the Übermensch through activation of the will and renunciation ofdesire and by Eastern philosophers such as Swami Vivekananda on the linkbetween the soul and Godhead, Prâna (life force) and Akâsha (ether) and itsequivalence to the universe, force, and matter,18 the inventor decided to composea once-in-a-lifetime apocalyptic treatise on the human condition andtechnology’s role in shaping world history.Robert pleaded with him “not to write a metaphysical article, but rather aninformative one,” but Tesla would not listen. Instead, he sent back a twelve-thousand-word discourse which covered such topics as the evolution of the race,artificial intelligence, the possibility of future beings surviving without thenecessity of eating food, the role of nitrogen as a fertilizer, telautomatics,alternative energy sources (e.g., terrestrial heat, wind, and the sun), a descriptionof how wireless communication can be achieved, hydrolysis, problems inmining, and the concept of the plurality of worlds.Robert was now in a bind. Neither he nor Gilder wanted to publish alengthy, controversial, abstract philosophical essay which might damage themagazine. However, they could not simply cross out sections they were unhappywith, for they were dealing with a man who was born a genius and a friend whohad contributed two previous gems that added greatly to the prestige of theirpublication. How to approach the hypersensitive savant was a difficult problemwhich Robert did not relish.March 6, 1900Dear Tesla,I just can’t see you misfire this time. Trust me in my knowledge ofwhat the public is eager to have from you.Keep your philosophy for a philosophical treatise and give ussomething practical about the experiments themselves…You’re making atask of a simple thing and for all I have said, forgive my clumsy way ofsaying it because of my love and respect for you, and because I have hadnearly 30 years of judging what the public finds interesting.Faithfully yours,(believe me never more faithfully)RUJ19March 6, 1900My dear Robert,I heard you are not feeling well and hope that it is not my article thatmakes you sick.Yours sincerely,N. Tesla20Tesla knew what he was doing. He had decided, once and for all, to putdown a significant percentage of the knowledge he had amassed into onetreatise, and there was no way he was going to change it. Most likely Robertconferred with Gilder. Clearly, the essay was brilliant and original, and the morethey read it, the more they realized its many layers of wisdom. The best tack totake at this point, they reasoned, was to work to clarify the piece by usingsubheadings, by including all of the startling electrical photos from Colorado,and the telautomaton, and by having Tesla more carefully explain the details ofhis inventions, and then hope for the best. The published essay began as follows:The Onward Movement of ManOf all the endless variety of phenomena which nature presents to oursenses, there is none that fills our minds with greater wonder than thatinconceivably complex movement which, in its entirety, we designate ashuman life. Its mysterious origin is veiled in the forever impenetrable mistof the past, its character is rendered incomprehensible by its infiniteintricacy, and its destination is hidden in the unfathomable depths of thefuture.Inherent in the structure matter, as seen in the growth of crystals, is a life-forming principle. This organized matrix of energy, as Tesla comprehended it,when it reaches a certain stage of complexity, becomes biological life. Now, thenext step in the evolution of the planet was to construct machines so that theycould think for themselves, and so Tesla created the first prototype, histeleautomaton. Life-forms need not be made out of flesh and blood.As an environmentalist, Tesla was concerned about personal hygiene, airand water pollution, and the needless waste of natural resources. Throughconcentration on energy problems, solutions could be achieved. Thus, many ofTesla’s inventions were created specifically to maximize efficient use of energyand prove out the principle that a self-directed thinking machine could alter thecourse of civilization by gaining greater control over the evolution of the planet.In the middle of the treatise, the inventor explained in vivid detail themechanism behind his wireless transmitter. Numerous photographs of hisexperiments at Colorado Springs also enhanced the impact of the message.Thirty-five pages later, he ended the treatise with a discussion of the cognitivehierarchy and the speculation that “intelligent beings on Mars…if there are[any]” most likely utilize a wireless energy-distribution system that interconnectsall corners of their planet. Tesla concluded: “The scientific man does not aim atan immediate result. He does not expect that his advanced ideas will be readilytaken up. His work is like that of the planter—for the future. His duty is to laythe foundation for those who are to come, and point the way.”21When the article appeared in the June issue of the Century, it created asensation. Tesla circulated advance copies to friends, such as Mrs. DouglasRobinson, one of the founders of the Metropolitan Museum of Art,22 JulianHawthorne, Stanford White, and John Jacob Astor. In Astor’s case, Teslaincluded his wireless patent applications, forwarding “this matter to your home,instead of your office [for secrecy reasons]…The patents give me an absolutemonopoly in the United States not only for power purposes,” the inventorcontinued in another letter to the colonel, “but also for establishing telegraphiccommunication…no matter how great the distance.”23 Those who were Teslasupporters rallied around him, Nature gave it a “favorable response,” and theFrench quickly translated it for their readers,24 but those who were against himnow had a new supply of ammunition for a frontal assault.The stage was set in March 1900, when Carl Hering was elected presidentof the AIEE; Professor Pupin was a close second.25 Hering, who would alsobecome editor in chief of Electrical World & Engineer, set a new tone for theelectrical community. Just as he had called into question Tesla’s priority work onAC a decade before, when he had backed Dobrowolsky, he also challengedTesla’s credibility in the field of wireless. Other opponents included ReginaldFessenden, who was trying to obtain competing patents on tuned circuits, andsuch traditional rivals as Lewis Stillwell, Charles Steinmetz, Tom Edison, andElihu Thomson. The first potshots appeared in the Evening Post26 and then inPopular Science Monthly.Tesla had suggested that the sum total of human energy on the planet,which he called M, could be multiplied by its “velocity,” V, which was measuredby technological and social progress. Just as in physics, the total human forcecould be calculated as MV2. If humans go against the laws of religion andhygiene, the total human energy would diminish. In a primitive or agrarian-basedsociety the energy would progress arithmetically. However, if the new generationhad a “higher degree of enlightenment,” then the “sum total of human energy”would increase geometrically. Tesla was suggesting that with his inventions ofthe induction motor, AC power transmission, and his remote-controlled robots,human progress would evolve at ever increasing rates.In a highly visible discourse under the banner title “Science and Fiction,”an anonymous writer with the nom de plume “Physicist” vehemently attackedthis premise. “Unhappily,” this critic wrote, “Mr. Tesla in his enthusiasm toprogress…neglects to state which direction is the proper one for the human massto follow, north, south, east, west, toward the moon or Sirius or to Dante’s Satanin the centre of the earth…Of course, the whole notion…is absurd.”The editorial, which continued for six columns, called into question Tesla’sinvention of the telautomaton, his belief that fighting machines would replacesoldiers on the field—“international bull-fights…or potatoraces might do just aswell”—his work in wireless, and his support for the plurality of worldshypothesis. The author suggested that the Century, in future issues, shouldsubject these types of articles to a scientific board “for criticism and revision ifonly for the protection against bogus inventions and nonsensical enterprises.”Hurling epithets as if in combat with a mortal enemy, “Physicist” concluded,“The editors [of the Century] apparently impute to their readers a desire to beentertained at all costs…They evidently often do not know science from rubbishand apparently seldom make any effort to find out the difference.”27The onslaught continued in Science and in a follow-up editorial again inPopular Science Monthly, this time by a mysterious “Mr. X.”“Science (Pseudo) contains an article from xxx. ‘Physicist’ is not in it,”Tesla wrote to Johnson, adding sarcastically, “It is also highly complimentary tothe editors of your great magazine.”28 Other daily papers also attacked theinventor’s controversial claims.Tesla, however, maintained a blind eye to this credibility problem andaudaciously or foolheartedly followed up this article with the infamous piece“Talking With the Planets” in Colliers, which we reviewed in an earlier chapter.Making no secret of his identity, Reginald Fessenden, who was now embroiledin a legal dispute with Tesla, vehemently wrote in Hering’s journal that thesource of “the so-called Martian signals have long been known…and only thecrassest ignorance could attribute any such origin.” Having at one time been “aserious obstacle to multiplex systems, [they are now all but] eliminated.”Fessenden said the signals were due to “street cars, lightning flashes and thegradual electriciation of the aerial. Furthermore, the different kinds are easilydistinguishable. Those ignorant of the subject might mistake them for intelligentsignals.”29Ever since his return to New York, Tesla made repeated efforts to rekindlehis friendship with Astor, but the gadabout was proving difficult to corner. Overthe summer, the Johnsons tried to woo the inventor to Maine for a vacation, buthe was too intent on contacting the multimillionaire.Nikola Tesla at the height of his fame in 1894Above The Chicago World’s Fair at night, illuminated by Westinghouse Corporationutilizing the Tesla AC polyphase system.(Opposite above) Tesla displaying wireless fluorescent tubes before the Royal Society inEngland, 1892.(Opposite below) Thomas Edison (center) at his Menlo Park invention factory. Seated toEdison’s left is Charles Batchelor, key partner and the man who introduced Tesla toEdison, probably in France in 1883.(Right) Thomas Commerford Martin, editor of the 1893 text The Inventions, Researches,and Writings of Nikola Tesla, the only collected works produced during Tesla’s lifetime.(MetaScience Foundation)(Above) The Waldorf-Astoria, where Tesla lived from 1897 to 1920. (MetaScienceFoundation)(Left) Katharine Johnson, who had a long-standing platonic love affair with the inventor.(Little Brown)(Opposite above) Mark Twain in Tesla’s laboratory in 1894. (MetaScience Foundation(Opposite below) Robert Underwood Johnson, editor of Century magazine and one ofTesla’s closest friends. (Little Brown)(Right) Niagara Falls at the turn of the nineteenth century.(Below right) Edward Dean Adams, one of Tesla’s financial backers and the manresponsible for the Niagara Falls hydroelectric project. (MetaScience Foundation)(Below left) C. E. L. Brown, an important Tesla supporter and the first engineer totransmit AC polyphase currents over long distances. (MetaScience Foundation)(Above) The patent plaque at Niagara Falls, listing Tesla as the primary inventor of theAC polyphase system. (Marc J. Seifer)(Left) Charles Steinmetz, initially a Tesla supporter and then one of the inventor’s mostvigorous opponents throughout their lifetimes. (MetaScience FoundationNikola Tesla displaying his invention of the cold wireless lamp without filament. (ElectricalReview, 1898).August 2, 1900Dear Mr. Tesla,I have been thinking of you all day and all evening as I do so often…Isat on a little hillside this afternoon looking over green meadows to the seabeyond…and wishing that I could loan you my eyes that you might havemy visions and drink in the beauty of the day…You are as silent as onlyyou know [how] to be…Do call us.Yours faithfully,Katharine Johnson30August 12, 1900My dear Mrs. Johnson,Just a line to tell you that I never can and never shall forget theFilipovs—they have given me too much trouble.Yours sincerely,N. Tesla31Unable to relax until he settled things with Astor, Tesla tried again, havingforfeited the chance for a needed respite.August 24, 1900My dear Colonel Astor,I still remember when you told me, that if I could only show you greatreturns on your investment, you would gladly back me up in anyundertaking, and I hope not in a selfish, but in a higher interest that yourideas have not changed since…[Re: oscillators, motors and lighting system]not less than $50,000,000 [can be]…made out of my invention. This mayseem to you exaggeration, but I honestly believe that it is anunderstatement.Is it possible that you should have something against me? Not hearingfrom you I cannot otherwise interpret your silence…Finally, Astor replied, stating that he was “glad to get your letter, and willget back to you.”32 But this was really a decoy procedure, for Astor continued toslip away. Tesla shot off another round of letters outlining his progress with hisoscillators, fluorescent light—“the commercial value…if rightly explored, issimply immense”—and wireless enterprise,33 but again Astor balked.Astor never directly told Tesla his real feelings. His reluctance in advancingthe partnership suggests that he was angry with Tesla for not exploiting theoscillators and fluorescent lights in 1899, as he had promised, but had insteadrun off to Colorado Springs to conduct his wireless folly.Certainly the onslaught in the papers injured Tesla’s reputation, but it is thisauthor’s belief that the attack by the press had little if anything to do withAstor’s turnabout. Tesla had deceived him. As wealthy as he was, Astor wantedto invest in a sure thing. The oscillators and the fluorescent lights seemedpractically ready for market, but rather than perfect these inventions, Tesla tookthe capital to go off on another venture and returned without a dime. Astor wasenraged but too much of a gentleman to even let Tesla know. With StanfordWhite and Mrs. Douglas Robinson behind him, Tesla explored a fresh lead. 