44FASTER THAN THE SPEED OFLIGHT (1927-40)June, 1931Potsdam, GermanyDear Mr. Tesla!I’m happy to hear that you are celebrating your 75th birthday, andthat, as a successful pioneer in the field of high frequency currents, youhave been able to witness the wonderful development of this field oftechnology.I congratulate you on the magnificent success of your life’s work.Albert Einstein1For the balance of the wizard’s life, he would continue to speak crypticallyabout a number of entirely new and revolutionary inventions. These included (a)a machine for harnessing cosmic rays; (b) a means for transmitting mechanicalenergy; (c) a particle-beam weapon; and (d) a mechanism for communicatingwith other planets. In addition, Tesla also continued to refer to (e) hisWardenclyffe idea. The identification of each separate invention became asomewhat confusing task for journalists and researchers because each of theseideas involves the transmission of energy to distant places; and the thirdinvention, the so-called death ray apparently, in its final form, comprisedfeatures from some, if not all, of the other inventions.Throughout Tesla’s seventies, that is, from the mid-1920s until about 1934,Tesla continued his practice of traveling to industrial centers throughout theNortheast and Midwest in his quest to market his wares. While commuting toPhiladelphia during the years 1924-25 to work on his gasoline turbine (he hadworked on the steam turbine in Chicago and Milwaukee), Tesla met with John B.Flowers, inspector of airplanes and engines at the local naval aircraft factory. Hehad known the inspector since 1917.2 As it became more apparent that thebladeless turbine was stuck in the endless cycle of research and development,Tesla returned to his first love, wireless transmission of power, and began apublicity campaign to espouse its merits. By implementing a series of centralstations to pump energy into the ground and surrounding medium, the ultimateconservationist-pragmatist theorized that airplanes and automobiles, equippedwith specially designed receiving devices, could operate without fuel onboard;they would simply derive their power from his towers.On October 10, 1925, Flowers traveled to New York City to confer with thewizard in his suite at the Hotel Pennsylvania. There they drafted out the entirescheme so that it could be presented to physicist J. H. Dillinger, head of theRadio Laboratory, Bureau of Standards, in Washington, D.C.In a carefully worded ten-page document, complete with schematicdrawings of the earth imbued with Tesla-created standing waves, Flowersunveiled a plan for operating cars and planes powered by electromagnetism. “Dr.Tesla said that the Wireless Power System would supply power to airplanes atany point around the earth,” Flowers told Dillinger. “In addition,” Flowerscontinued, “Dr. Tesla has already developed the oscillator to provide the powerand is willing to furnish the U.S. Government his plans if they agree to build theplant.” Flowers also set up a meeting in Washington to go over the proposal.In the interim, Dillinger referred the proposal to H. L. Curtis, a fellowexpert. After canny consideration, Curtis rejected the plan, his main objectionbeing that “as he understood it, Tesla’s scheme was to create standing electricalwaves around the earth as a sphere. There would then be considerableconcentration of energy at the nodes and it was at the nodal points Teslaexpected to develop his energy. The system proposed by Mr. Flowers does nothave this feature. He proposes to collect energy at any point…[Thus] somemeans would have to be devised for concentrating this energy and making itavailable. No such method is proposed, and I do not think of any that appearsfeasible…[Furthermore] I do not know of any wireless apparatus…of sufficientmagnitude to warrant the expectation that power can be economicallytransmitted by radio methods.”3The basic criticism that the energy would not be available at any point ofthe globe, but only at the nodal points, was countered on numerous occasions byTesla (although, apparently, the towers, which were not near power sources,would have to be placed at nodal points). One of Tesla’s favorite analogies wasto view electricity as a kind of fluid and his magnifying transmitters as a seriesof pumps. Just as with a hydraulic system the fluid would be present at all pointsin equal pressures, so, too, would Tesla’s electrical oscillations. And just aselectrical energy is present at every connected electrical outlet in the world but isnot used until an appliance is plugged in, so, too, was Tesla’s electricityavailable, but not used until the receiver was turned on.In a comprehensive article published in Telegraph & Telephone Age inOctober 1927, which was probably written as a rebuttal to Curtis and Dillinger,Tesla also explains that the oscillations would spread from the magnifyingtransmitterwith a theoretically infinite speed, slowing down first very quickly andafterward at a lesser rate until the distance is about six thousand miles,when it proceeds with the speed of light. From there on it again increases inspeed, slowly at first, and then more rapidly, reaching the antipode withapproximately infinite velocity. The law of motion can be expressed bystating that the waves on the terrestrial surface sweep in equal intervals oftime over equal areas, but it must be understood that the current penetratesdeep into the earth and the effects produced on the receivers are the same asif the whole flow was confined to the earth’s axis joining the transmitterwith the antipode. The mean surface speed is thus about 471,200 kilometersper second—57% greater than that of the so-called Hertz waves.4Tesla likened the effect to the moon’s shadow spreading over the earthduring an eclipse. Here was the first of a number of instances in which Tesladisagreed with the findings of Einstein’s theory of relativity, as the so-calledTesla wave supposedly traveled faster than light.5In 1928, Tesla traveled to Philadelphia to attempt construction of hishelicopter-airplane, probably with John Flowers, and to Detroit to try to marketit as a “flying automobile” to GM. On a more practical level, he also peddled hisspeedometer to the Ford Motor Company.One of the problems in the speedometer was cost, the Tesla inventionhaving become a premium item only found in the more expensive vehicles. Healso visited with his nephew Nicholas Trbojevich, who was helping fund thehelicopter, and who was on the verge of becoming very wealthy from his variousautomobile inventions associated with economizing the transmission andsteering. Trbojevich, like his uncle, was somewhat of a workaholic, and Teslacautioned his wife to give her husband “unceasing care [and love],” as in thelong run “your husband is sure to acquire great wealth and when his battle iswon, you will have everything to your heart’s desire.”6Shortly after, Tesla returned to Detroit and met Trbojevich for a late snackat the Book-Cadillac Hotel, the city’s “finest.” According to William Terbo, “themaitre d’ suggested they wait five minutes, when the five dollar cover chargewould be lifted. Tesla would hear none of it and marched in.” As this was duringthe Great Depression, when a quarter could buy three hot dogs and two cokes,this wasted expense was enormous, and it became a great point for laughteramong the Trbojevich family, which tended to view Tesla as simply their oldeccentric uncle rather than one of the most important inventors in the world.When the nephew tried tactfully to bring up the matter of the cover charge, Teslaevaded by responding, “I’ll never die rich unless the money comes in the doorfaster than I can shovel it out the window.”7During this period (1925-38) Tesla also negotiated with Myron Taylor, CEOof U.S. Steel. Interested in the steel company for a variety of reasons, the ever-prodigious inventor had developed special equipment for purifying ores,“degasification of steel,” and also conservation of sulphur during ironprocessing. In the late 1920s he asked Taylor if he could install equipment to seeif the procedure worked. Taylor agreed, and so Tesla traveled up to theirWorcester plant in September 1931 to install it. Although he hoped for asuccessful demonstration, this apparently did not occur, since the archives ofU.S. Steel have only one short paragraph referring to Tesla’s dealings with thecompany.8 Tesla’s ultimate plan, which apparently was not tested, was to installhis bladeless turbine in the heat exhaust system, with the idea of converting theenormous amount of wasted heat into useful electricity. Ever the conservationist,this was one of Tesla’s most elegant ideas.From Worcester, Tesla moved on to Buffalo for a top-secret experiment,according to Peter Savo, a cousin living in New York. There the inventorreportedly refitted an automobile that, according to the story, ran on electricalpower from an outside source.The car [was] a standard Pierce Arrow, with the engine removed and certainother components installed instead. The standard clutch, gear box, and drivetrain remained…Under the hood, there was a brushless electric motor,connected to [or in place of] the engine…Tesla would not divulge whomade the motor.Set into the dash was a “power receiver” consisting of a box…containing 12 radio tubes…A vertical antenna, consisting of a 6 ft. rod, wasinstalled and connected to the power receiver [which was] in turn,connected to the motor by two heavy, conspicuous cables…Tesla pushedthese in before starting and said: “We now have power.”9If this tale is to be believed, it would mean that Tesla had also installed oneof his powerful oscillators somewhere near Niagara Falls to provide the wirelessenergy needed to power the vehicle. An alternative possibility was that Tesla wastesting one of his gasoline or steam turbines in the automobile, and Savo mistookit for the wireless device. “The aging inventor, a tall, thin, almost spiritual figurein the sort of brown cutaway suit that older men wore before the World War,received interviewers in one of the public rooms in the Hotel New Yorker, wherehe lives. Before he would speak of his present work, he reviewed his pastachievements, which entitle him more than Edison, Steinmetz or any other, to becalled the father of the power age…”10There was a new king of the hill. Ever since the 1919 confirmation of histheory of relativity, that space was curved and that light traveled at a constantspeed irrespective of the movement of its source, Einstein began to occupy thespot formerly held by such technical wizards as Bell, Edison, the Wrightbrothers, or Tesla. First postulated in 1905, Einstein’s theories not only shiftedthe prevailing space-time paradigm, that self-assuring Newtonian world that theold guard grew up in; his theories also threatened Tesla’s position as premiermastermind. Although the measurement of the starlight bending around the sunduring the 1919 eclipse was experimental proof of Einstein’s new postulate,” forthe most part the theoretical physicist was exactly that, a theorist, whereas Tesla,as hands-on creator of new technologies, was able to prove out his assumptionsin the everyday world. This was the inventor’s advantage, and he used it toattack the new Nobel Prize-winning upstart.As Einstein’s theory abandoned the old nineteenth-century ether, itexplained the bending of light rays around large bodies as being caused by thenon-Euclidean curving of space-time. This, in essence, became the new andmore abstract ether. Mathematical equations accurately predicted the preciseamount of bending that occurred. “In general relativity, the gravitational fieldand the structure or geometry of space are identical…The gravitational field isthe curved space.”12Tesla completely disagreed with the concept of space being curved, sayingthat it was “self-contradictory.” Since “every action is accompanied by anequivalent reaction,” it appeared to Tesla’s “simple mind…[that] the curvedspaces must react on the bodies and, producing the opposite effect, straighten outthe curves.” To Tesla, the light bent because the large body (e.g., the sun) had aforce field which influenced it.13Ironically, Einstein’s contemporaries at the Carnegie Institution ofWashington were using the Tesla coil in their new 1929 experiments inattempting to split the atom,14 while Tesla was discussing a more esoteric sourceof energy, cosmic rays:A principle by which power for driving the machinery of the world may bederived from the cosmic energy which operates the universe, has beendiscovered by Nikola Tesla, noted physicist and inventor…This principle, which taps a source of power described as “everywherepresent in unlimited quantities” and which may be transmitted by wire orwireless from central plants to any part of the globe, will eliminate the needof coal, oil, gas or any other of the common fuels…“The central source ofcosmic energy for the earth is the sun,” Dr. Tesla said, but “night will notinterrupt the flow of the new power supply.”15On July 10, 1931, Tesla turned seventy-five. Time honored the seniorinventor by placing his portrait on the cover. Tesla’s life was briefly reviewed,and his most recent mysterious research on harnessing “an entirely new andunsuspected source [of energy]” was discussed. Unwilling to reveal more aboutthe adjuvant, the venerated iconoclast startled the interviewer by referringobliquely to his most esoteric invention, the “Teslascope,” a device for signalingthe nearby stars: “I think that nothing can be more important than interplanetarycommunication. It will certainly come some day, and the certitude that there areother human beings in the universe, working, suffering, struggling likeourselves, will produce a magic effect on mankind, and will form the foundationof a universal brotherhood that will last as long as humanity itself.”16 HugoGernsback couldn’t have said it better.Simultaneously, Kenneth Swezey wrote a flurry of letters to every notablehe could think of, requesting a birthday greeting. Accolades poured in (manyquoted throughout this text) from E. F. Alexanderson, B. A. Behrend, W. H.Bragg, Lee De Forest, Gano Dunn, Jack Hammond, A. E. Kennelly, ArthurKorn, Oliver Lodge, Robert Millikan, D. McFarlan Moore, Valdemar Poulsen,Charles F. Scott, Georg Graf von Arco, H. H. Westinghouse, and Albert Einstein.VIPs who wrote back to decline included Guglielmo Marconi and MichaelPupin.17By October, Thomas Alva Edison was dead; the lights in the city weredimmed in honor of the great man’s passing. Perhaps it was the death of hisnemesis or the new round of adulation, or Tesla’s advanced age that promptedhim to alter his style of avoiding publicity. Whatever the reason, from 1931 onthe inventor made it an annual practice on his birthday to invite the press to hisflat and announce his latest discoveries. With the talent of a mystery writer, theelectrician stretched out the secrets of his various creations, revealing just a littlemore each year.By 1935, on his seventy-ninth birthday, Tesla, although exceedingly gaunt,was still exuberant and expected to live past 110. His mind ever evolving, thesorcerer utilized this occasion to lay out in considerable detail the variousparticulars of a number of his more exotic creations. With movie cameras rollingand the inventor “treating the press, about 30 in number, to a gourmet’sluncheon…Mr. Tesla sat at the head of the table.” Eating little more than breadand warm milk, which he heated up in a chafing dish at the table, the wizardtalked while the reporters “feasted.”18Inventor, 81, Talks of Key toInterstellar Transmission& Tube to Produce Radium Copiously and CheaplyReports of discoveries by which it will be possible to communicatewith the planets and to produce radium in unlimited quantities for $1 apound were announced by Dr. Nikola Tesla yesterday on his 81st birthdayat which he was honored with high orders from the Yugoslav andCzechoslovak Governments…“I am expecting to put before the Institute of France an accuratedescription of the devices with data and calculations and claim the PierreGuzman prize of 100,000 francs for means of communication with otherworlds, feeling perfectly sure that it will be awarded to me. The money, ofcourse, is a trifling consideration, but for the great historical honor of beingthe first to achieve this miracle I would be almost willing to give my life.“I am just as sure that the prize will be awarded to me as if I alreadyhad it in my pocket. They have got to do it. It means it will be possible toconvey several thousand units of horsepower to other planets, regardless ofthe distance. This discovery of mine will be remembered when everythingelse I have done, is covered with dust.”19In discussing this invention, one runs into murky waters, for it appears thatTesla tied the concept of the radium-producing tube to the interplanetarycommunicator. These, however, may be two unrelated creations. Anotherproblem was that the inventor was also discussing at this time the idea ofcapturing cosmic rays that travel at velocities fifty times greater than that oflight. If this invention utilized cosmic rays, it would imply that Tesla planned totranscend the speed of light and communicate with other stars.In reading the text carefully, it appears that Tesla does not mention otherstars but, rather, the planets, which are relatively close to the earth; furthermore,he does not really discuss communicating with extraterrestrials so much astransmitting energy. It is known that as early as 1918, while working withColeman Czito’s son, Julian, the inventor was bouncing laserlike pulses off themoon and testing some type of “scope.”20 Therefore, it is possible that he wasworking on more than one device to send energy into outer space.Verification for Tesla that there existed particles that traveled faster than thespeed of light were purportedly discovered in the late 1890s when he invented adevice to capture radiant energy. The machine, patented on November 5, 1901,comprised, in essence, an insulated plate, resembling a fly swatter, made out of“the best quality of mica as dielectric.” This was attached to a condenser.Stemming from his work with radiant energy, X rays, and Lenard tubes, thedevice could also capture what he called cosmic rays.21I made some progress in solving the mystery until in 1899 I obtainedmathematical and experimental proofs that the sun and other heavenlybodies similarly conditioned emit rays of great energy which consist ofinconceivably small particles animated by velocities vastly exceeding thatof light. So great is the penetrative power of these rays that they cantraverse thousands of miles of solid matter with but slight diminution ofvelocity. In passing through space, which is filled with cosmic dust, theygenerate a secondary radiation of constant intensity, day or night, andpouring upon the earth equally from all directions.22Since Victor Hess’s discovery in 1911 and Robert Millikan’s confirmation,there have been many scientists who have measured cosmic rays. We now knowthat emitted uncharged elementary particles known as neutrinos possess thepenetrative powers suggested by Tesla, but no researcher, to my knowledge, hasdiscovered rays that transcend the speed of light. This supposed finding of Teslaalso violated relativity.Tesla was insistent that such particles did exist; he saw them as a sourcewhich could be converted into electrical power. During the summer of 1932 hetold Jack O’Neill that he had “harnessed the cosmic rays and caused them tooperate a motive device…The attractive features of the cosmic rays is theirconstancy. They shower down on us through the whole 24 hours, and if a plant isdeveloped to use their power, it will not require devices for storing energy, aswould be necessary with devices using wind, tide or sunlight.” When pressed formore details, Tesla revealed that he would tell O’Neill “in a general way [theirmodus operandi…] The cosmic rays ionize the air, setting free many charges—ions and electrons. These charges are captured in a condenser which is made todischarge through the circuit of the motor.” Tesla also told O’Neill that he “hadhopes of building such a motor on a large scale.”23FREE ENERGY?As the years rolled on, it became a challenge for reporters to wrestle more detailsabout each invention from the wizened prestidigitator, since Tesla continued tomaintain his perpetual reticence about revealing particulars. Concerning thecosmic-ray accumulator, the reporters were able collectively to pry from theinventor the following: “My power generator will be of the simplest kind—just abig mass of steel, copper and aluminum, comprising a stationary and rotatingpart, peculiarly assembled…Such a source of power obtainable everywhere willsolve many problems with which the human race is confronted…[The]machinery for harnessing it would last more than 5,000 years.”24Cosmic rays, he asserted, are produced by the force of “electrostaticrepulsion”; they consist of powerfully charged positive particles which come tous from the sun and other suns in the universe. He determined, “afterexperimentation,” that the sun is charged “with an electric potential ofapproximately 215,000,000,000 volts.”25Owing to its immense charge, the sun imparts to minute positivelyelectrified particles prodigious velocities which are governed only by theratio between the quantity of free electricity carried by the particles andtheir mass, some attaining a speed exceeding fifty times that of light…At great altitudes, the intensity of the rays is more than 10,000%greater than at sea level…The energy of the cosmic radiations impingingupon the earth from all sides is stupendous, such that if all of it wereconverted into heat the globe quickly would be melted and volatilized…Rising air currents…partially neutralize [their intensity]…Those who arestill doubting that our sun emits powerful cosmic rays evidently overlookthat the solar disk, in whatever position it may be in the heavens, cuts offthe radiations from beyond, replacing them by its own.26Coupled with his view that all bodies in the universe obtain their energyfrom external sources, and possibly influenced by Walter Russell, an artist,philosopher, and longtime friend of Tesla’s who hypothesized that the periodictable of elements was constructed in a hierarchical spiral of octaves, Tesla was“led to the inescapable conclusion that such bodies as the sun are taking on massmuch more rapidly than they are dissipating it by the dissipation of energy inheat and light.”27 Similarly, radioactive decay was not caused by thedisintegration of the nucleus of the atom; rather, it was a “secondary effect ofexternal rays and two-fold—one part coming from the energy stored, the otherfrom that continuously supplied.”28 In other words, radioactive material was, toTesla, apparently a kind of conduit for the ever-present primary substance“Akasa,” which was being absorbed in such a way as to cause the emission ofthe radioactive material.These Tesla offerings would appear as evidence of a great mind gone astray,for the various discoveries and suggestions inherent in Tesla’s theory violate notonly such accepted theories as relativity and quantum physics but also, on thesurface, common sense. The idea that the inventor could construct a simpledevice made up basically of a receiving plate and a condenser to provideelectricity to run motors from cosmic rays harks the reader back to the inanedays of the Keely motor and the obtuse concepts of perpetual motion and freeenergy. Yet underneath the veneer of the theory is an exciting notion that the sunis somehow absorbing energy from the universe and that there does exist someform of it which transcends the limiting factor of the speed of light. Called byother researchers tachyons (i.e., particles that travel faster than the speed oflight) and linked to other such concepts as black holes, worm holes, string theorynonlocality, the implicate order, hyperspace, gravitons, and Mach’s principle,Tesla’s theories, when viewed within the matrix of the bizarre new physics, maynot be so far-out.Another of Tesla’s discoveries involved the transmission of mechanicalenergy to distant places. By strategically placing one of his mechanicaloscillators on, for example, solid bedrock, a mechanical impulse could be sentinto the ground to accomplish “at least four practical possibilities. It would givethe world a new means of unfailing communication; it would provide a new safemeans for guiding ships at sea into port; furnish a kind of divining rod forlocating ore deposits…; and finally, it would provide scientists with a means forlaying bare the physical conditions of the earth.”29 The essential principle behindthis invention is, of course, used today in sonar for ships and by geophysicists instudying the interior of the earth, mapping fault lines, studying the core, and soon.Tesla, at 78, Bares New ‘Death-Beam’Dr. Tesla…has perfected a method and apparatus…which will sendconcentrated beams of particles through the free air, of such tremendousenergy that they will bring down a fleet of 10,000 enemy airplanes at adistance of 250 miles from a defending nation’s border and will causearmies of millions to drop dead in their tracks.30Tesla’s discovery of a death ray stems all the way back to his work in theearly 1890s with his creation of a button lamp that could bounce electrons off ofa central filament made of almost any substance (e.g., carbon, diamonds,zirconia, rubies) onto the interior of a self-reflective bulb and then bounce backto the source. This device would not only produce an extraordinarily brilliantlight, it could also “vaporize” the button. As stated previously, it was only a shortstep from this machine to the invention of the ruby laser. For instance, if therewas a scratch or imperfection in the coating of the glass, the energy wouldstream out through this opening in laserlike fashion.In the late 1890s, Tesla was bombarding targets with X rays at distances inexcess of forty feet, and by 1915 he had announced in the New York Times a typeof electronic defensive shield which today corresponds to what has been calledSDI, or the Strategic Defense Initiative.HARRY GRINDELL-MATHEWSDuring World War I, another Teslarian, Harry Grindell-Mathews, was providedwith 25,000 pounds by the British government for the creation of a searchlightbeam which he said could control aircraft. A wireless electrician and veteran ofthe British army, wounded at the turn of the century during the Boer War,Grindell-Mathews eventually refined this invention and changed it into a“diabolical ray.” This new electronic beam, he said, could not only destroyzeppelins and airplanes, but also immobilize marching armies and nautical fleets.Although he would not divulge the specifics of his creation, he made no secret ofhis admiration for Tesla, whose technologies had “inspired” its groundwork.In July 1924, Grindell-Mathews traveled to America to see an eyespecialist. He probably met with Hugo Gernsback at that time and might alsohave visited Tesla. Staying at the Hotel Vanderbilt, the British inventor wasinterviewed by a number of the local dailies. “Let me recall to you the air attackson London during the [world] war. Searchlights picked up the German raidersand illuminated them while guns fired, hitting some but more often missingthem. But suppose instead of a searchlight you direct my ray? So soon as ittouches the plane this bursts into flame and crashes to the earth.”31Grindell-Mathews was also convinced that the Germans had such a ray.They were using a high-frequency current of 200 kilowatts, which as of yet theywere “unable to control.”Working with the French government in Lyons and performing successfultests before members of the British War Office, Grindell-Mathews instituteddestructive effects at distances of sixty feet but was hoping to extend the force toa radius of six or seven miles. Asked for specifics, he said that his device utilizedtwo beams, one as a carrier ray and the other as the “destructive current.” Thefirst beam would constitute a low frequency and would be projected through alens; the second, of a higher frequency, would increase conductivity so thatdestructive power would be more easily transmitted. The motor of an airplane,for instance, could be the “contact point” at which the paralyzing ray would doits handiwork. He admitted, however, that if the object were grounded, it wouldbe protected against such a force.32Hugo Gernsback, along with Dr. W. Severinghouse, a physicist fromColumbia University, tried unsuccessfully to duplicate the effects using heatbeams, X rays, and ultraviolet rays. Doubting Grindell-Mathews’s claims,Gernsback nevertheless featured the “diabolical ray” with characteristic FrankPaulian panache on the cover of his magazine and with a series of exposés.33Leaders from other countries were less critical than Gernsback, and manyproclaimed that their scientists also had such diabolical rays. Herr Wulle, amember of the German Reichstag, announced that “three German scientists haveperfected apparatus that can bring down airplanes, halt tanks and spread acurtain of death like gas clouds of the recent war.” Not to be outdone, LeonTrotsky stated that the Soviets had also invented such a device. Warning allnations, Trotsky proclaimed, “I know the potency of Grammachikoffs ray, so letRussia alone!”34This theme of all-powerful efficient weaponry reappeared during the 1930sas the seeds of World War II were sown. At this time, Tesla began to reveal moreand more about his own diabolical ray as he criticized the Grindell-Mathewsscheme.“It is impossible to develop such a ray,” [Dr. Tesla says]. “I worked on thatidea for many years before my ignorance was dispelled and I became convincedthat it could not be realized. This new beam of mine consists of minute bulletsmoving at a terrific speed, and any amount of power desired can be transmittedby them. The whole plant is just a gun, but one which is incomparably superiorto the present.” The inventor further claimed that the new weapon, which was tobe used for defense only, comprised “four new inventions”: (1) an apparatus forproducing the rays; (2) a process for producing immense electrical power; (3) amethod for amplifying the power; and (4) a tremendous electrical repellingforce.35Working in two undisclosed locations, including a secret laboratory underthe Fifty-ninth Street Bridge, near Second Avenue,36 Tesla perfected his particle-beam weapon, as he conspired with unabashed anarchist and architect TitusdeBobula, to design the all-purpose power plant that could generate highvoltages or capture cosmic rays and convert them into his defensive electronicshield.37 Believing that entire countries could be protected by such plants, theinventor clandestinely approached the war departments of each of the Allies withhis scheme. 