7BOGUS INVENTORS (1889-90)Keely has discovered that all sympathetic streams, cerebellic, gravital,magnetic, and electric, are composed of triple flows; this fact governing allthe terrestrial and celestial orders of positive and negative radiation…Hehas discovered that the range of molecular motion in all quiescent massesis equal to one-third of their diameters, and that all extended range isinduced by sound-force, set at chords of the thirds which are antagonistic tothe combined chords of the mass of the neutral centres that they represent.“Who Is the Greatest Genius of Our Age?”REVIEW OF REVIEWS, 18901Tesla left Pittsburgh in the autumn of 1889 to return to New York and start hissecond laboratory, now on Grand Street. There he would begin work on highfrequency apparatus, wireless transmission, and theories on the relationshipbetween electromagnetic radiation and light. In particular, the inventor wanted toreplicate the findings of the German academician Heinrich Hertz, a student ofHermann Ludwig von Helmholtz’s who had recently published his landmarkexperiments in wave propagation. Tesla said that this work “caused a thrill ashad scarcely ever been experienced before.”2 “I was not free at Pittsburgh,” hecontinued. “I was dependent and could not work…When I [left] that situationideas and inventions rushed through my brain like a Niagara.”3Before he set up shop, the inventor traveled to Paris to attend the UniversalExposition and witness the unveiling of a gargantuan architectural triumph, theEiffel Tower. Returning to a city filled with fond memories, Tesla could sayhello to old friends and tell them how far he had come. There the buddingcreator could stop once again at the Louvre to gaze upon the “marvels” ofRaphael, his self-perceived counterpart in the fine arts.4 Nevertheless, Tesla alsohad mixed feelings, as he was traveling in the shadow of his nemesis, ThomasEdison, who not only attended the fair but who also provided a one-acre site fordisplaying his various inventions. In particular, the phonograph created asensation, and Edison was received as a veritable demigod.While Edison, who was accompanied by his new wife, Mina, just twenty-two years old, lunched with Alexandre Eiffel in his apartment at the top of thetower, Tesla met with Prof. Wilhelm Bjerknes at the fair to “witness the beautifuldemonstrations [of his] vibrating diaphragms.”5 A Norwegian physicist from theUniversity of Stockholm, Bjerknes had, along with Jules-Henri Poincaré, notonly replicated the work of Heinrich Hertz on the propagation ofelectromagnetic waves through space; they had also, according to Hertz,discovered multiple resonance and had worked out the mathematics of thephenomena.6 Tesla was able to study Bjerknes’s oscillator, which provided avariety of electromagnetic waves and a resonator for augmenting them, and alsodiscuss with him theoretical implications concerning the properties of theelectromagnetic waves thereby produced.And while the Wizard of Menlo Park met with Louis Pasteur at hislaboratory in Paris and received the French Grand Cross of the Legion of Honorfor his achievements, Tesla developed one of his most important discoveries,namely, that so-called Hertzian waves not only produced transverse oscillations,suggested by Bjerknes, but also longitudinal vibrations structured much likesound waves, “that is to say, waves, propagated by alternate compression andexpansion…of the ether.”7 This conceptualization would come to play a pivotalrole in the wireless transmitters Tesla would construct over the next decade.As Tesla packed his bags for a brief visit to see his family,8 Edisoncontinued on his tour. In Italy he was honored by Queen Marguerite of Veniceand King Humbert of Rome, in Berlin he met with Helmholtz at his laboratory,and at Heidelberg, Edison displayed his phonograph before a “monster meeting”of fifteen thousand people at which the machine “delivered a speech in goodGerman.”9 Edison’s favorite moment, however, was when he attended a largedinner given by Buffalo Bill, who was touring Europe with his Wild West Show.And as Tesla left for New York, Edison continued on to London, where he couldvisit his central stations but also learn firsthand that the new use of the Tesla ACwas here to stay.10 In Deptford, for instance, in this year, an engineer by thename of Ferranti installed probably the first-ever working single-phasegenerating station; with a Tesla system, he was able to transmit 11,000 voltsseven miles away to London.11 Although a truly epoch making achievement, thisplant, for some unknown reason, received virtually no publicity.This was a complex time in the history of the electrical industry; thoseelectrical experts in Europe and America who took the time to study the Teslacreation saw its benefits immediately. In Switzerland and Germany polyphaseinduction motors were being constructed by C. E. L. Brown and Michael vonDolivo-Dobrowolsky, and in America Elihu Thomson of Thomson-Houston andWilliam Stanley did the same. As in any branch of science, it was customary tostudy and replicate the work of others, but in electrical engineering successensured not only a place in history but also a substantial profit. Thus, therewould be many, such as most of those mentioned above, who would try andclaim the polyphase system as their own.There was another motor invention, however, called the hydropneumaticpulsating vacuo engine, which was on much safer ground; nobody couldreplicate the intricacies of its machinery, and nobody but the inventor, John ErnstWorrell Keely, knew how it worked. Keely had gotten the idea for the motorafter reading the treatise “Harmonies of Tones and Colours, Developed byEvolution,” by Charles Darwin’s niece Mrs. F. J. Hughes, which discussed thestructure of the ether and various theoretical harmonic laws of the universe.12Hailed as a virtual perpetual-motion machine, the Keely motor never ceased tointoxicate the public, for Keely had the uncanny ability to keep the secret going,but continually achieve abstruse results. “In the opinion of Madame Blavatsky,[Keely] has discovered Vril, the mysterious force of the universe in which LordLytton drew attention in his ‘Coming Race’…Keely calls it sympathetic negativeattraction.”13Rivaling snake-oil salesmen in the ability to “humbug” the public, Keely, aformer “circus sleight-of-hand performer,” had formed a company in 1874,capitalized with $100,000 of stock in order to sell his motor, and had beensuccessfully doing so for nearly fifteen years, until 1889, when his work wasquestioned.Public Opinion wrote that, “Engineers, scientific men, and capitalists madefrequent pilgrimages to Keely’s Philadelphia laboratory to see the ‘Keely motormote.’ Sometimes it moted and sometimes it didn’t, but Keely always had a greattale to tell. Keely’s chief accomplishment was a ready use of jargon of scientificand unscientific terms. He talked about ‘triune currents of polar flow of force,’the ‘reflex action of gravity,’ ‘chords of mass,’ ‘sympathetic outreaches ofdistance,’ ‘depolar etheric waves’ and a lot of other things which didn’t meananything, but [he] never told why his motor moted and [why he] never took apatent” (although he did have them drawn up).14T. Carpenter Smith, writing in Engineering Magazine described aneyewitness account with the “inventor” at work: “Mr. Keely proceeded toproduce the force by striking a large tuning-fork with a fiddle-bow and thentouching the generator with the fork. After two or three attempts, which he saidfailed by reason of not getting the ‘chord of the mass,’ he turned a small valve onthe top of the generator. When a slight hiss was heard, loud cheers greeted hisannouncement that he had ‘got it.’…The state of mind of the audience may beimagined when the shout of one enthusiast ‘Keely, you are next to GodAlmighty!’ seemed only a natural expression.”15This mountebank inventor headlined the New York dailies with his newestcreations and also the accompanying cry of fraud. Factions of the publicdemanded he be jailed, the court giving Keely sixty days to “divulge hissecret,”16 but Keely held fast. Threatening to stop work on his inventions unlessthe court dropped its suit,17 Keely was held in contempt of court and inNovember of 1888, he was placed in jail.18Shortly thereafter, through his counsel, Keely revealed that the “missinglink” was a “copper tube in the form of a hoop,” and he was released on bail afew days later. He argued that he had indeed “obeyed all orders of the court” inexplaining his invention in detail and the suit against him was overturned!19Like Edison, who promised and gave the world the “Lamp of Aladdin,” andTesla, who discovered and harnessed a purported alternating current perpetual-motion machine, Keely billed his own invention as the “greatest scientificdiscovery of the century.”Apparently vindicated, Keely proceeded with his deception. In 1890 theworld celebrity and palmist Count Louis Hamon, better known as Cheiro, visitedthe Keely lab; and by 1895, John Jacob Astor became an investor.Unfortunately for Tesla, however, like Keely, he, too, was gaining areputation for making outlandish claims. For instance, Tesla said that his systemcould “place 100,000 horse-power on a wire” and send it hundreds of miles withalmost no loss of power when the prevailing technology could only send a fewhundred volts one mile, and in that case, with power dropping off markedly withdistance.20 Never mind that this prognostication came true just a few years later;Tesla’s style was that of a visionary, and the claim seemed ridiculous. To theunimaginative, the uninformed, or people who listened only to the opposition, hewas little different from Keely, and so he suffered through guilt by association.21As far back as 1884, Scientific American had published an exposé on theKeely motor, speculating that its source of power was a secret chamber ofcompressed air. This was confirmed in 1898, after Keely’s death, in aninvestigation of his laboratory conducted by Mrs. Bloomfield-Moore’s sonClarence. Having waited for his mother, an ardent Keely admirer, to pass onbefore he tore the place apart, Moore discovered in the cellar a large tank and aseries of pipes leading up through the floor above where the demonstrations tookplace. Keely’s “‘etheric force’ was nothing more than compressed air [releasedby]…the pressure of his foot tapping on a concealed spring valve.”22Other bogus inventors of the day included Gaston Bulmar, who tried to sellGeneral Electric (GE) special pills that turned water into gasoline; WalterHonenau, who derived free energy from an H2O “hydro-atomizer” and “KingCon,” Victor “the Count” Lustig, who was eventually arrested for devising andselling a special money machine that cranked out crisp twenty-dollar bills frominserted white paper.23In an age of new marvels that almost daily transformed society inirreversible ways, the public was “ripe for picking”; naive investors were oftenbilked by promises of impossible schemes. Thus, the inventor was perceived incontradictory ways, as executioner or light bearer, con man or wizard.When Tesla returned from Europe, he wanted nothing better than to havehis AC invention placed in the hands of its new rightful owner so that he couldproceed with other burgeoning interests. Naturally, he would continue to aidWestinghouse in any way that he could, by continually offering advice to Scott,Schmid, or Lamme or stopping by at Pittsburgh to provide hands-on expertise.Throughout the 1890s, whenever the opportunity presented itself, Tesla wouldalso introduce eminent prospective clients to the Westinghouse concern. As washis custom and style, Tesla never considered a commission for this service,although he did obtain vital equipment for his laboratory, which at first wasprovided without cost.And as with Keely, Bulwer-Lytton’s electrical-like energy called “vrilpower” had also been attached to Tesla by this time as well, via a letter from alady in 1890, who “dreamed that if I [Tesla] would read the ‘Coming Race’ ofBulwer, I would discover great things which would advance [my workconsiderably].” But Tesla would not pursue the mystical treatise for a decade,and therefore it appears that although the inventions discussed in the story boregreat similarities to some of Tesla’s later creations, the reader must not sayafterward that “the beautiful things which I shall invent were suggested byBulwer.”24 Nevertheless, the similarities remain, and one wonders whether ornot Tesla actually read the book at the time or knew of its contents. 