15EFFULGENT GLORY (1894)Dear Mr. Tesla,Early in 1894, I told our mutual friend…T. C. Martin, that your book“The Inventions, Researches and Writings of Nikola Tesla,” would still beconsidered a classic a hundred years hence. I have not changed myopinion…The application of the principles therein first enunciated havedefinitely changed for the better, life on this planet.D. McFarlan Moore1In February 1894, Tesla went with T. C. Martin to the laboratory of Mr. Bettini,an inventor who had advanced Edison’s work in the perfection of thephonograph. “He wants to display his marvelous collection of song cylinders—Madam Melba, deReszke, Salvini and Bernhardt,” Martin wrote. “He wishes thehonor of catching your voice as well.”2During this time, Martin continued to forward reviews from Book News,Physics Review, and London Electrician. “Praise from Sir Herbert [Spencer] ispraise indeed,” the editor wrote. “Thanks for continuing the Russian translation;the German edition is selling as well.”3On the home front, Tesla had formed a new company with two of thecoordinators of the Niagara project, and he was now turning his attention todesigning a wireless system that would be able to transmit light, information,and electrical power. Thus, the inventor worked to perfect his mechanical andelectrical oscillators and vacuum lamps. The mechanical oscillator couldefficiently convert steam to electrical power, the electrical oscillator couldproduce the frequencies necessary for power transmission, and the wirelessfluorescent bulbs could be illuminated when the correct wavelengths werereached capable of engendering light. According to Tesla’s theory, if the ethercould be made to oscillate at 500 trillion times per second, pure light would becreated. Below that figure, heat was produced.4T. C. Martin continued to play a role somewhat like a manager. In thespring he set up a sitting for the inventor before the sculptor Mr. Wolff, and toTesla’s dismay, he also arranged an interview with S. S. McClure, the well-known magazine editor. Tesla had too many events crammed into his calendar,but T. C. persisted.“I cannot very well call off McClure now,” Martin wrote, “after your littledinner which has simply made him more eager than ever for the article.” Endingthe missive with customary praise, Martin wrote, “He knows now personally,what he knew before only by hearsay, viz that you are a great man and a nicefellow. I excuse your blushes.”5It would take nearly a year for the Century to complete its own article andorganize the photographing of the celebrated individuals who came to 33-35South Fifth Avenue, but finally, in April 1895, Martin’s follow-up pieceappeared. Even today, a century later, it remains a spectacular testament to thewizard’s fabled laboratory, for not only did it display many fascinatinginventions and prognostications; it also presented dazzling multiple-exposurephotographs of such stars of the day as actor Joseph Jefferson, poet F. MarionCrawford, and sorcerer Nikola Tesla. “Martin’s article should be read verycarefully to be appreciated,” Tesla wrote Johnson.6With thirty-five homes illuminated by gas for every one lit by electricity,the market was ripe for a more efficient source. However, Tesla’s fluorescentlamps were still in an experimental stage, as evidenced by the ten-minute time-lapse photograph of Mark Twain taken for the Martin article.7 The story forTesla’s steam dynamo was analogous. According to Martin’s figures, nine-tenthsof all dynamos in the country were steam driven. The rest gained their powerfrom either compressed air, waterwheels, or gasoline. Since the Tesla oscillatorwas forty times more efficient than the prevailing steam-driven dynamo, itseemed that the marketing of this product would be highly profitable. But again,the perfection of the device was not completed and therefore not yet marketable.Nevertheless, it was revolutionary, and Tesla contacted Babcock & Wilcox tobegin manufacturing prototypes.Before a large number of physicians and engineers of the AmericanElectroTherapeutic Association at his laboratory in October 1894, Tesla used theoscillator to generate electricity for over fifty incandescent lamps and vacuumtubes. Also, “arc lights were shown in operation.” Naturally, the oscillator alsogenerated the extremely high frequencies necessary for engendering beneficialelectrotherapeutic effects.8Refining his theory on wireless communication, the inventor realized thatelectrical energy could be transmitted in two distinctly different ways, one asradiation through the air, and the other as conduction through the ground. Todaythis difference corresponds to FM and AM radio. (As an experiment to verifythat FM travels mostly through the air and AM mostly through, or along, theground, drive your car into an underpass and turn on the radio. When you switchon AM [amplitude modulation], you will probably hear static, whereas FM[frequency modulation] comes in loud and clear.) “When I showed myexperiments to an audience,” Tesla said, “it would happen that when I wanted tooperate single circuits with some devices more than one circuit would respond,and people would call my attention to this…I would then have to say that thecircuits were not carefully tuned.”9 Thus the inventor turned his attention to theproblem of creating separate channels.By studying Herbert Spencer’s theories on resultant forces and nerveconduction,10 Tesla began to realize that he could design vacuum tubes whichwould respond only when a precise combination of two or more circuits werebeing triggered. One of the lamps held by Twain was illuminated in this manner,its dual circuit triggered by a corresponding dual circuit created by two cableslaid around the room. Like the combination of a safety lock, this invention notonly explains the mechanism behind tuning into different stations on the radio, italso explains the principle behind telephone and TV scramblers. In this way,Tesla attained “the exclusiveness and non-interferability of impulses.11Transmitting messages from an outer circuit to an inner circuit twenty feetaway was one thing; sending information over long distances was another matterentirely. Tesla had realized for a number of years that the earth carried a charge,and therefore he decided to utilize the planet itself as a carrier of electricalenergy. If this were so and individualized channels could be created,transmission lines appeared to be superfluous. He therefore began to constructmany different-sized coils to connect to the ground (usually via the water-mainsystem) in order to ascertain the terrestrial period of frequency.With an oscillator constructed for this purpose, Martin wrote, “if he has notyet actually determined the earth’s [precise] electrical charge, or ‘capacity,’ hehas obtained striking effects which conclusively demonstrate that he hassucceeded in disturbing it…[When his oscillations] are in harmony with theindividual vibrations of the [earth], an intense vibration or surging will beobtained.”12 Martin ended the article with the suggestion that with this devicenot only could information and power be transmitted, but also the weather mightbe modified. “Perchance, we shall ‘call up’ Mars in this way some day, theelectrical charge of both planets being utilized as signals,” Martin concluded,quoting Tesla’s wish at the finale of the exposé.13Classifying Tesla was becoming more and more difficult. Martin portrayedhim in a variety of ways—as a practical inventor, a wizard, and an iconoclast;critics portrayed him as “an impractical…visionary enthusiast.”14 “Hisinventions already show how brilliantly capable he is,” one newspaper reported,but his “propositions…seem like a madman’s dream of empire.”15“One is naturally disappointed that nothing practical has as yet proceededfrom the magnificent experimental investigations with which Tesla has dazzledthe world,” Lt. F. Jarvis Patten wrote in Electrical World.16 But his solidaccomplishments at Niagara could not be ignored. The article concluded:Before the general public, he stands as a phenomenal inventor from theEastern world, from whom is expected little less than if he carriedAladdin’s lamp in his hand, which, of course, is wrong, and an injusticeboth to the public and to Mr. Tesla…He has doubtless much importance instore for us, but the difference should never be lost sight of between thesearch for nature’s truths in the lab of the physicist and the reduction of theresults attained, however great their promise, to a form suitable forcommercial use…If some of the dreams which Tesla and others arecherishing today ever come to realization, the magnitude of the ensuingchange in the material life of the world simply defies the imagination.17In Manhattan, Tesla soon caught the eye of Joseph Pulitzer, the German-Hungarian immigrant and owner of the New York World. Pulitzer sent his newestreporter, Arthur Brisbane, on the interview. Already one of the most widely readcolumnists in the nation, Brisbane had recently jumped from Charles Dana’sNew York Sun, but at age thirty, Brisbane would soon also leave Pulitzer tobecome head shock reporter for William Randolf Hearst’s up-and-coming yellowJournal. He met Tesla in July 1894.While dining nightly at Delmonico’s restaurant, the reporter was introducedby Mr. Delmonico to “a very handsome young man with a pointed black beard.”Brisbane wrote that “Mr. Delmonico lowers his voice when he speaks of Mr.Tesla, as Boston cab drivers used to lower their voicess in speaking of John L.Sullivan.”“That Mr. Tesla can do anything,” Delmonico contended. “We managed tomake him play pool one night. He had never played, but he had watched us for alittle while. He was very indignant when he found that we meant to give himfifteen points. But it didn’t matter much, for he beat us all and got all themoney.” Delmonico noted that they were only playing for quarters, but “itwasn’t the money we cared about, but the way he studies out pool in his head,and then beat us, after we had practiced for years. [It] surprised us.”18Considering that Tesla was very proficient at the sport and had slyly kept thatinformation confidential makes the story all the more interesting. Tesla could bedeceptive, particularly in pecuniary matters.Although the article appeared somewhat disjointed and redundant, itnevertheless aptly described Tesla’s habits and appearance at that time. Teslawould dine frequently at the popular establishment, always choosing a table bythe window and usually reading a newspaper. Brisbane described Tesla’s “eyes[as being] set very far back in his head. They are rather light. I asked him how[that] could [be, as he was] a Slav. He told me that his eyes were once muchdarker, but that using his mind a great deal had made them many shades lighter.”This confirmed a theory on brain usage and eye color that Brisbane had heardabout.Brisbane went on to write that Tesla “stoops—most men do when they haveno peacock blood in them. He lives inside of himself.” And yet the article wasadorned with the most fantastic full-body engraving of Tesla standing quiteunstooped, proud as a peacock, illuminated like a virtual Christmas tree.This full-page spread remains one of the most spectacular portraits of theinventor ever concocted, and it caused numerous people to ask Tesla how it feltto pump such huge amounts of electricity throughout his body. “I admit that Iwas somewhat alarmed, when I began these experiments,” Tesla admitted, “butafter I understood the principles, I could proceed in an unalarmed manner.”19When pressed for details a number of years later at the Harvard Club, theinventor responded:[When] the body of a person [is] subjected to the rapidly alternatingpressure of an electrical oscillator of two and one half million volts [this]presents a sight marvelous and unforgettable. One sees the experimenterstanding on a big sheet of fierce, blinding flame, his whole body envelopedin a mass of phosphorescent streamers, like the tentacles of an octopus.Bundles of light stick out from his spine. As he stretches out the arms,roaring tongues of fire leap from his fingertips as myriads of minuteprojectiles are shot off from him with such velocities as to pass through theadjoining walls. He is in turn being violently bombarded by the surroundingair and dust.20Tesla was walking a difficult line and revealing contradictory natures:reclusive versus natural showman. The interest of the press made it difficult toprotect against piracy. He wanted to disclose, for public and historical purposes,his overall goal, but he had to keep vital details confidential. One reporter whohad spent a day with “this kindly wizard of Washington Square” revealed thatTesla “confided to me that he was engaged on several secret experiments of mostabundant promise, but their nature cannot be hinted at here. However, I have Mr.Tesla’s permission to say that some day he proposes to transmit vibrationsthrough the earth [so] that it will be possible to send a message from an oceansteamer to a city, however distant, without the use of any wire.”21 Even hislaboratory workers were insulated from the details of his secret experiments.22After calculating the size of the planet and the hypothetical wavelength ofsolar rays, Tesla constructed a transmitter with several circuits capable ofengendering their electrical charge into the earth. One end of the instrument wasattached to the ground via the radiator or water main, and the other end wasconnected to a cable which Tesla brought to the roof of the building as an aerialconnection. With Mr. Diaz Buitrago, his draughtsman, in charge of thetransmitter, the inventor would take his receiving instruments as far as five milesaway. His first experiments were set up on the roof of the Hotel Gerlach,approximately thirty blocks from the lab. With balloons filled with hot air,helium, or hydrogen to hold the elevated terminal (aerial) high above thebuildings and a cable attached to the water main of the hotel, Tesla set up hisreceivers and verified that, indeed, electrical energy could be secured from histransmitter.23Had Tesla taken a reporter with him on any one of these excursions, it isquite possible that the generally accepted history of the invention of wirelesstransmission would be completely different, because in all of Tesla’s years, henever demonstrated before a viewing body any long-distance wireless effects.Still three years away from expressing details of his wireless work in patentapplications, Tesla had actually hidden some of his plans in patents alreadysecured on his mechanical and electrical oscillators drawn up in 1891 and1893.24 This would present a problem for Michael Pupin, who was alsoexperimenting with resonance effects and the transmission of simultaneousmessages. However, Pupin’s goal involved the improvement of the prevailingtelephone and telegraph lines. He was not attempting to send messages withoutthem.Pupin realized that by equally spacing pulsations of AC, the rapidity andnumber of transmissions could be increased greatly. Unfortunately, his February1894 patent prospectus was easily covered in Tesla’s existing inventions andhigh-frequency lectures.25Tesla had announced in London, in February 1892, that “if the wave lengthof the impulses is much smaller than the length of the wire, then correspondingshort waves…would [greatly] reduce the capacity [making it] possible to sendover the wire high frequency currents at enormous distances. [Furthermore], thecharacter of the vibrations would not be greatly affected.” The creation of a“screen” to “cut the wire into smaller sections” would make it possible totransmit many telephonic messages over the transatlantic cable.26These patents and published announcements in no way deterred Pupin. Hefelt that he had discovered something, and he began a long campaign against theU.S. Patent Office in attempts to bulldoze his way into a legal foothold. Theprize, if successful, would be enormous, as he would have exclusive rights on away to successfully transmit at the same time large numbers of noninterferinglong-distance telephonic and telegraphic conversations over the same wires.Pupin’s nemesis was John Seymour, commissioner of patents.The Columbia University professor’s first strategy was to write up a patentapplication. He submitted it on February 10, 1894, claiming, “I certainlyconsider myself the first to make a practical application of this principle tomultiple telegraphy.”27Seymour’s reply a few months later was that Pupin’s “claims…are rejectedon the arrangement of apparatus shown…by patents by Thomson and Rice…[and by] Tesla’s article Experiments in Alternating Currents.” Seymour alsocited the exact page and figure number, concluding that Pupin had merely“multiplied Mr. Tesla’s electric light circuits,” which in no way was a newinvention.28Hiring a lawyer to help him put together a legalistic-looking circular, Pupinargued that he had indeed been the inventor of the “Art of Distributing ElectricalEnergy by Alternating Currents.” The typeset brief, which resembled an officialcourt document, read in part as follows: “Tesla produced luminous effects, anddid not consider multiplex signalling…He does not disclose several excitingcircuits acting on the main line, with means for tuning each exciting circuitindependently…The applicant was the first to apply the principle upon which theclaims are based and did more than merely multiply the Tesla electric circuit.”29Seymour wrote back: “Claims 1, 2 and 3 are again rejected on Tesla. It iswell known in the art that several periodicities may be simultaneously impressedon the same line…The examiner can see no more in these claims than amultiplication of Tesla’s circuit in a manner well understood in the art.”30Pupin was adamant. He was convinced that he had been the first to inventthe obvious and, furthermore, that he had a total right to make use of Tesla’soscillators, as they were now being generally accepted as the optimum-frequency generators for long-distance electrical transmissions. By studyingeach rejection notice by the U.S. Patent Office, Pupin kept refining the languageof his patent in order to try and come upon a way that would secure a legalfoothold for him. Moreover, Pupin continued to convince himself that indeedthis invention was his.Altering history in his mind and erasing Tesla in his classroom, Pupinwould continue his battle to secure this highly lucrative patent on the means oftransmitting many simultaneous messages over long distances. His battle wouldcontinue for another six years, until after John Seymour retired.The year 1894 was a banner one. In July the spectacular portrait of Teslaappeared in the World. He had major coverage in Electrical World, the New YorkTimes and Review of Reviews, and his AC polyphase system was going to beutilized at Niagara Falls. Tesla had formed a partnership with financiers fromWall Street, he had invited the historical giants of his age to his workplace, andhe had made marked improvements in experiments in wireless communication.The year closed with an invitation by Tesla to the Johnsons to come to hisshop. “Dear Luka,” Tesla wrote on December 21, “You have not forgotten thevisit to my laboratory tomorrow I hope. Dvořák will be there and a number ofother celebrities in America’s elite.”31Anton Dvořák, fifteen years Tesla’s senior, had immigrated from his nativeCzechloslovakia in 1892, to be appointed director of the National Conservatoryof Music. Forever homesick, Dvořák stayed in the United States for only threeyears, but during that time he composed some of his most famous works,particularly the New World Symphony. After the performance, Dvořák visited thewizard’s lab. Christmas and New Year’s Eve with the Johnsons would round outone truly remarkable year. 