39J. P. MORGAN JR. (1912-14)April 18, 1912My dear Mr. Tesla:I attended the Marconi meeting last night, in company with illustrioussociety. The everlasting toast-master, [T.C.] Martin, read, in most theatricalfashion a telegram; and after a pause of fully three minutes, announced itsauthor as: “THOMAS A. EDISON!”Mr. Marconi gave the history, as he sees it, of wireless up to this date.[He] does not speak any more of Hertzian Wave Telegraphy, butaccentuates that messages he sends out are conducted along the earth.Pupin had the floor next, showing that wireless was due entirely to onesingle person…The only speaker of the evening who understood Mr. Marconi’s merit,who did not hesitate to vent his opinion was Steinmetz. In a brief historicalsketch, he maintained that while all elements necessary for the transmissionof wireless energy were available, it was due to Marconi that intelligencewas actually transmitted…That evening was, without any question, the highest tribute that I everhave heard paid to you in the language of absolute silence as to your name.Sincerely yours,Fritz Lowenstein1Tesla was in the midst of working for W. M. Maxwell, superintendent of NewYork’s public schools, on a controversial project to electrify classrooms withhigh-frequency currents. Following in the footsteps of a highly publicizedexperiment in Stockholm whereby a group of children in such an environmentapparently showed increased scores on aptitude tests and accelerated growth,Maxwell was hoping to boost the health and intelligence of students in America.With the prestigious inventor wiring the walls with his “Tesla coil,” guaranteeingcomplete safety, and concurring with the general conclusions of the hypothesis,Tesla helped Maxwell set up a pilot study with “fifty mentally defective schoolchildren.” If the study proved successful, the superintendent boldly stated, “thenew system would overturn all methods hitherto applied in its schools andintroduce a new era in education.”2Marconi’s talk, before eleven hundred members of the New York ElectricalSociety, was held on the very day the Titanic sank. Frank Sprague, who gave theeulogy, “visibly affected Mr. Marconi when he credited him with saving the livesof from 700 to 800 persons.”3 Unfortunately, Marconi was unable to save fifteenhundred other individuals, including Colonel Astor, who went down with theship after helping his new bride board one of the remaining lifeboats.If ever an event epitomized the loss of innocence, the myopic condition ofhumanity, it was the sinking of the Titanic. Reminiscent of Tesla’s own voyage,this watershed recapitulated the story of Icarus, the prideful aeronaut whocrumbled because of lack of respect for his limitations. With Tesla’s outlandishwish to transmit unlimited energy to the far reaches of the world and bring rainto the deserts, to become a master of the universe, it was inevitable that he, too,would succumb. The tragedy prompted Congress to pass into law an actrequiring the use of wireless equipment on all ships carrying fifty or morepassengers. It also focused national attention on twenty-one-year old DavidSarnoff, latter-day head of RCA, who was credited as the first wireless operatorto pick up the Titanic distress signal.4Tesla was not the only casualty in the wireless game. Reginald Fessenden’sconcern “all but ceased functioning in 1912” due to his erratic nature, infighting,and “prolonged litigation.” And Lee De Forest, who by now had nearly fortypatents in wireless, also went under when he was convicted with officers of hiscompany in a stock fraud.5 Concerning Lowenstein, Tesla was backing hisprotégé’s attempts to install equipment on U.S. Navy ships using equipmentbased on some of his fundamental designs. “He is much abler than the rest of thewireless men,” he wrote Scherff, “[so] this has given me great pleasure.”6 Theone edge Lowenstein had over Marconi was the Italian’s insistence on an all-or-nothing deal with the military. Either all ships were hooked into his system, ornone were. The U.S. government, however, was loath to relinquish their upperhand to a private concern, so Marconi had great difficulty integrating his systeminto the American marketplace.Nevertheless, Marconi was still the only major competitor, so Tesla set outto reestablish his legal right. Conferring with his lawyers, the pioneer began astrategy to sue the pirate in every country he could.In England, Tesla had allowed an important patent to lapse, so progressthere was halted. Oliver Lodge, on the other hand, was able to prevail andreceived 1,000 pounds per year for seven years from the Marconi concern there.7In the United States, where Tesla was applying for a renewal of his mostfundamental patent, he had yet to formalize the suit, but in “the highest court inFrance” the inventor achieved a resounding success. Sending his writtentestimony to Judge M. Bonjean in Paris, Tesla explained his work in 1895, whenhe “erected a large wireless terminal above the building…[and] employeddamped and undamped oscillations.” He also enclosed two patents from 1897and specifications for his telautomaton, which confirmed that he had displayed itbefore G. D. Seely, the examiner-in-chief of the U.S. Patent Office inWashington, D.C. in 1898. Concerning Marconi’s June 2, 1896, patent, Teslatestified that the patent was “but a mass of imperfection and error…If anything,it has been the means of misleading many experts and retarding progress in theright direction…It gives no hint as to the length of the transmitting and receivingconductors and the arrangements illustrated preclude the possibility of accuratetuning…[Marconi replaced] the old-fashioned Rumhkorff coil [with]…the Teslacoil.”8Speaking in support of Tesla’s cause for Popoff, Ducretet & Rochefort, theFrench company that had initiated the action, was electrical engineer M. E.Girardeau, who described in detail the technical accomplishments of Tesla’sinvention. “Indeed,” Girardeau began, “one finds in the American patentextraordinary clearness and precision, surprising even to physicists of today…What a cruel injustice would it be now to try to stifle the pure glory of Tesla inopposing him scornfully.”9Judge Bonjean struck down Marconi’s patents and reestablished Tesla’s assuperseding. Most likely, compensation was also paid to him from the Frenchcompany that won the case.With this victory, however, came other defeats. The year 1912 saw legalentanglements against Tesla by Edmund K. Stallo, who was seeking damages of$61,000 for advances tendered in 1906; and also the Westinghouse Corporation,which sued for $23,000 for equipment loaned out in 1907. In the first instance,the Stallo syndicate, which had ties to Standard Oil, had invested only $3,500and was frivolously suing for the promise of an enormous profit. The inventor’sliability was thus minimal. In the second instance, Tesla argued that he was notpersonally liable, as the machinery was loaned to the company he wasorganizing. He did offer, however, to return the equipment which was still beingguarded at the Long Island laboratory.10 Although his financial losses weresmall, the negative publicity undermined his reputation and caused the inventorto become a more invisible presence at the prestigious Waldorf, where he wasstill residing and piling up debt. And then there was Mrs. Tierstein, who Teslasaid, “wanted to shoot me for throwing electricity at her.” Tesla “pitied the poorwoman” but had her sent, by way of Judge Foster, “to the asylum.”11The suit by Westinghouse caused quite a stir among the inner circle, andeven prompted Tom Edison to pen a rare missive of commiseration.February 24, 1912My dear Mr. Edison,Acknowledging your kind letter…I wish to reiterate the sentimentsand express my great regret that I was unable to transmit them in person.With assurance of high regard, I remain as ever,N. Tesla12The Westinghouse Corporation, however, was not a monolithic enterprise,and its legal department, in some ways, was an autonomous entity. Teslacontinued to borrow equipment on a regular basis throughout the period (1909-17), and he frequently conferred with various engineers, particularly CharlesScott, whom he began educating in the field of wireless. Tesla also continued tomeet with the recently deposed chieftain George Westinghouse, who wasworking in semiretirement at his offices in New York City.“I suppose you cannot help feeling disappointed at the ingratitude of somewho are now heading the great enterprise which your genius has created,” theinventor remarked. “I sincerely hope that you will very shortly be again in theposition you have heretofore occupied. I know that the large majority of thepublic shares my sentiments.”“Thank you for your concern,” the descendent of Russian noblemenreplied.13THE GERMAN CONNECTIONMarconi’s greatest rival in the legal arena may have been Nikola Tesla, butin the battleground of the marketplace it was Telefunken, the German wirelessconcern. Although Marconi had patents in Germany, the Telefunken syndicatehad too many important connections on its home front and easily maintained amonopoly there. Formed through a forced merger, under orders of the kaiser, ofthe Braun-Siemens-Halske and Arco-Slaby systems, Telefunken had fought theMarconi conglomerate vigorously on every front. It was, without doubt, thenumber-two competitor in the world. Although Marconi had achieved a recentcoup in Spain, Telefunken gained an edge in America when it constructed twoenormous transatlantic systems in Tuckerton, New Jersey, and Sayville, NewYork.For nationalistic reasons, Tesla had been prohibited from obtaining hisrightful royalties in Germany, but Professor Adolf Slaby never hid the fact thathe considered Tesla the patriarch in the field. Thus, when Telefunken came toAmerica, Slaby sought out his mentor not only on moral grounds but also forgaining a legal foothold against Marconi and to obtain the inventor’s technicalexpertise.A meeting was held between Tesla and the principles of Telefunken’sAmerican holding company, the innocuous-sounding Atlantic CommunicationCompany, at 111 Broadway, the location of their offices. Present was its director,Dr. Karl George Frank, “one of the best known German [American] electricalexperts,” and his two managers, Richard Pfund, a frequent visitor to Tesla’s lab,who was head of the Sayville plant, and “the monocle,” Lt. Emil Meyers, headof operations at Tuckerton.Tesla asked for an advance of $25,000 and royalties of $2,500 per monthbut settled for $1,500 per month, with a one month advance.14 The inventor metwith Pfund to discuss the turbine deal with the kaiser and also to fix a transmitterthat the Germans were working on at the Manhattan office. Shortly thereafter, hetraveled out to the two wireless stations with his plan to institute his latestrefinements in order to boost their capabilities.15 With Professor JonathanZenneck out at Sayville, Tesla calculated that they were wasting nearly 25percent of their energy in electromagnetic radiations. “Those waves willdissipate only a few miles off shore,” he told Zenneck, “whereas the energy thatwill reach Germany will be from your ground connection.”16After a grueling search along the imponderable ice field, John Jacob Astor’semaciated body was fished from the sea for a New York funeral. Documentsfrom his estate revealed five hundred shares of Tesla Electric Company.17 A yearlater, J. Pierpont Morgan, the sultan of Wall Street, the octopus, was dead.Considering the resentment and disillusionment the inventor felt, he also boregreat admiration for the man he called a “towering” historical figure.Although Morgan’s son-in-law, Herbert Satterlee, could only provide aback-row seat at the chapel, nevertheless, even to be present at the solemnoccasion was a great honor. The hall was speckled with numerous faces ofcolleagues and adversaries, many of whom could track a large percentage oftheir wealth, and even their station, to Tesla’s creations. No doubt, the inventorendured some snickering, particularly from the hydra’s underlings, but Tesla,ever the nobleman, transcended the petty titters as he walked up to Anne and J.P. Junior.“Please accept my heartfelt condolences on the death of the great man whowas the head of your famous firm,” he told them. “When I can feel such a voidin my heart and brain at the passing of Morgan, I can appreciate, in a measure,the depth of feeling of those who were his lifelong comrades. All the worldknew him as a genius of rare powers, but to me he appears as one of thosecolossal figures of [the] past which mark epochs in the evolution of humanthought.”18Two months later, within days of the termination of his relationship withHammond, Tesla approached the new head of the House of Morgan with aproposal to help fund his bladeless turbines. “Its application to the manufactureof iron and steel, alone will yield $100,000,000 a year through the utilization ofthe waste heat and other economies, and it will have a similar effect on shippropulsion, railroad, automobile and many other large industries.” The monarchlooked over the proposal and advanced the inventor $5,000.19It was a time for reflection on the death and transmutation of his nemesis.Conflicting emotions of enmity and adoration poured through his being intorrents as he relived the exhilaration of his wireless odyssey and the anguish ofits incompleteness.On July 7, 1913, three days before his fifty-seventh birthday, Tesla took thetrain back out to Wardenclyffe. He had much to think about, for his friendJohnson had decided to retire from the Century. Overseers of the company werepressing to lower the standards. Johnson offered to create a separate magazine,which would be more flashy, but he wanted to maintain the integrity of theoriginal; but he was outvoted. “It was really pathetic to see the way authorswould plead with me for another ‘damn,’”20 he told his friend. Katharine becamemore persistent in demanding that Tesla stop by for another visit. Now infinancial trouble, his friends could even lose their house. Tesla tried to scurrypast the magnifying transmitter without looking up, to get to the safe in thelaboratory, but he was drawn like a magnet to the stalwart frame. As he grabbeda rung from the bottom tier, a sorrow swept through him that stole his breath. Hestaggered to the door of Stanny’s building and let himself in. “I did not exactlycry when I saw my place after so long an interval,” he wrote Scherff, “but camevery near doing it.”21Tesla began to court the new Morgan, trying not to fall into the trap he hadlaid for himself the first time around. He sent Jack an articulate proposaloutlining his wireless enterprise and explanation of his outstanding debt andarrangement with his father and also his plans in the field of “fluid propulsion,”that is, bladeless turbines.“In either of these fields in which I have the good fortune to be a pioneerthe possibilities are immense and I can vouch for the fullest success; but myappeal for your support is on a higher plane…The proposition which I wouldrespectfully submit is to organize two companies and to turn over to you myentire interests in both, of which you may accord me such a part as you deembest.”22“I’m greatly impressed with your offer,” Jack responded. “But of course Icould not consent to doing as you suggest. I wish to make a counter offer, whichis that you should proceed to organize your companies, and, if and as they workout, repay to Mr. Morgan’s estate either in securities or in cash, the money Mr.Morgan advanced. It seems to me, that you are entitled to the profits of thesecompanies, but that Morgan would, in strict justice, be entitled to a return of hismoney if it could be arranged.”23Tesla left the meeting with the old itch reactivated and another check for$5,000. He thanked Jack for his encouragement and forwarded an open letterwhich he had written to His Grace, the Most Reverend Archbishop of Ireland.“The day is not distant when the very planet which gave him birth, will trembleat the sound of his voice: he will…harness the inexhaustible…intense energy ofmicrocosmic movement, cause atoms to combine in predetermined forms; hewill draw the mighty ocean from its bed, transport it through the air and createlakes and rivers at will; he will command the wild elements; he will push onfrom great to greater deeds until with his intelligence and force he will reach outto spheres beyond the terrestrial.”24“It is now clear to me,” Tesla told the new J.P., “that you are moved by thesame great spirit of generosity which has animated your father and I am morethan ever desirous of enlisting your interest and support. Destiny has placed youin a position of great power and influence and here is a wonderful opportunity.“As for myself,” the modest inventor continued, “I contemplated more thanfinancial success…A great monument will no doubt be built to Mr. Morgan, butnone in marble or bronze could be as lasting as the achievement which I haveproposed to link with his memory.”25To reassert his dominance as the preeminent inventor in wireless, theinventor forwarded a transcript of the entire French litigation proceedings,wherein Marconi’s work was overturned in favor of his. If Jack could help fightthe legal battle in the United States, the wireless enterprise, which theycontractually shared, could be revived.Jack, however, was not smitten by the same vision of destiny and graciouslydeclined to become involved in Wardenclyffe in any way. He had not ruled outthe turbines, however, and told the inventor to keep him informed of anyprogress.Tesla returned to the Edison Waterside Station with a new transfusion of 23Wall Street blood. To reflect the reactivation of the resurrected alliance, theinventor set out to search for more fashionable chambers. Within a few monthshe took up residence in the brand-new Woolworth Building. Decorated with agold-leafed emerald-colored mosaic ceiling in the lobby and located by city hall,near Wall Street on Park Row, the gothicstyled Woolworth soared above the cityto the dizzying height of eight hundred feet, eclipsing the Metropolitan Towersas the loftiest skyscraper in the world. Tesla took the Johnsons along to the galaopening. The banquet began with the illumination of the building’s eightythousand lightbulbs by President Woodrow Wilson, who pressed a button inWashington, D.C. Tesla met with the mayor, Mr. “Dime Store” Woolworth, andother dignitaries, and then Katharine lured her two escorts into one of thetwenty-four high-speed elevators to the roof, where they could gaze out over thesprawling megalopolis.“Do not worry about finances, Luka,” Tesla said confidently. “Remember,while you sleep, I work and am solving your problems.” Johnson brought up theold AC polyphase debacle, and Tesla replied that there were “billions invested[in it] now. I won every suit without exception and had it not been for a ‘scrap ofpaper,’ I would have received in royalties Rockefeller’s fortune, but just thesame, I feel I am safe to invite you to dinner.”Tesla’s wit and latest maneuver once again brought a needed smile to theoft-brooding Mrs. Filipov. As usual, when the wizard returned to her orb, sheseemed to step back from the veil. Johnson, however, reiterated his concern thatwithout a job, 327 Lexington Avenue could go on the market.“Please take my words seriously,” Tesla insisted. “Do not worry, and writeyour splendid poetry in perfect serenity. I will do away with all difficulties whichconfront you. Your talent cannot be turned into money, but mine is one which…can be transformed into car-loads of gold. This is what I am doing now.”26During this period, Tesla continued to pay back monies owed the Johnsons as helabored with his new engines.Throughout the latter half of 1913, the inventor prepared a carefulmarketing plan to exploit his new device. Not only would he show Hammondthat he had made a costly mistake, he would also set up an industry that wouldensure the finances necessary to return to his beloved Long Island tower. Hisbest leads came from the Ford Motor Company in the United States and theBergmann Works in Germany.Tesla had known Sigmund Bergmann since his first days in America.Bergmann had emigrated from Germany even before Tesla and became a valuedemployee/private partner and manufacturer for Thomas Edison. Maintaining aseparate company from the other Edison works, Bergmann became highlysuccessful. He returned to Germany in the early 1900s, becoming one of theleading manufacturers for the kaiser,27 a man who had also attempted to woo theSerb, especially before the turn of the century, when he was demonstrating hisfantastic inventions in Europe and America.In September, Tesla forwarded photographs of his turbines and invitedMorgan to the Waterside Station to see them in person; however, Morgan wassailing for Europe. “Perhaps when I return some time in December,” Morganreplied, “it will be possible for me to go into the question.”28 While the newWall Street czar sailed for the Old World, Tesla set up meetings with emissariesfrom the most consequential markets. In a letter sent to Morgan upon his return,Tesla outlined his numerous strategies for achieving financial success. His listincluded:1. Sale of exclusive license for Belgium through the advisor of theKing [for] $10,000 cash and fair royalty.2. Concessions for Italy through an associate at Crispi [for] $20,000and royalty. Not yet consummated.3. Exclusive license for the U.S. to the Wing Manufacturing Companyfor turbo draught blowers.4. Exclusive license for train lighting, Dressel Railway Lamp Works.5. [Manufacture of] automobile lighting with engine exhaust gas.6. Use of my wireless system [with Lowenstein] on several battleships.7. Agreement with L. C. Tiffany Co. on new invention.8. Prospective agreement with Mr. N. E. Brady of the EdisonCompany in regard to the manufacture of turbines. Very good chance forbig business.Manufacturing had begun at some of these places, and royalty contractswere negotiated with most. “As you can see, Mr. Morgan, here are decidedlyvaluable results very gratifying to me but, on the other hand, I am almostdespairing at the present state of things. I need money badly and I cannot get itin these dreadful times. You are about the only man to whom I can look for help.I have stated my case.”29Morgan agreed to defer interest payments on the amount, which was nowup to $20,000, but decided not to increase the loan. Tesla, however, simplyrequired the funds and followed up the letter with a testimonial from Excellenzvon Tirpitz, minister of marine, “who has been requested to the German Emperorrelative to the Tesla Turbine who is greatly interested in this invention.” VonTirpitz had “promised his Excellency that the machine will certainly be here onexhibition about the middle of January, so you know what that means.” Teslaalso informed Morgan that if the deal was consummated, Bergmann would comethrough with royalties on the turbine of $100,000 per year.30Considering Jack’s keen antipathy for the Germans, their connection to theJewish banking houses (he was notoriously anti-Semitic), and the long-standingpolicy of the House of Morgan to shun financial arrangements with Germanyafter they had double-crossed Pierpont many years before, it would seemunlikely that Jack would reverse his decision. However, unlike his father, the sonwas able to compromise and allow his heart to rule at times. He graciouslychanged his mind and forwarded the additional funds.31As Tesla awaited news from the Bergmann Works, he labored to perfect anew speedometer he had invented. The device, much simpler than the one thenbeing used, would cost half as much to produce and had a market in thehundreds of thousands. Considering that his selling price would be aroundtwenty-five dollars each, the potential for large profits was great, and Teslaoffered the deal to Morgan. Jack declined and asked again for the interestpayment due on the loan.“In the turbine proposition,” Tesla replied, “I have received a painfulsetback. I installed the machine at the Edison Plant and made some verygratifying tests, but soon discovered that the castings of the bearings were full ofsmall holes which allowed the water to enter and made it hazardous to run.”Tesla had to renew the parts, “but spent considerably more money thanexpected.” He also had lawyers fees to contend with because of the upcomingsuit with Marconi, so he requested that Morgan either be patient or help with thebills to complete the turbine project or protect their other common interest.32Besides the deaths of Astor and Pierpont Morgan, this period also markedthe departure of two other lions from Tesla’s den, George Westinghouse andnaturalist John Muir; both men died in 1914. Westinghouse’s death wascushioned by some weeks of declining health, but Muir’s passage took Tesla bysurprise. “He seemed so vigorous in mind and body when I saw him not longago,” the technological conservationist told the Johnsons.33 Only a few yearsbefore, the sky had been blanketed with hundreds of thousands of passengerpigeons, and the beauty of nature had been rekindled with Muir’s inspirationalwritings. As Tesla strolled to his favorite spot by the Forty-second Street libraryto spread seed among the bird’s domestic cousins and consider a new tack forinstituting his wireless scheme, the last passenger pigeon disappeared from theearth. Jack Morgan spent time with one of the few Jews he liked, DanielGuggenheim, organizing Kennecott Copper, “America’s biggest copperproducer.”34Tesla sent his tribute to Westinghouse to Electrical World. It was publishedwith the comments of other colleagues, such as William Stanley, Lewis Stillwell,and Frank Sprague.I like to think of George Westinghouse as he appeared to me in 1888, whenI saw him for the first time. The tremendous potential energy of the manhad only in part taken kinetic form, but even to a superficial observer thelatent force was manifest…An athlete in ordinary life, he was transformedinto a giant when confronted with difficulties which seemedunsurmountable. He enjoyed the struggle and never lost confidence. Whenothers would give up in despair, he triumphed. Had he been transferred toanother planet with everything against him he would have worked out hissalvation…His was a wonderful career filled with remarkableachievements…He was a great pioneer and builder whose work was of far-reaching effect on his time and whose name will live long in the memory ofmen.35 