3COLLEGE YEARS (1875-82)It has cost me years of thought to arrive at certain results, by many believedto be unattainable, for which there are now numerous claimants, and thenumber of these is rapidly increasing, like that of the colonels in the Southafter the war.NIKOLA TESLA1Eighty miles south of Vienna, in the capital of the province of Styria, was thePolytechnic School in Graz. Milutin had chosen the school because it was one ofthe most advanced of the region. The physicist and philosopher Ernst Mach hadtaught there a few years earlier, as had the psychophysiologist Gustav TheodorFechner. Planning on becoming a professor, Tesla undertook courses inarithmetic and geometry from Professor Rogner, a lecturer known for hishistrionics; theoretical and experimental physics with the punctilious Germanprofessor Poeschl; and integral calculus with Professor Allé. Allé “was the mostbrilliant lecturer to whom I ever listened. He took a special interest in myprogress and would frequently remain for an hour or two in the lecture room,giving me problems to solve, in which I delighted.”2 Other courses takenincluded analytical chemistry, mineralogy, machinery construction, botany, wavetheory, optics, French, and English.3 To save money, he roomed with KostaKulishich, whom he had met at the Student Society of Serbia. Kulishich laterbecame a professor of philosophy in Belgrade.4Tesla plunged into his work with great intensity. Studying upward of twentyhours a day, he changed his major to engineering and extended his curriculum tostudy other languages—he could speak about nine of them—and the works ofsuch writers as Descartes, Goethe, Spencer, and Shakespeare, many of which heknew entirely by heart. “I had a veritable mania for finishing whatever I began,”he recalled, reflecting on his next self-appointed assignment. The collectedworks of Voltaire comprised “one hundred large volumes in small print whichthat monster had written while drinking seventy-two cups of black coffee perdiem.”5 This task cured him of the compulsion but did not serve to quell thepattern of relentless self-denial and self-determination. Because he was praisedby his teachers, the other students became jealous, but at first Tesla remainedunperturbed.Returning home the following summer, having passed his freshman yearwith all A + ’s,6 the young scholar expected to be praised by his parents. Instead,his father tried to persuade his son to stay in Gospić. Unbeknown to Tesla, histeachers had written Milutin warning that the boy was at risk of injuring hishealth by obsessively long and intense hours of study. A rift was created betweenfather and son, perhaps in part because the Military Frontier Authority had beenabolished and the scholarship was no longer available.Reacting to the ridicule from other students, who resented Tesla for hismonastic study habits and close association with the faculty, Tesla took upgambling. “He began to stay late at the Botanical Garden, the students’ favoritecoffee house, playing cards, billiards and chess, attracting a large crowd to watchhis skillful performances.”7 Tesla’s father “led an exemplary life and could notexcuse the senseless waste of time and money…” “I can stop whenever Iplease,” he told his father, “but is it worth while to give up that which I wouldpurchase with the joys of Paradise?”8During his sophomore year, a direct-current Gramme dynamo was deliveredfrom Paris to Professor Poeschl’s physics class. It was equipped with thecustomary commutator, a device that transferred the current from the generatorto the motor. Electricity in its natural state is alternating. This means that itsdirection of flow changes rapidly. An analogous situation would be a river thatflowed downstream, then upstream, then downstream, and so on many times persecond.9 One can see the difficulty in harnessing such a river with, for instance,a waterwheel, for the wheel would constantly change its direction as well. Thecommutator is comprised of a series of wire brushes that serve to transfer theelectricity into only one direction of flow, that is, a direct current (DC). It is acumbersome device and sparks considerably.When Professor Poeschl displayed this up-to-date equipment, Teslaintuitively deduced that the commutator was unnecessary and that alternatingcurrent (AC) could be harnessed unencumbered. He voiced this opinion, whichappeared utterly fantastic at the time. Poeschl devoted the rest of the lecture to adetailed explanation of how this goal was impossible. Driving the point home,Poeschl embarrassed his student by disconnecting the “superfluous” commutatorand noting with feigned surprise that the generator no longer worked.10 “Mr.Tesla may do many things, but this he can not accomplish. His plan is simply aperpetual motion scheme.”11 Tesla would spend the next four years obsessedwith proving the professor wrong.Another invention Tesla worked on at the same time, but under the tutelageof Professor Allé, was that of a mechanical flying machine. As a child, Tesla hadheard stories from his grandfather about Napoleon’s employment of hot-airballoons, which were used to observe enemy troop movements and for droppingbombs. No doubt he had also studied the principles involved in school and quitepossibly saw such futuristic creations floating in the Austrian skies when hewent off to college.By his third year Tesla was running into difficulties at school. Havingsurpassed his classmates in his studies, he became bored and frustrated by hisinability to find a solution to his AC problem. He began to gamble more heavily,sometimes twenty-four hours at a stretch. Although Tesla tended to return hiswinnings to heavy losers, reciprocation did not occur, and one semester he losthis entire allowance, including the money for tuition. His father was fuming, buthis mother came to him with “a roll of bills” and said, “Go and enjoy yourself.The sooner you lose all we possess the better it will be. I know that you will getover it.”12The audacious youth won back his initial losses and returned the balance tohis family. “I conquered my passion then and there,” he wrote, and “tore it frommy heart so as not to leave a trace of desire. Ever since that time I have been asindifferent to any form of gambling as to picking teeth.”13 This statementappears to be an exaggeration, as Tesla gambled quite freely with his future andwas known to play billiards when he came to the United States. An Edisonemployee recalled: “He played a beautiful game. [Tesla] was not a high scorer,but his cushion shots displayed skill equal to that of a professional exponent ofthis art.”14 It has also been suggested that years later, in the early 1890s, Teslabilked some of the wealthy socialites in New York by feigning minimal ability inthe sport.15Exam time came, and Tesla was unprepared. He asked for an extension tostudy but was denied. He never graduated from the Austrian Polytechnic Schooland did not receive any grades for his last semester there. Most likely, he wasdischarged, in part for gambling and, supposedly, “womanizing.”16 According tohis roommate, Tesla’s “cousins, who had been sending him money, thereforewithdrew their aid.” Fearing that his parents would find out, Tesla disappearedwithout word. “Friends searched everywhere for him and decided that he haddrowned in the river.”Clandestinely packing his gear, Tesla traveled south, over the border intoSlovenia, where he arrived in Maribor in late spring of 1878 to look for work.He played cards with the local man on the streets, as is still the custom today,and soon gained employment with an engineer “earning 60 florins a month,”17but the job was short-lived. Tesla continued traveling, making his way throughZagreb, to the small coastal village of Min-Gag. He would not return home, forhe did not want to confront his parents. At the same time, however, Tesla alsocontinued his quest for a solution to the problem of removing the commutatorfrom the DC generator.His cousin, Dr. Nikola Pribic, recalled a story he had heard as a boygrowing up in Yugoslavia in the 1920s: “My mother told us…he would alwayslike to be alone [when Tesla visited us]. In the morning he would go off into thewoods and meditate. He would measure one tree to another making notes,experimenting [stringing wires between them and transmitting current]. Peasantspassing by would be astonished at such an erratic person…They would approachand say, ‘We’re sorry; your [cousin] seems to be crazy.’”18Having finally located his son, after word from Kulishich, who had seenTesla in Maribor, Milutin traveled north to discuss his academic problems. Teslarefused to return to Graz, so Milutin offered a solution: His son would make afresh start at another university. They returned to Gospić.Reaccepted into the family, Tesla began once again to attend church to hearhis father’s sermons. There he met Anna. She was “tall and beautiful [with]extraordinary understandable eyes.” For the first and only time in his life, Teslawould say, “I fell in love.” Delighting in her company, Nikola would take Annafor strolls by the river or back to Smiljan, where they would talk about thefuture. He wanted to become an electrical engineer; she wanted to raise afamily.19The following year, Milutin passed away, and a few months later, in 1880,Tesla left for Bohemia (now in the Czech Republic) to “carry…out my father’swish and continue my education.” He promised to write to Anna, but theirromance was doomed, and she would marry shortly thereafter.Tesla enrolled in the Charles-Ferdinand branch of the University of Prague,one of the foremost institutions in Europe, for the summer term.According to Ernst Mach, who, a decade earlier, had transferred from Grazto be appointed Rector Magnificus, Prague was a city “rich in talented people,”with street signs often appearing in a half-dozen languages. Although the citywas filled with majestic buildings, sanitary conditions were severely lacking. Toavoid typhoid fever one had to boil water or obtain mineral water from springs tothe north.20Just two years after Tesla’s stay, Harvard psychologist William Jameswould come to visit, to meet with Mach and Mach’s archrival, Carl Stumpf,“Ordinary Professor of Philosophy.” Stumpf was a student of the controversialex-priest Franz Brentano (who also influenced another pupil, Sigmund Freud)and was also Tesla’s philosophy teacher. Other courses Tesla undertook includedanalytical geometry with Heinreich Durege, experimental physics with KarelDomalip, both “Ordinary Professors,” and higher mathematics with AntonPuchta, who was an “Extraordinary Professor” from the German TechnicalUniversity also in Prague.21With Stumpf, Tesla studied Scottish philosopher David Hume. Raised as achild prodigy of music, the acerbic and “sharp-nosed” Stumpf22 opposed anumber of key psychophysicists, including the famed Wilhelm Wundt as well asMach, but at the same time he also helped shape the thinking of a number of keystudents, such as phenomenologist Edmund Husserl and Gestalt psychologistWolfgang Kohler.23A persuasive advocate of Hume’s “radical skepticism,” Stumpf argued forthe concept of the “tabula rasa.” Basing his thinking on Aristotle and JohnLocke, both of whom repudiated the concept of innate ideas, Stumpf stated thatthe human mind was born a blank slate, a “tabula rasa”; impinging on it, afterbirth, were all of the “primary quality of things,” that is, true knowledge aboutthe world. Through the sense organs, Tesla learned, the brain mechanicallyrecorded incoming data. The mind, according to Hume, was nothing more than asimple compilation of cause-and-effect sensations. What we call ideas weresecondary impressions derived from these primary sensations. The will and“even the soul w[ere] reduced by Hume to impressions and associations ofimpressions.”24 At this time, Tesla also studied the theories of Descartes, whoenvisioned animals, including man, as simply “automata incapable of actionsother than those characteristic of a machine.”25This line of thinking would dominate Tesla’s worldview and wouldironically serve as the template for a mechanistic paradigm that would lead theinventor to discover his most original creations, even though the whole idea oforiginal discovery appears to be antithetical to this extrinsically motivatedAristotelian premise. According to Tesla and to this view, all of his discoverieswere derived from the outside world.Although Tesla does not overtly refer to Stumpf’s perceived adversary, inretrospect, it appears obvious that Stumpf’s opposition did not stop Tesla fromstudying Mach’s experiments in wave mechanics. Born in Moravia (now theCzech Republic) in 1838, Mach graduated from the University of Vienna in1860. By 1864 he was a full professor at Graz, and by 1867 he was head of thedepartment of experimental physics at Prague, with four books and sixty-twoarticles to his credit. Influenced by the research in psychophysics of Fechner inGraz and Ludwig von Helmholtz in Berlin, Mach studied the workings of thehuman eye, along with his Prague colleague “famed physiologist andphilosopher” Jan Purkyne. Both the eye and ear collected information from theoutside world, analyzed it, and transferred it, via electrical impulses in thenerves, to the respective processing centers in the brain. This traditional line ofresearch had been taken by many other well-known scientists, including IsaacNewton, Johann von Goethe, and Herbert Spencer, all favorites of Tesla’s.In his laboratory, Mach had constructed a “famous instrument known as awave machine. This device could make progressive [and standing] longitudinal[and] transverse waves…” Mach could display a number of mechanical effectswith these acoustic waves and “demonstrate the analogy between acoustic andelectromagnetic events.” By this means, the “mechanical theory of the ether”could also be demonstrated.26By studying acoustical-wave motion in association with mechanical,electrical, and optical phenomena, Mach discovered that when the speed ofsound was achieved, the nature of an air flow over an object changeddramatically. This threshold value became known as Mach 1.Mach also wrote on the structure of the ether and hypothesized that it wasinherently linked to a gravitational attraction between all masses in the universe.Influenced overtly by Buddhist writings, which no doubt filtered down toesoteric discussions by the university students, Mach could hypothesize that noevent in the universe was separate from any other. “The inertia of a system isreduced to a functional relationship between the system and the rest of theuniverse.”27 This viewpoint was extended to the relationship of mental events toexterior influences. Like Stumpf, he agreed that every mental event had to havea corresponding physical action.28Since Mach’s writings so closely parallel Tesla’s later research andphilosophical outlook, Mach seems a curious omission from Tesla’s publishedwritings.By the time Tesla left the university at the end of the term, he had madegreat strides, both theoretical and practical, in solving the AC dilemma. “It wasin that city,” Tesla said, “that I made a decided advance, which consisted indetaching the commutator from the machine and studying the phenomena in thisnew aspect.”29With the death of his father, he needed to earn his own living. He began anapprenticeship in teaching but did not enjoy it. Uncle Pajo suggested that hemove to Hungary, where employment could be obtained through a militaryfriend, Ferenc Puskas, who ran the new “American” telephone exchange with hisbrother Tivadar.30 In January 1881, Tesla moved to Budapest, but he found to hisdismay that the operation had not yet been launched.The Puskas brothers were very busy men, running operations in St.Petersburg and overseeing, in Paris, Thomas Edison’s incandescent lamp exhibitat the Paris Exposition and fixing the lighting system at the opera house there.31Out of funds and without a job, Tesla approached the Engineering Department atthe Central Telegraph Office of the Hungarian government and talked his wayinto a position as a draftsman and designer. Working for a subsistence salary, heutilized what little surplus funds he had to purchase equipment to further hisexperiments.Anthony Szigeti, a former classmate and engineer from Hungary, “with thebody of Apollo…[and] a big head with a lump on the side…[that] gave him astartling appearance,”32 became Tesla’s friend and confidant. Many a night,when the budding inventor was not enmeshed in his research, the two fellowswould meet at the local cafes, where they would discuss the events of the day orcompete in such friendly games as determining who could drink the most milk.On one such occasion, Tesla claimed he was beaten after the thirty-eighthbottle!33Due to his meager funds and general inability to budget himself, Tesla hadbut one suit, which had withered from use. It was the time of a religious festival,and Szigeti inquired what Tesla would be wearing. Stuck for an answer, theyouthful inventor came upon the clever idea of turning his suit inside out,planning thereby to show up with a seemingly new set of clothes. All night wasspent tailoring and ironing. But when one starts with a wrong premise, noamount of patching can right the problem. The outfit looked ridiculous, andTesla stayed home instead.34In a few months, the American telephone exchange opened there inBudapest and Tesla and Szigeti immediately gained employment. The newenterprise allowed the young engineers to finally learn firsthand how the mostmodern inventions of the day operated. It was also the first time that Tesla wasintroduced to the work of Thomas Edison, the “Napoleon of Invention,” whoseimprovements on Bell’s telephone helped revolutionize the field ofcommunications. Up the poles Tesla would climb to check the lines and repairequipment. On the ground he worked as a mechanic and mathematician. Therehe studied the principle of induction, whereby a mass with an electric orelectromagnetic charge can provide a corresponding charge or force ormagnetism in a second mass without contact. He also studied a number ofEdison’s inventions, such as his multiplex telegraph, which allowed four Morse-coded messages to be sent in two directions simultaneously, and his newinduction-triggered carbon disk speaker, the flat, circular, easily removabledevice which is still found in the mouthpiece of every telephone today. As washis nature, Tesla took apart the various instruments and conceived ways ofimproving them. By giving the carbon disk a conical shape, he fashioned anamplifier, which repeated and boosted transmission signals. Tesla had invented aprecursor of the loudspeaker. He never bothered to obtain a patent on it.Except for friendly diversion with Szigeti, Tesla’s every spare moment wasspent reworking the problem of eliminating the commutator in DC machines andharnessing AC without cumbersome intermediaries. Although a solution seemedimminent, the answer would not be revealed. Hundreds of hours were spentbuilding and rebuilding equipment and discussing his ideas with his friend.35He pored over his calculations and reviewed the work of others. Tesla laterwrote: “With me it was a sacred vow, a question of life or death. I knew that Iwould perish if I failed.”36 Monomaniacal in pursuit of his goal, he gave upsleep, or rest of any kind, straining every fiber to prove once and for all that hewas right and Professor Poeschl and the rest of the world were wrong. His bodyand brain finally gave out, and he suffered a severe nervous collapse,experiencing an illness that “surpasses all belief.” Claiming that his pulse racedto 250 beats per minute, his body twitched and quivered incessantly.37 “I couldhear the ticking of a watch…three rooms [away]. A fly alighting on a table…would cause a dull thud in my ear. A carriage passing at a distance…fairly shookmy whole body…I had to support my bed on rubber cushions to get any rest atall…The sun’s rays, when periodically intercepted, would cause blows of suchforce on my brain that they would stun me…In the dark I had the sense of a batand could detect the presence of an object…by a peculiar creepy sensation onthe forehead.” A respected doctor “pronounced [his] malady unique andincurable.” Desperately clinging to life, Tesla was not expected to recover.38Tesla attributes his revival to “a powerful desire to live and to continue thework” and to the assistance of the athletic Szigeti, who forced him outdoors andgot him to undertake healthful exercises. Mystics attributed the event to thetriggering of his pineal gland and corresponding access to higher mystical statesof consciousness.39 During a walk in the park with Szigeti at sunset, the solutionto the problem suddenly became manifest as he was reciting a “gloriouspassage” from Goethe’s Faust.See how the setting sun, with ruddy glow,The green-embosomed hamlet fires.He sinks and fades, the day is lived and gone.He hastens forth new scenes of life to waken.O for a wing to lift and bear me on,And on to where his last rays beckon.“As I uttered these inspiring words,” Tesla declared, “the truth was[suddenly] revealed. I drew with a stick on the sand the diagrams shown sixyears later in my address before the American Institute of Electrical Engineers…Pygmalion seeing his statue come to life could not have been more deeplymoved. A thousand secrets of nature which I might have stumbled uponaccidentally I would have given for that one which I had wrestled from heragainst all odds and at the peril of my existence.”40Tesla emphasized that his conceptualization involved new principles ratherthan refinements of preexisting work.The AC creation came to be known as the rotating magnetic field. Simplystated, Tesla utilized two circuits instead of the customary single circuit totransmit electrical energy and thus generated dual currents ninety degrees out ofphase with each other. The net effect was that a receiving magnet (or motorarmature), by means of induction, would rotate in space and thereby continuallyattract a steady stream of electrons whether or not the charge was positive ornegative. He also worked out the mechanism to explain the effect.41Follow the letter N in each of the stages above.Motor Schematics Showing Magnetic Field Rotation.Tesla referred to this diagram (or one quite similar to it) in his lecturebefore the American Society of Electrical Engineers for the first time in 1888.Each square represents the same armature at different points in its rotation. Thereare two independent circuits or currents set up diagonally across from oneanother which are 90 degrees out of phase with each other in both position andtiming. So, for instance, in the first position, the armature points to the north pole(of the north/south circuit, which runs from bottom right to top left). The othercircuit (running from bottom left to top right) is in the position of changing sothat neither pole has a charge. If we look to the next square to the right (which isoccurring a fraction of a second later as the currents continue to alternate), wenote that the charge is beginning to enter the second circuit (i.e., running frombottom left to top right). At this point in the other circuit, the charge is beginningto reverse itself as well but still has the same polarity. As there are two northpoles set up at this fraction of a second, the armature rotates to go between thetwo of them. In the third square, the bottom right-top left circuit is nowneutralized on its way to reversing its polarity, while the bottom left-top rightcircuit maintains the polarity it has just entered. Therefore, the armaturecontinues its movement to the most northward position, and so on.42“In less than two months,” Tesla wrote, “I evolved virtually all the types ofmotors and modifications of the system now identified with my name…It was amental state of happiness as complete as I have ever known in life. Ideas came inan uninterrupted stream and the only difficulty I had was to hold them fast.”43Tesla invented, at this time, not only single-phase motors whereby the twocircuits were 90 degrees out of phase with each other, but also polyphase motorswhich used three or more circuits of the same frequency in various other degreesout of phase with each other. Motors would be run entirely in his mind;improvements and additions to design were conceived; finally, plans andmathematical calculations would eventually be transferred to a notebook. Thisstep-by-step procedure would become customary.Ferenc Puskas, who had initially hired Tesla, asked if he wanted to help hisbrother Tivadar run the new Edison lighting company in Paris. Tesla said, “Igladly accepted.”44 Szigeti was also offered a position, so Tesla was fortunate tohave a good friend with whom he could share the new adventure.Was Tesla the first to conceive of a rotating magnetic field? The answer isno. As far back as 1824, a French astronomer by the name of François Aragoexperimented with spinning the arm of a magnet by using a copper disc.The first workable rotating magnetic field similar to Tesla’s 1882 revelationwas conceived three years before him by Mr. Walter Baily, who demonstratedthe principle before the Physical Society of London on June 28, 1879, in a paperentitled “A Mode of Producing Arago’s Rotations.”45 The invention comprisedtwo batteries connected to two pairs of electromagnets bolted catty-corner toeach other in an X pattern, with a commutator used as a switching device. Therotating magnetic field was initiated and maintained by manually cranking thecommutator. On this occasion Baily stated, “The disk can be made to rotate bymeans of intermittent rotation of the field effected by means ofelectromagnets.”46Two years later, at the Paris Exposition of 1881, came the work of MarcelDeprez, who calculated “that a rotating magnetic field could be producedwithout the aid of a commutator by energizing electromagnets with two out-of-step AC currents.”47 However, Deprez’s invention, which won an award at theelectrical show, had a major problem: One of the currents was “furnished by themachine itself.” Furthermore, the invention was never practicallydemonstrated.48Other researchers who conceived of a rotating magnetic field analogous toTesla’s but after his revelation (in early 1882) were Professor Galileo Ferraris ofTurin, Italy (1885-88), and an American engineer, Charles Bradley (1887).Ferraris was influenced by the work of Lucien Gaulard and George Gibbs, whodesigned AC transformers during the mid 1880s. In 1883 they presented theirAC system at the Royal Aquarium in London,49 and in 1885 they installed anAC system of power distribution in Italy, where they met Ferraris.50 Purchasedby George Westinghouse for $50,000, the system was installed in GreatBarrington, Massachusetts, the following year by William Stanley,Westinghouse’s head engineer. The Gaulard-Gibbs invention, however, did notdo away with the commutator, which was the express purpose of Tesla’s design.In Ferraris’s published treatise on his independent discovery of a rotatingmagnetic field, he wrote, “This principle cannot be of any commercialimportance as a motor.” After learning of Tesla’s work, Ferraris stated, “Tesladeveloped it much further than [I]…did.”51Bradley filed for a patent for an AC polyphase device on May 8, 1887 (no.390,439) after nine Tesla AC patents had been granted. Haselwander, in thesame year, utilized slip rings in place of commutators on DC Thomson-Houstonequipment and also designed two-and three-phase windings on DC armatures.52The question of priority concerning Tesla’s invention was discussed bySilvanus P. Thompson, a physics professor in London, in his 1897comprehensive text on AC motors. Thompson (no relationship to ElihuThomson), considered at the time to be “perhaps the best known writer onelectrical subjects now living,” said that Tesla’s work separated itself clearlyfrom predecessors and contemporaries in his “discovery of a new method ofelectrical transmission of power [emphasis added].”53A question that remains unanswered was whether or not Tesla knew ofBaily’s work. It is quite possible that he had read Baily’s paper, although no oneat the time, including Baily, comprehended the importance of the research orunderstood how to turn it into a practical invention.54 Tesla stated in the early1890s, “I am aware that it is not new to produce the rotations of a motor byintermittently changing the poles of one of its elements…In such cases, however,I imply true alternating currents; and my invention consists in the discovery ofthe mode or method of utilizing such currents.”55A few years later, in a well-publicized case involving patent priorities onwhat came to be known as the “Tesla Alternating Current Polyphase System,”Judge Townsend of the U.S. Circuit Court of Connecticut noted that beforeTesla’s invention and lecture to the American Institute of Electrical Engineers(AIEE) in 1888, there had been no AC motors; furthermore, no one attending thelecture recognized any priorities. Whereas Baily had dealt with “impracticalabstractions, Tesla had created a workable product which initiated a revolution inthe art.”56 The Tesla patents were also sustained against individual casesinvolving Charles Bradley, Mons. Cabanellas and Dumesnil, William Stanley,and Elihu Thomson.57In citing a previous case on a similar issue, Judge Townsend responded towhat today is called the “doctrine of obviousness”:The apparent simplicity of a new device often leads an inexperiencedperson to think that it would have occurred to anyone familiar with thesubject, but the decisive answer is that with dozens and perhaps hundreds ofothers laboring in the same field, it had never occurred to anyone before[Potta v. Creager, 155 U.S. 597]…Baily and the others [e.g., Bradley,Ferraris, Stanley] did not discover the Tesla invention; they were discussingelectric light machines with commutators…Eminent electricians united inthe view that by reason of reversals of direction and rapidity of alternations,an alternating current motor was impracticable, and the future belonged tothe commutated continuous current…It remained for the genius of Tesla to…transform the toy of Arago intoan engine of power.58The discovery of how to effectively harness the rotating magnetic field wasreally only a fraction of Tesla’s creation. Before his invention, electricity couldbe pumped approximately one mile, and then only for illuminating dwellings.After Tesla, electrical power could be transmitted hundreds of miles, and thennot only for lighting but for running household appliances and industrialmachines in factories. Tesla’s creation was a leap ahead in a rapidly advancingtechnological revolution. 