38THE HAMMOND CONNECTION(1909-13)November 8, 1910My dear Mr. Hammond [Jr.],I was glad to read the enclosed newspaper reports. This is water on mymill. Just go ahead and make a lot of money and I will sue for infringementand we will divide.Yours sincerely,N. Tesla1It is unclear as to exactly when, and in what capacity, John Hays Hammond Sr.became involved financially with Nikola Tesla. John O’Neill, who knew theinventor for nearly forty years, wrote in his biography that Hammond Seniorgave Tesla a gift of $10,000 for the development of the telautomaton, which wasunveiled in 1898.2 John Hays Hammond Jr., or “Jack” Hammond, contradictedthis assertion, writing twelve years after the book’s publication, “My father wasfinancing one of his later inventions and in this way, I had the opportunity ofmeeting him even while I was at Yale (1907-1910).”3 Thus, based on Jack’sletter, Hammond Senior most likely helped finance Tesla’s bladeless turbine,although he may have invested in Wardenclyffe or some other enterprise.In either case, it is unlikely that Hammond presented Tesla with an outright“gift,” so it is clear that at least part of O’Neill’s statement is incorrect. One ofHammond Senior’s oldest friends stemming from childhood was Darius OgdenMills. Both men grew up as California gold miners.4 Mills, a long-standingfriend of Stanford White’s, became a principal in the Edison IlluminatingCompany back in 1883, along with J. Pierpont Morgan.5 As a business associateof John Jacob Astor in the late 1890s, Mills was involved in the financing of theNiagara Falls enterprise and probably invested in Tesla’s company as well. Teslaalso knew Hammond’s brother Richard, who had been to Niagara Falls to hearthe inventor’s invocation.Having correctly anticipated a “depression” resulting from GroverCleveland’s 1892 election, Hammond had traveled with his wife and family toSouth Africa to run the Bernarto Brothers’ gold and diamond mines. Thus, hewas on the other side of the globe at the time of Tesla’s work in telautomatics.Nevertheless, it is entirely possible that through Mills, Hammond participated inthe venture. Jack Hammond, who would have been ten years old in 1898, wouldhave therefore learned about this technology at an impressionable age. As thefocus of Jack’s extraordinary career revolved around his work in radio-guidedweaponry systems, this early Tesla connection would help explain his ardentinterest. Although Jack made no secret of crediting Tesla as being the primaryinventor of telautomatics, he may still have wished to suppress Tesla’s ultimaterole in influencing so greatly the direction his life would take.According to Jack Hammond’s research, “Prof. Ernest Wilson in 1897controlled a torpedo on the Thames by Hertzian waves. He is the pioneerinventor in this art.”7JOHN HAYS HAMMOND SR.John Hays Hammond Sr., whose life became fictionalized as the “heroic Clay inSoldiers of Fortune,”8 was the ultimate daredevil. Born in 1855, Hammond’smaternal grandfather, Col. John Coffee Hays, was a Texas Ranger and the firstsheriff of the “wickedest city in the world,” the seaport and bonanza town of SanFrancisco. Raised in California during the gold rush, Hammond’s father, RichardPindell Hammond, was a West Point graduate and a friend of Robert E. Lee’sand also Franklin Pierce. Hammond was also a gold miner and federal taxcollector for the port of San Francisco.Schooled at Yale University with a major in mining, Hammond continuedhis studies in the mid-1870s in Europe. After his return, the energetic adventurerset out for the Sierra Madre in his search for silver and gold. Traveling with hisfamily and brother Richard, Hammond encountered Apache Indians on thewarpath and Mexican desperadoes in his quest for buried treasure. “By way ofencouragement,” Hammond stated, “my wife frequently declared that in caseDick and I should be killed, she would faithfully promise to shoot: first thewomen,…then her child and then herself, rather than have them fall into thehands of the Indians.”9Other excursions included travel through alligator-infested swamps inCentral America and “the cannibal country of Columbia.”10 Successful infinding gold in Guatemala, Hammond also opened up lead and silver minesthroughout Mexico and the Midwest. In 1891, with a six-gun strapped to eachhip, he helped quell a violent mining strike in Montana; but in 1893, unhappywith the new Democratic administration, he decided to leave America, taking hisfamily with him, to fulfill his childhood dream of searching for diamonds in thedepths of the Dark Continent.Placed in charge of the British Consolidated Gold Fields, Hammond madehis fortune when he realized that searching for diamonds twenty-five hundredfeet under the ground would be much more lucrative when this type of land wasselling for $10 per acre, whereas shallow mining stakes were going for $40,000per acre.11Among his children, the most precocious was a five-year-old named JohnHays Hammond Jr., or Jack. There was also Harris, six years Jack’s elder,Richard, a younger brother, and Nathalie, a little sister.Swept into the Boer War in 1896, Hammond was arrested by the Transvaalgovernment. Captured with Cecil Rhodes and the infamous Dr. Jameson, whohad led a revolt against the Dutch, the elite members of the mining syndicatewere sentenced to death by firing squad. With a plea from the U.S. secretary ofstate and perhaps a nudge from Mark Twain, who was in South Africa at thetime, they were finally able to buy their way out. According to Hammond, Twainhad informed the Dutch that they had captured “some of the wealthiest bugs inthe world.” President Krueger placed the ransom at $600,000, or $125,000 apiece. With Rhodes fronting the booty, the deal was struck, and they werereleased. Hammond, with his wife and family, were free to return to the States.He would pay back his share with future profits from new mining ventures.Considered one of the wealthiest industrialists in the world, with a list offriends that included three presidents and former Yale classmate WilliamHoward Taft, John Hays Hammond Sr. became a natural choice for vicepresident. Resigning from the Guggenheim copper coalition, Hammond soughtthe position as Taft’s running mate with full vigor in 1908,12 during the initialyears of Tesla’s partnership with his son Jack.JOHN HAYS HAMMOND JR.After a short stay in England in 1900, the Hammond family returned to theStates and took up residence in Washington, D.C. Hammond Senior also had anoffice on Wall Street and a summer home in New Jersey. Having a keen interestin inventors, the mining engineer invited many of them to his home. Included onthe list were Alexander Graham Bell, Guglielmo Marconi, Tom Edison, NikolaTesla, and the Wright brothers.13 In 1901, when Jack was just twelve years old,he was invited with his father to Menlo Park. There Edison, who was working on“a new process to extract gold from South African ore, showed Jack models ofhis first phonograph, and gave the youth some original sketches. It may havebeen this contact,” Hammond speculated, “that stimulated my son’s interest inthe study of electricity.”14Shortly after Jack entered Yale in 1906, he began to study Tesla’sinventions. He also worked for Alexander Graham Bell. Thus, it was during hiscollege years that his interest in remote control became (re)awakened. “Tesla andBell were, so to speak, my scientific god-fathers,” Jack wrote in his diary. “Ifound them deeply inspiring.”15 Jack’s “experiments started in early 1908, whenhe developed an electric steering and [also an] engine control for a boat…[finding] that he could control this mechanism over short distances with a radioimpulse.”16It was at this time that the Hammonds set up permanent residence on theharbor at the fishing village of Gloucester, Massachusetts, and it was there thatthe enthusiastic engineering student performed most of his investigations.Destined to have more patents than any American inventor except Tom Edison,Jack began his interest in inventing during his New Jersey prep-school years. Hisfirst significant creation, at age sixteen, was a reverse switch whichautomatically turned off his night light when the headmaster opened his dormdoor to check to see if he was reading after curfew.17 After this, the floodgateswere opened, and by the end of his career, John Hays Hammond Jr. had amassedan astounding array of over eight hundred patents, including inventions in thefields of military warfare, music and sound (no relation to W. H. Hammond ofelectricorgan fame), and home appliances. Some of Jack’s most uniquecontributions include a cigarette case which “popped out a lit cigarette whenopened,” a microwave oven, a push-button radio, a superheterodyne (whichgreatly amplified radio waves and was coincident with Edwin Armstrong),aircraft guidance systems, a time-controlled gas bomb, a magnetic bottle cap, acombination piano-radio-phonograph, a windshield washer, a mobile housingunit, and a “telestereographer,” or “mechanism for projecting three-dimensionalimages via wireless.”18In September 1909, during his senior year, the budding wunderkind wroteto his father to arrange for a meeting with the “Serbian High Priest ofTelautomatics.”19 “Father, I have some important information that I desire to getfrom Mr. Tesla.”20Hammond Senior, who had just lost his bid for the vice-presidential slot,made the arrangements. Jack met the fifty-three-year-old inventor at hisMetropolitan Towers office in New York the week of September 26, and it ismost likely that Tesla reciprocated by visiting Gloucester shortly thereafter.Hammond requested that Tesla send his patent information on wireless control ofmachinery, and Tesla did so before the end of the month.21Moonlighting at the patent office in Washington D.C., Jack had alreadyrigged, by this time, a forty-foot vessel to be maneuvered by means of wireless.His broadcasting system, in part based on a Marconi design, also utilized Teslaoscillators and contained “two 360-foot radio control towers near the laboratoryoverlooking Freshwater Cove…With these devices, a man standing at a shorelookout station could steer an empty boat in the water.”22 Jack also asked Teslato speak at his Yale graduation.23This period in Tesla’s life was marked by extreme bitterness becauseMarconi was rewarded for his piracy with the Nobel Prize in December. Teslainformed Jack that the Italian tinkerer had “abandoned the old devices of Hertzand Lodge and substituted mine instead. In this manner the transmission acrossthe Atlantic was effected.”24 Jack, however, held no ill will toward Marconi andincluded him prominently in the four-volume compendium he was writing on thehistory of wireless communication. He also invited Marconi to the Gloucestercompound and formed a friendship that would last well into the 1930s.25Having returned from a European excursion, where he had visited electricalengineers (and psychic researchers) in London, Paris, and St. Petersburg, Jackwas able to complete his master’s dissertation:Mr. Tesla in 1892 showed that the true Hertzian effect was not a means bywhich it was possible for a sending station to communicate with a receivingstation at any great distance. He demonstrated furthermore, that wavespropagated at a transmitting station travelled along the ground as aconductor. Today [1912] it is acknowledged that these views are correct. Itwas, however, left to the splendid enterprise of Marconi to crystallize theresults of previous investigators into a complete and practical system ofspace telegraphy…In 1897 Mr. Marconi transmitted messages to a distanceof 8.7 miles. Today Mr. Marconi says that the maximum effective distanceof transmission is 6,000 miles.26Perturbed with Hammond’s decision to highlight Marconi’s dubiousachievements and proceed in his field of remote control, Tesla soughtcompensation. Working with Fritz Lowenstein and Alexander Graham Bell, Jackinvented a “mechanical dog” which followed its “master” when a lantern wasbeamed at it. Created in the shape of a milk carton on wheels, the “critter” madeuse of selenium cells for “eyes” to receive the glimmering command signal.Hammond assured Tesla that he was not infringing upon his work intelautomatics, but Tesla remained unconvinced, especially after an article in thenewspapers reported that Hammond was in the midst of displaying remotecontrolled torpedoes to the military.My dear Mr. Hammond,Judging from the enclosed, I think that you are playing a wirelesspossum. Notwithstanding your assurances, I will watch your progress andbring a friendly suit for infringement as soon as I ascertain that you are infunds.27Jack wrote back to reconfirm that he would give proper credit, but Teslawanted a contract and a percentage of any profits.“My dear Mr. Tesla,” the twenty-two-year-old wrote back, “I am veryagreeable to share the profits with you, but I shall only on the condition that youshare our liabilities also.”28“As I naturally surmise that your Papa would pay all our liabilities,” Teslareplied, “I am willing to share in these.”29Aside from the banter, Tesla was hoping that Hammond would succeed inhis interface with the military, for now he would have a market for selling hisnew bladeless engines. Soon a partnership was formed, Hammond Seniorfooting the bill.“Go in on this with your brother Harris,” Jack’s father cautioned. “He isolder than you and more experienced. And be careful with Mr. Tesla. He tends tospend gold as if it were copper.”Having studied Tesla’s method of selective tuning, Jack came to call it the“1903 prophetic genius patent.”30 Tesla had created this invention due to arecurrent problem which he had noticed in 1894-95, namely, that he had beenhaving difficulty illuminating particular bulbs in his laboratory withoutilluminating others. After studying the work of Herbert Spencer on the combinedaction of two or more nerves in the human body, the inventor came upon a planwhereby bulbs would illuminate only when a combination of more than onefrequency was transmitted. Jack noted that “Mr. Tesla resembles his system to acombination lock.”31 Explaining the particulars to the initiate, Tesla showed thatdevices could be made to respond not only to one frequency but to two, three, oreven more. This combined arrangement, analogous to today’s TV and telephonescramblers, would not only ensure privacy, it would also allow for a system witha virtually unlimited number of separate channels.32The corresponding patent, along with Tesla’s method of utilizing resonantearth frequencies for transmission, that is, Tesla currents, became the backbonefor a plethora of inventions ranging from military guidance systems to radio andtelecommunications. The further development and refinement of this foundationwould also eventually make Jack and a few other inventors millionaires, forexample, Edwin H. Armstrong.In 1911, writing from the patent office, where Jack was still employed, thewilling prodigy informed Tesla that he had contacted the War Department withthe hope of selling ship-to-shore communication systems capable of transmittingtwenty words per minute. Jack had also begun the construction of a military-linked think tank at Gloucester, where he hired such competent engineers asFritz Lowenstein and Benjamin Franklin Meissner. Born in 1890, Meissner, whowould come to author a textbook on radiodynamics with some help from Tesla,33became chief assistant at the lab. Having worked for the U.S. Navy in 1908,Meissner had aided in the development of the electric dog and superheterodyne.He is also credited with inventing the “cat whisker” which was a detector on thecrystal radio set.” Jack was also conferring with Reginald Fessenden, Lee deForest, John S. Stone, and Guglielmo Marconi.Washington, DCFebruary 16, 1911Dear Mr. Tesla,Let us create an unpretentious company and call it the Tesla-HammondWireless Development Company. In thinking of this name, I have followedEmersonian advice, and as you see, have attached my chariot to a star…The purpose of this company would be to perfect an automaticselective system, to perfect the [submersible] torpedo, and eventually tocarry out your magnificent projects that will wirelessly electrify the world.I am most sincerely yours,John Hays Hammond Jr.35202 Metropolitan TowersFebruary 18, 1911New York CityDear Mr. Hammond:The Tesla-Hammond combination looks good to me, but we shouldhave to go at it with some circumspection. I have already interested agentleman who signs himself J.P.M. in a part of my wireless inventions andmy friend Astor is now waiting for the completion of my plant to go intothe wireless power transmission business which should be a colossalsuccess.In the art of Telautomatics, however, I am perfectly free and would beglad to go into any fair proposition to exploit the field. I think that in a fewyears this departure will command the attention of the world.I have just completed my turbines and am starting Monday to installthem at the Edison plant where I expect to show them to you in operationon your next visit to the city.With kind regards,N. Tesla36Writing on his classy Wardenclyffe letterhead, with the magnifyingtransmitter posing at the top of the page, the inventor pens, in the estimation ofthis author, a most exasperating dispatch. The tiff that Tesla had with Morganhad been held in secret. Only a handful of people even knew the details of theircontract. Even Tesla’s closest friends and latter-day biographers were kept in thedark. However, on another level, it had become obvious by 1911 to all but Teslathat Wardenclyffe was a ship with a lead hull.Still intoxicated with the world-telegraphy idea, filled with hope that hisnew bladeless turbines would cause a revolution, the perennial iconoclastembarked foolhardly, albeit courageously, on the best-case scenerio: that hewould raise enough capital with new inventions to finally return to Long Islandto complete the tower.Perhaps it was still possible at this juncture of his life if his motor, forinstance, replaced the gasoline engine in the automobile or the prop engine in theairplane. However, what was not possible was the intimation in the letter thatMorgan was still “interested.” This was a blatant display of disinformationwhich the pompous Waldorf dandy conceitedly proclaimed in order to hide thevery fact, maybe even to himself, that his optimism was possibly delusion.Here was a chance to develop a concrete wireless system with the backingof the wealthy and powerful Hammond lineage, but Tesla turned the opportunityaway because of arrogant, tunnel-minded, and narcissistic proclivities—andpossibly because of contractual limitations imposed by the Morgan contract. Hadhe developed the wireless scheme with Jack, he may have had to legallycompensate Morgan with 51 percent of any developments he achieved.Hammond hadn’t figured that the star he had hitched himself to was a half-bakedcomet.THE APOSTLE OF FIGMENTSIn May 1911, T. C. Martin invited Tesla to address thirteen hundred members ofthe National Electric Light Association, which was holding its annualsymposium at the Engineering Society Building on Thirty-ninth Street.“There is no enjoyment that I could picture in my mind so exquisite as thetriumph which follows an original invention or discovery,” the inculcationbegan. “But the world is not always ready to accept the dictum of the inventor,and doubters are plentiful, so that discoverers have often to swallow bitter pills,along with their pleasure.”But what magniloquent pills would this mad scientist force his congregationto ingest! Tesla proceeded to dazzle the audience with slides of his ACpolyphase system, telautomaton, and world wireless experiments, flashingpictures from Colorado with streamers extending sixty-five feet.In discussing his method of individuation, he stated that the broadcasting ofcombination and multiple frequencies was benefited in a system that did not usewires. “All the statements that you read in the newspapers that wirelessmessages are interfered with,” the inventor explained, “are because the workersin that field are laboring under delusions—they are transmitting messages byHertz waves, and in this way no secrecy is possible.”Having skyrocketed his vision to a world which was not of this earth, thewizard stepped into the shoes of Prometheus. “Now, the discovery [of standingwaves that] I have made upset all that has gone before, for there was a means ofprojecting energy into space, absolutely without loss from any point of the globeto another, to the antipodes, if desired. In fact, a force impressed at one pointcould be made to increase with distance…You can imagine how profoundly Iwas affected by this revelation. Technically, it meant that the earth, as a whole,had a certain period of vibration.”37Set against a sky of thunderclouds, the Wardenclyffe citadel was flashed onthe screen, its mushroom-shaped vertex looming.“I have annihilated distance in my scheme,” deus roared, “and whenperfected, it will not be one mite different than my present plans call for. The airwill be my medium, and I will be able to transmit energy of any amount to anyplace. I will be able to issue messages to all parts of the world and send [forth]words which will come out of the ground in the Sahara Desert with such forcethat they can be heard for fifteen miles around.”38“It would be possible by my powerful wireless transmitter, to light theentire United States. The current would pass into the air and, spreading in alldirections, produce the effect of a strong aurora borealis. It would be a soft light,but sufficient to distinguish objects.”39 Naturally, the tower would also bepowerful enough to send signals to nearby planets, especially if there were anyMartians out there to receive them.And this was just the introduction to the topic he came to divulge that night:the Tesla bladeless turbine.Tesla began to work on his new engines in earnest, shuffling betweenProvidence and Bridgeport, with most of his operations now shifted to the NewYork Edison Waterside Station. He also looked for prospective clients. One ofhis plans was to sell, probably through Jacob Schiff, five hundred engines to theJapanese. “By applying my turbine to their torpedo,” Tesla wrote Jack’s brotherHarris, “I can double the power. We should negotiate royalties on the basis ofhorsepower.”40 Tesla also conferred with GE and the exuberant SeiberlingCompany, leaders in the development of high-speed power boats.41Promising “great success,” the vulcan worked overtime, forging hisrevolutionary equipment, as Jack continued perfecting a prototyperemoteoperated boat and a wireless broadcasting station. With a range of twothousand miles, the Hammond transmitter became “the most important privatesending station in the world.” Jack also studied telephotography, and he workedon perfecting his electric dog. “And, if you reverse the motor by pushing overthe tail switch,” Jack announced to the press, “you can make the dog back awaymost surprisingly in either direction when you advance upon him with thelight.”42Expanding his market, Tesla designed prototypes that could transmutate thegasoline engine in the automobile; he began to make overtures to Ford MotorCompany and also Kaiser Wilhelm of Germany, who was planning on puttingthem in tanks. As with any new creation, there were problems. For instance,because the ball bearings were wearing down too quickly, the disks were notmaintaining their spins at optimum accelerations. As a “sun dodger,” Tesla alsohad a penchant for working throughout the night, and therefore his labor costswere often double. Naturally, there were other expenditures.Jack suggested more publicity and sent over the well-known journalistWaldemar Kaempffert to interview, in Kaempffert’s words, the “temperamentalgenius” for Scientific American.43 But in Tesla’s estimation he had enoughpublicity. He needed more capital.Throughout the latter part of 1912 and through the first months of the newyear, Tesla sent urgent pleas to his partner. He had expended $18,000, hadworked without salary for all this time, and required $10,000 back immediately.Dear Mr. Hammond,…in desperate need of money. I am unable to hold out any longer.44But Hammond, who was helping Lowenstein install his wireless equipmentaboard navy ships and competing against De Forest for a $50,000 amplifier dealwith AT&T, ignored the request, his brother Harris taking a full quarter of a yearto respond:June 10, 1913Dear Mr. Tesla,As you know, we have advanced a great many thousands of dollars inthe development of this turbine and have expected each week the past yearto be in a position to have tested it…[Now] we find that the turbine is onlypartially set up at the Edison plant…[We are missing] a splendidopportunity of having it thoroughly and honestly tested by people whowould be the greatest benefit to us should these tests be successful.Sincerely yours,Harris HammondThe High Priest of Telautomatics was incapable of believing that the son ofone of the richest men in the world was scorning his entreaty. “Since my notice, Ihave done the best I could to save what was possible, the sacrifices which I havebeen compelled to make and the losses which I have suffered are such that if Iwere dealing with a man less attractive to me than yourself, I would disdain toanswer.” Tesla also enclosed glowing testaments to the turbine from professorsand chief engineers, but the partnership was over.45 Hammond would not comethrough.THE CASTLE THAT JACK BUILTJack Hammond traveled to Europe only months before World War I to conferwith various scientists in order to perfect a better receiving instrument than theMarconi coherer. It appears that Tesla and Hammond were working at crosspurposes. As would become obvious, the $10,000 Tesla requested would nothave been sufficient to complete his work on the turbines. He probably neededforty or fifty times that figure, and Jack’s main interest lay in the perfection ofwireless transmitting and receiving apparatus. The torpedo propellants werereally secondary.In retrospect, it seems that Tesla might have been better off abandoning theturbine for the time being and working with Jack to perfect the guidance system;but he was too close to a potential major success to sink more time into aninvention he had already perfected fifteen years earlier. Jack would go on in1913 and 1914 to demonstrate his remote-controlled boat before the U.S.military elite. General Weaver, chief of the U.S. Coast Artillery, and a smallentourage traveled up to Gloucester to witness the Natalia, the prodigal son’snewest success, the general even taking the controls himself. “Again and againthe flashing craft shot forth and manoeuvered [sic] about the harbor underinvisible control, while natives of Gloucester gasped in amazement…They sawher headed for a definite mark a mile away, two miles, three miles away, andstrike it with precision every time.”46A few weeks later, Hammond Junior demonstrated the long-rangecapabilities of the vessel. It could operate while twenty miles away from theGloucester radio transmitter and in one way or another was directed the fulldistance of sixty miles to the naval base at Newport by means of wireless. Jackhad also perfected the problem of static interference and selective tuning. InDecember he wrote:My dear father,We are now drawing up as systematically as possible the wholeproposition to the present to the Board of Ordinance. This work means agood deal in the future financial success of the proposition.I am your affectionate son,John Hays Hammond Jr.47It would be many years, however, before the U.S. government recompensedJack for his remote-controlled guidance system. He would expend over the nextdecade in the neighborhood of three-quarters of a million dollars on theoperation, expanding the system of radiodynamic control to include aircraft aswell submersibles.48 Problems in the creation of secret channels were madeapparent in 1915 and 1916 when the USS Dolphin successfully interfered with atorpedo launched by Hammond over distances of two hundred to three hundredfeet, but the Hammond system was successful when the torpedo was launchedfarther away.49 The War Department also wanted to sustain visual contact of theweapon, so Jack began working on a device to be directed from flying machines.Every problem he encountered he was able to overcome.The technology was still too new to be used during World War I, and themilitary kept avoiding expenditures of any funds. Ostensibly waiting for Tesla’sfundamental telautomatic patents to expire, Jack finally presented his case beforemembers of Congress. He stated that he had overtures from foreigngovernments, but he would refuse to negotiate with them because of theimportance of the work and loyalty to his country. And so, in 1919, while hisfather, John Hays Hammond Sr., continued to gain publicity for his idea of aWorld Court to prevent war, the U.S. Congress and President Wilson approvedan appropriation of $417,000 for the war patents for Hammond’s son; however,still no monies changed hands.50In the 1920s, Jack began working with David Sarnoff, who, along withGuglielmo Marconi and Edwin Armstrong, was forming the seeds of the RadioCorporation of America (RCA). And, in 1923, the fruits of his labor paid offwhen Jack sold a series of wireless patents to RCA for $500,000,51 but he wasstill to be compensated by the U.S. government. In 1924, Hammond sent yetanother dispatch to the War Department to gain the release of the appropriatedfunds, which were now up to $750,000. “I have brought the development to astate where we have demonstrated the feasibility of control of standard navaltorpedoes while running at depths of 6 feet or over, submerged at speeds of 27-30 knots/hr,” Hammond wrote.52 Finally, in December 1924, with the help ofCurtis Wilbur, secretary of the navy and admirer of Hammond’s father, thegovernment made good, recompensing Hammond and assigning his work to asecret file in the patent office. Assurances were also given that their exclusivepatents did not compete with those sold to RCA. All this took place a full decadeafter his breakup with his Serbian mentor, who “now [had] the pleasure ofsimply looking on when others are using my inventions.”“I wish him luck,” Tesla said. “But still, I ought to have had something forit.” Tesla also pointed out that Hammond sought his patents just a few monthsafter Tesla’s had run out.53Now a millionaire on his own merits, Jack set out to fulfill a dream thatbegan in his youth, when the family moved to England, namely, to live in acastle. He also fell in love with an artist, Irene Fenton, a lovely daughter of ashipbuilder who unfortunately was married to a shoe merchant. Irene, forty-five,got divorced and married Jack, thirty-seven, clandestinely in 1925, as he beganconstruction of the medieval dwelling which was situated on the cloistered andtreacherous coastal cliffs where Longfellow wrecked the fictitious schoonerHesperus in Gloucester. The site was less than a mile from his parent’s home.54Jack’s passion was music. Although not a musician, he had many acousticalpatents and also an organ that was so enormous, comprising eight thousandpipes, that a palace would be the only edifice capable of housing it. Hammonddesigned the all-stone building around the instrument, complete with parapets, amoat, and a chain-link drawbridge. Inside could be found dark, windingcorridors, hidden doorways, and breakaway walls at the entrance of the greatroom for moving organ pipes into it and out. In the center of the castle, whichtoday is a museum, Hammond placed an indoor swimming pool and an atriumfilled with plants and tropical birds. Ancient artifacts from Europe werepurchased, and a nude statue of the celebrated innovator was sculpted, Irenedesigning a metal fig leaf to subdue the piece.Jack continued to work on a long series of top-secret inventions for the WarDepartment and for himself as he lived the life of the bon vivant. Visitors to hisestate and to his pipe-organ concerts in the 1930s included the Hearsts, GeorgeGershwin, Helen Hayes, David Sarnoff, Ann and Theodore Edison, theMarconis, J. Pierpont Morgan’s daughter Louisa and her husband, HerbertSatterlee, Helen Astor, Marie Carnegie, David Rockefeller, the Barrymores,Noël Coward, and Leopold Stokowski.It is doubtful that Tesla ever visited the castle, although he might have, buton March 30, 1951, nearly a decade after the Serb’s death, another Slav andTeslarian, Andrija Puharich, stopped by.55 Still interested in extrasensoryperception, Jack had invited Puharich, a medical doctor and inventor of hearingaids, along with psychic Eileen Garrett, to his citadel for the purpose of testingher telepathic abilities. Placed in a Faraday cage so that electromagnetic wavescould be screened out, Garrett performed at a level that astounded theexperimenters.56A world traveler and prodigious innovator throughout his life, Jack spentmuch of his time in the latter years traveling, with his wife, across the country ina mobile home he had designed. One day on a trip to see his friend IgorSikorsky, in Bridgeport, the inventor of the helicopter asked if Jack wanted oneas a present. “Only if it can take my mobile home,” Jack responded. After a longpause, with time out to stare at the mobile monstrosity, Igor responded, “It canbe done.”John Hays Hammond Jr. died in 1965 at the age of seventy-seven. A geniusin his own right, it is unfortunate that his relationship with Tesla was thwarted.Together they invented a rather sizable chunk of the appliances of the modernera. 