14NIAGARA POWER (1894)How extraordinary was my life an incident may illustrate…[As a youth] Iwas fascinated by a description of Niagara Falls I had perused, andpictured in my imagination a big wheel run by the Falls. I told my unclethat I would go to America and carry out this scheme. Thirty years later Isaw my ideas carried out at Niagara and marveled at the unfathomablemystery of the mind.NIKOLA TESLA1Conquest of Niagara was by no means assured. It hinged on very specificfactors. The first serious scheme to harness the mighty cataract, the Evershedplan, was proposed in 1886. Thomas Evershed, a civil engineer, who had workedon the Erie Canal, had conceived the idea of the creation of a complex networkof canals and tunnels running adjacent to the Falls, whereby two hundredwaterwheels and accompanying industrial mills would be placed. He hadprobably ruminated over the scheme for twoscore years, as Evershed had workedas a surveyor at Niagara in his youth as far back as the 1840s. Although the ideawas attractive, it was costly and dangerous to implement, as most of the ninemiles of excavation required for the canals and wheel pits had to be done byblasting through stone; estimates ran as high as $10 million. Thus, the officialsof the Cataract Construction Company sought counsel from notable engineersand inventors.2In 1889, Edison submitted a plan which boldly asserted that DC could betransmitted to Buffalo, approximately twenty miles away. As appreciableamounts of DC electricity had never traversed a distance in excess of one or twomiles, this suggestion appeared highly optimistic, and it was doubted by mostother engineers, particularly Sprague and Kennelly, two of Edison’s coworkers.Westinghouse was also dubious of the feasibility of transmitting electricalenergy, and he suggested the implementation of a sophisticated system of cablesand compressed air tubes to transfer the power to Buffalo.3 Thus, for thesereasons, plans for harnesing the falls centered for the most part on constructingan industrial complex adjacent to the falls.The long-distance transmission of electrical power was simply beyondimagining. It must be remembered that what Edison generated was meageramounts of electricity capable of illuminating lightbulbs, and then only in closeproximity to the source of the power. Since his DC apparatus still made use of acommutator, he was incapable of transmitting appreciable amounts of power,although he could run a few motors if they were close to the generator. That iswhy the 1891 Lauffen-Frankfurt transmission was so startling. Brown andDobrowolsky had not only surpassed, by a factor of about one hundred, Edison’slong-distance record; they had also transmitted significant amounts of power, aspectacular achievement with no comparable precedent.Brown and Dobrowolsky had had predecessors. Two years earlier,Sebastian Ziani de Ferranti, the son of an Italian musician living in Liverpool,England, had been the first to use Tesla’s apparatus at a plant at Depford.Ferranti, a brilliant engineer with talents purported to have rivaled Edison’s, hadalready made important modifications on the Gaulard-Gibbs AC apparatus forSiemens Brothers and also Ganz & Company at their London branch. His boldidea was to create a central station along the Thames so that electricity could bepumped to numerous substations around town.4 In 1889, from Depford, Ferrantitransmitted an unprecedented 11,000 volts to four substations of six to sevenmiles away, where 10,000 horsepower alternators were driven.5 This was amagnificent accomplishment, but it appears doubtful that many peopleunderstood that it was Tesla’s system6 or even that true success had beenachieved. In no way did it gain the publicity of the Lauffen-Frankfurt enterprise,nor did it spark the idea of spreading the energy of Niagara Falls beyond itssurrounding area.Nor had Westinghouse’s initial achievements in electrical powertransmission demonstrated the capabilities of the Tesla system. He hadsucceeded at Telluride, Colorado, with Stillwell, Shallenberger, and Scott, intransmitting 60,000 volts of AC for a distance of four miles to run a 100horsepower Tesla motor, and he had illuminated the Chicago World’s Fair of1893. Both of these were great triumphs, but neither demonstrated that electricalpower could be transmitted over long distances. In short, without the Lauffen-Frankfurt success, there would have been no proof that AC was capable oftraversing the twenty miles from Niagara to Buffalo, let alone from Niagara toNew York City, which was over three hundred miles away. That is why thefinancial backers of the Niagara project sent Edward Dean Adams, president ofthe Cataract Construction Company, to Europe to confer with Brown andDobrowolsky, and that is why Dobrowolsky intimated that the invention was his.There was no physical proof to the contrary, as clearly he and Brown had beenthe first and only engineers to realize such a feat.Adams, from the firm Winslow, Lanier & Company, out of Boston, was aslight, gentle-looking man with large round eyes, small head, the face of ateenager, and a mammoth handlebar mustache. He began his relationship withlongtime J. P. Morgan associate Charles Lanier in 1881. Working his way up tofull partner, Adams was placed on the board of directors of a number of majorrailroads, including Henry Villard’s Northern Pacific, and also the Ontario andWestern Railroad, with lines stemming from Buffalo to New York City.7 He alsosat on the board of directors of the Edison Electric Light Company, as its secondlargest stockholder.In 1889, along with Villard, who was attempting to combine all the majorelectric companies into one large corporation, Adams tried to curtail the highlyexpensive lightbulb patent dispute between Edison and Westinghouse by gettingthem to confer with one another, but, of course, Edison wanted no part of suchan arrangement.8As president of the Cataract Construction Company, Adams sold his sharesin the Edison concern so that he could be impartial in his investigations, and in1890 he “established the International Niagara Commission, with headquartersin London…His intention was to consult with leading European scientists andengineers and to examine the most advanced hydraulic-power [compressed air]techniques, a branch of engineering in which Switzerland excelled.”9In 1890, Adams traveled to Europe with Dr. Coleman Sellers, anotherexecutive of the Cataract Construction Company, where they conferred withengineers in France, Switzerland, and England. In London they visited Ferrantiat his electrical station at Depford; they also met with Professor Rowland, whohad traveled from Johns Hopkins University, and Gisbert Kapp, electricalengineering editor and author of the classic text Electrical Transmission ofEnergy. Rowland argued in favor of AC, and Kapp recommended C. E. L.Brown as the most prominent engineer to undertake the project. He was locatedat the Maschinenfabrin Oerlikon Works in Switzerland. Adams wired J. PierpontMorgan, who was in Paris, with the suggestion that he return to Switzerland tomeet with Brown. Morgan concurred.10Before leaving England, Adams met with Sir William Thomson (LordKelvin), whom he placed in charge of the International Niagara Commission,and a contest was created awarding cash prizes totaling $20,000 for the bestplans submitted for harnessing the falls. L. B. Stillwell, who was in London withH. H. Byllesby, at the Westinghouse branch, wired to Pittsburgh to requestpermission to compete by giving Adams a plan based on the Tesla system; butWestinghouse turned down the idea because he did not want to give away$100,000 worth of advice for such a paltry sum.Of the twenty proposals submitted, most involved compressed air andhydraulic equipment. “Of the six electrical plans, four used direct current…[one]proposed single phase [AC], but ‘details were not fully described.’ Theremaining plan by Prof. George Forbes advocated polyphase installation.”11Forbes, who was a professor from Glasgow and who was later hired asconsulting engineer to the Niagara Power Company, wrote to the commission:“It will be somewhat startling to many, as I confess it was at first to myself, tofind as the result of a thorough and impartial examination of the problem that theonly practical solution lies in the adoption of alternating current generators andmotors…The only [workable one] is the Tesla motor manufactured by theWestinghouse Electric Company and which I have myself put through varioustests at their works at Pittsburgh.”12Although initially rejected by the commission, the Forbes report caught theeye of Adams. Nevertheless, Adams went to Switzerland to confer with C. E. L.Brown, who declined the offers to head up the Niagara project.Morgan’s emissary was Francis Lynde Stetson, a lawyer who was also partof the Cataract Construction Company. He was sent to Switzerland and Londonto review the prevailing technology for their company, GE, but it was starting tobecome obvious that the major patents were all owned by Westinghouse. InTivoli, where there were waterfalls 334 feet high, Ganz & Company ofBudapest, another Westinghouse-linked operation, was constructing ahydroelectric plant to transmit electricity to Rome, which was eighteen milesaway, and in Portland, Oregon, at Willamette Falls, Westinghouse was alsotransmitting thousands of volts of AC over distances of twelve miles. AlthoughKelvin sided with Edison in insisting that DC was superior, Adams now knewthat Westinghouse held all the trump cards.13In America, however, and from the point of view of GE, the outcome wasnot all that obvious. The Panic of 1893 had taken its toll, and Charles Coffin,CEO of GE, was forced to “ruthlessly” lay off a large number of their workersand cut the pay of many others. Not only had production of electrical equipmentfallen dramatically, in-fighting between the Edison and Thomson campspeaked.14 Although Thomson and Steinmetz now realized that AC was vastlysuperior to DC, they were unable to guarantee to Coffin that they could deviseequipment superior to Tesla’s. Desperate to compete, it appears that amemorandum was sent by Thomson to E. G. Waters, general manager of the GEplant in Pittsburgh, for the purpose of recruiting an informant who worked forWestinghouse.15Noticing that blueprints were missing, Westinghouse accused GE ofindustrial espionage, and charges were brought against Thomson’s Lynn plant,where a sheriff, acting under court order, found the missing documents. The GEofficials claimed that their interest was in seeing whether Westinghouse waspirating their protected lightbulbs, and the jury split six to six on the decision.Westinghouse suspected that a janitor was the culprit, but the man was neverprosecuted.16Simultaneously, Steinmetz and Thomson were submitting patentapplications for an AC motor which used a “teaser current” instead of a full-fledged polyphase one,17 but it was obvious to the patent office that theapparatus was based on the Tesla system, and their patent application wasdenied. This did not stop Thomson from insisting that he was the real inventor ofthe AC system, and by 1894, with Thomson’s great expertise, he devised aninduction motor that in some respects was superior to the one produced byWestinghouse.18 Ironically, even to this day, biographies of Elihu Thomson oftenaccuse Tesla of the piracy instead of the reverse!19 Although GE was brought totrial for stealing blueprints, they audaciously continued for the next severalyears, through Waters, to pay spies to obtain information from the Westinghouseplant.Nevertheless, Westinghouse’s success at Telluride and at the ChicagoWorld’s Fair eliminated any remaining doubts as to who would be awarded theNiagara contract. In the first months of 1893, Forbes, Rowland, and Sellersvisited Pittsburgh to test their equipment, and in May of that year the deal wassigned with Westinghouse.As J. Pierpont Morgan was the major force behind GE, it is interesting tospeculate about why he allowed Westinghouse to gain the bid. First of all, whenthe actual contract was signed, because the operation was so enormous (andbecause of Morgan’s ties to GE), a large portion of the work was also given toGE. Westinghouse constructed the “generators, switchgear and auxiliaryequipment in the powerhouse, [and] GE was awarded contracts for thetransformers, the transmission line to Buffalo, and the equipment for thesubstation there.”20 Thus, although Westinghouse got the larger share, GE wasby no means cut out and in fact ended up with a licensing arrangement whichgave them their first legal foothold on the fundamental patents held by the othercompany.Morgan had close ties to August Belmont, who was one of Westinghouse’sfinancial backers, and it is possible that this connection had something to do withthe arrangement. He acquiesced in part because of his respect for thecommission Adams had set up and also because of the advice he received fromhis lawyer William B. Rankine, who lived in Buffalo and who had devoted hislife to the enterprise, and his close associate, Francis Lynde Stetson, who toldMorgan of Tesla’s “daring promise [as far back as 1890] to place 100,000 hp ona wire and send it 450 miles in one direction to New York City, the metropolis ofthe East, and 500 miles in the other direction to Chicago, the metropolis of theWest, [to] serve the purpose of these great urban communities.”21In 1894, Tesla hit his stride. The Martin article in the Century opened thefloodgates, and an army of reporters from newspapers and magazines descendedupon him. That year would find features on Tesla in such prestigious periodicalsas New Science Review, Outlook and Cassiers; McClure’s and Review of Reviewsboldly announced that Tesla was the founder of the discoveries which lay behind“the largest electrical enterprise in the world,”22 and the New York Times profiledhim in a four-column spread complete with a large stylized portrait and an in-depth account of his philosophies and newest creations.23 The following year,the Times wrote, “To Tesla belongs the undisputed honor of being the manwhose work made this Niagara enterprise possible…There could be no betterevidence of the practical qualities of his inventive genius.”24Since the contracts with Westinghouse and GE had been signed, Adams nolonger had to pretend to be unbiased; now he was free to seek business ventures.He came down to New York to visit Tesla at his laboratory, and there Adams wasintroduced to the inventor’s new mechanical and electrical oscillators and to arevolutionary new AC system of lighting that was vastly superior to the existingone. Adams offered Tesla $100,000 for a controlling interest in “fourteen U.S.patents, many foreign patents,” and any future inventions which Tesla mightconceive. The inventor accepted the proposal.25 In February 1895, the creationof the Nikola Tesla Company was formally announced, with the directors beingTesla, Alfred S. Brown of New York, Charles Coaney of New Jersey, William B.Rankine of Buffalo, Edward D. Adams, and Adams’s son Ernest of Boston.26Tesla had reached the inner sanctum of the corporate world. He now had onhis board two of the most important members of the Niagara project, and he wassitting on at least a half-dozen entirely new inventions, each of which had thepotential for creating completely new industries. His mechanical oscillatorslooked as if they were going to replace the steam engine; his electrical oscillatorswere intrinsic to his system of fluorescent lighting, remote control, and his nowsecret work in wireless transmission; and there were other ideas as well, such ashis work in artificial intelligence, ozone production, “cheap refrigeration, andcheap manufacture of liquid air, the manufacture of fertilizers and nitric acidfrom the air.”27 However, all of these inventions were still, to a great extent, intheir developmental stages, and Tesla’s strong suit was never in manufacturing.He gained his backers ostensibly because of his track record in AC and becauseof the promise held by his cold light and various oscillators. But his real interest,his passion, remained in the wireless transmission of power, and most of his timewas spent in that direction. 