34THE WEB (1903-1904)July 14, 1903Dear Sir:I have received your letter…and in reply would say that I should notfeel disposed at present to make any further advances.Yours truly,J. Pierpont Morgan1Mr. Boldt removed his monocle from his top vest pocket and eyed the mansuspiciously. The foreigner was sweating profusely from the August heat. “NikoTezlê,” he said in a heavy accent as he handed the hotel manager a crinkledenvelope.Momentarily sidetracked by a spot of dust, Boldt retrieved the document toinspect Tesla’s letterhead. “You may go up,” he said disdainfully as he slammedhis hand down on the clangor to call a bellhop.The man entered what appeared to him to be a palatial suite. “Jovan, sogood of you to come,” the venerated engineer said in his native tongue. “Youmust find Uncle Petar. It is a matter of utmost urgency.”“He may be in Bosnia.”“Then go there.” Tesla handed the man a round trip boat ticket, acommunique sealed with wax, and a billfold of spending money. “I amdepending on you.”2Tesla’s three sisters, Angelina Trbojevich, Milka Glumicic and MaricaKosanovic, their husbands, all Serbian priests, and all of their children sat in therectory to listen to the spell-binding account the courier brought of Niko’slaboratory and world telegraphy tower. “Its head reaches up to the clouds,”Jovan said, spreading his arms to their full extent, “and some day it will sendmessages to the whole world—right here to this town.” Jovan’s cousins gaspedin amazement as he passed around a photograph taken just three months earlierby Dickenson D. Alley, the photographer also responsible for the Coloradopictures.3“How will we know when a message is sent?”“Everyone will have a little device, the size of”—Jovan looked around theroom and spotted a prayer book—“the size of this book, with a wire attachedwhich you will stick into the ground to receive the message!”Two first cousins, Nicholas Trbojevich and Sava Kosanovic, both justemerging from boyhood, listened intently. Fully captivated by such news fromAmerica, Nicholas announced proudly, “Some day I will be an inventor too.”Sava, destined forty years later to be Yugoslavia’s first ambassador to America,smiled back and nodded in agreement.Uncle Petar stepped from the room to open the dispatch in private. Nikohad told his uncle that the Panic had hit him hard, that he was out of funds. Hewould have to close down the World Telegraphy Center if assistance was notreceived immediately. He asked Petar to go to a local bank and borrow fundsusing shares in Wardenclyffe as collateral. The bank, of course, would notcomply,4 so Petar called a meeting with family elders for a pooling of resources.They then returned to Belgrade, where the transfer of funds could beaccomplished. “You wish Niko well for us,” Petar said, grasping Jovan with botharms. Tesla received the money by the end of the month, but it was really onlyenough to keep a door open for the balance of the year.September 13, 1903Dear Mr. Morgan,Many years I was at your door with this invention, but I did not go inthinking it would be useless…My last undertaking has returned more thattwo dozen times the original investment and this in strong hands should dobetter still.Help me to complete this work and you will see.Yours most faithfully,N. Tesla5Altering his schedule, the inventor began visiting the lab only on weekends.Having thought the matter through, he abandoned the idea of meeting withsmall-time investors and placed his efforts in two separate directions. He wouldstep up the manufacture of the oscillators and enlist other tycoons.6 With themoney from his relatives, Tesla was able to hire back a few workers. Operations,however, were just about nil, and the rest of the crew were angry about not beingpaid.“You know, of course,” he told Scherff, “that when this panic came, a greatmany manufacturers simply dismissed their men. Our employees shouldunderstand that I have tried to treat them generously in the hardest times thiscountry has known, and they should be grateful instead of impatient. Althoughthe panic is practically over, there is still a general feeling of apprehension on thestreet. However, I have a few irons in the fire, and at any moment, I may comeup with the solution which confronts me. I am more than ever assured thatnothing can prevent my ultimate success.”7Tesla’s first stop was the home of John Jacob Astor. Taking with himAlley’s new dramatic glossies, the inventor tried his best to reignite the flame.Astor, who was earning approximately $3 million per annum, was neverthelessnot a frivolous man. Most of his money these days was being spent on his yacht,the Nourmahal. Whereas Tesla had had an ally in Astor’s wife, the marriage wasnow in decline, with Ava spending most of her time in Europe with her twosmall children and her husband, Jack, continuing his practice of straying athome.8 “While wishing you all possible luck,” Astor wrote the inventor, “do notcare to go into the company myself.”9Deciding that there were other fish in the sea worth hooking, Teslacompiled a list of the biggest ones and worked with a graphic designer toproduce a flashy mailer. Known as the “Tesla Manifesto,” the pamphlet boldlyannounced the expectations of his world telegraphy enterprise.10Folded into a maroon vellum binder, the brochure contained lavish prints ofthe Colorado Station and also the imposing laboratory and tower atWardenclyffe, a list of relevant patents, past and future accomplishments, astatement of his availability to be hired as a consultant, and a declaration of thebreadth and scope of his plan, all of this surrounded by a scalloped design ofpen-and-ink drawings of his many other inventions. Atop the new magnifyingtransmitter, drawn as part of the frame in fancy cursive, were the followingwords: “Electrical Oscillator Activity Ten Million Horsepower.” People on hislist included numerous moguls, each worth anywhere between $20 and $200million, just about all personally known by the inventor.“Luka,” Tesla wrote to Robert Johnson, “Rockefeller and Harriman are nowtaking up every moment of my time, but I think I shall get through with themvery shortly.”11 Written partly in jest, this letter was not far from the truth, forTesla was becoming more successful in penetrating a number of other wealthyenclaves.An Interview with Wizard Edison“Do you believe, [Mr. Edison] with Tesla that we should be able to talkaround the world one of these days?”“No, I do not look for developments in that line. The wonderful thingthat will be more and more developed is wireless telegraphy. Marconi is allright and is bound sooner or later to perfect his system.12With Edison leading the charges against his credibility, Tesla was placed ina delicate situation. The public at large had yet to know of the Morganconnection, and yet Tesla had to inform potential investors of his interest. Due toanimosities that Morgan still held for Harriman, a contract with him was out ofthe question, but there were still many other financiers to consider.On October 12, 1903, Tesla met with Thomas Fortune Ryan. A stalwart,corpulent man five years Tesla’s senior, Ryan, whose real middle name wasFalkner, had gotten his start as a dry-goods clerk in Baltimore. His break cameafter he moved to Wall Street, where he became a stockbroker and investor inlarge financial institutions. By 1905 his position had grown so extensively thathe gained control of nearly $1.4 billion, which was equivalent to almost half ofthe entire public debt of the United States. Almost one-third of this figurestemmed from his acquisition of the controlling shares of Equitable LifeAssurance Society,13 and this came about a little over a year after his initialmeeting with Tesla. In and of itself, the connection would appear to beincidental; however, it was Tesla who arranged for a meeting between Ryan andMorgan in attempts to iron out an amenable agreement, and it is well known thatMorgan was the secret power behind the famous Equitable Life insurancescandal which erupted in 1905.Aside from the handful of diamonds he perpetually fondled in his palm,Ryan’s other assets included control over Mutual Life and Washington LifeInsurance, New York City Railway, American Tobacco, Morton Trust,Metropolitan Securities, and Mercantile Trust. Ryan also sat on the board of adozen other insurance, banking, rail, and utility concerns.14 He also owned animmense estate covering hundreds of acres north of the city, near Monticello,where he had erected a $500,000 mansion. From this retreat, his wife, Mrs. T. F.Ryan made a name for herself as a philanthropist, founding a theologicalinstitution, erecting “a magnificent Catholic Church [and] a public hospital,[purchasing] fire company equipment, and [making] scores of minorcontributions for the good of the village.”15Known for his “striking [proficiency] of systematic organization…decisiveaction, secrecy and the art of using great power behind the throne,” Ryan’s mosteffective gift was his persuasive ability. “Mr. Ryan makes his headquarters in theMorton Trust Company’s office, where he is Vice-President. He does not bar thedoor like John D. Rockefeller…Any caller gets to his secretary and very often tothe inner room. There is none of the gruffness that so characterizes Mr.Morgan…Mr. Ryan is suavely silent…He never does and never says animportant thing without consulting lawyers…Yet he always is polite, and nevershows anger.”16Tesla had calculated that he required approximately $100,000 to completehis project, so his plan was to enlist “ten subscribers at $10,000 each.”“What is the use of going to so many people,” Ryan suggested, staring atthe contents of the vellum binder. “I shall take one-fourth. Where do I sign?”17Obviously, this was a great opportunity, but it was not a simple matter ofjust signing a paper. Tesla had to go back to Morgan to confer, and $25,000would still leave him way short of his goal. “Would you consider underwritingthe entire $100,000?”“That’s a possibility.”“Let me speak to my partner about your generous offer and get back toyou.”“Is it anyone that I know?” Ryan inquired.“I am under orders to keep his name confidential.”“We are talking about a significant amount of money, Mr. Tesla. I want toknow who I am going into business with.”“It is Pierpont Morgan,” the inventor said cryptically.“Morgan! Well, then, you couldn’t be in better hands.”Tesla wrote Morgan on the following day to arrange a meeting. “Mr. Ryanis a great admirer and a loyal friend of yours and for this reason as well as onaccount of his ability, I am very anxious to enlist his cooperation. I have told himthat $100,000 would be sufficient to reach the first commercial results, whichwill pave the way to other greater successes. Knowing your generous spirit, Ihave told Mr. Ryan that any terms you may decide upon will be satisfactory tome.”18For Thanksgiving, Tesla joined the Johnsons. He had good news to report.Just back from a two-month stint in Europe, Robert and Kate were eager todescribe their meeting with Queen Elena of Italy. Having been decorated byKing Humbert in 1895 for his work on the international copyright, Robert wasreceived by the widowed queen as a distinguished personage. He read to her andthe queen mother a selection from his most recent book of poems.19 They alsostayed a few extra weeks to witness the jubilee at the Vatican, celebratingtwenty-five years of the reign of Pope Leo XIII.“Mr. Tesla, do I detect a gleam in your eye?” Kate inquired.“You’re not about to become one of the detested wealthy elite, are you?”Robert teased.“My dear Luka, I do not want you to despise millionaires, as I am hard atwork to become one. My stocks have gone up considerably this week.”“Morgan?” Katharine whispered hopefully.“Fortune Ryan,” Tesla said, taking out a bank note to display proudly. Hewould receive a total of $10,000 from the financier. “If it continues for a fewweeks like this, the globe will be girdled soon. Now Kate, where’s thatturkey?”20At this time, Morgan met with Ryan. Obviously, the Tesla deal did not gothrough. The question is, why?Every indication suggests that the meeting went well. Ryan had beendescribed by Wheeler (one of Morgan’s harshest critics) as “a most adroit, suaveand noiseless man,”21 and this makes some sense, for a few years later it wouldbecome evident that Ryan was, in essence, a Morgan puppet.In 1899, Henry Hyde passed away. He had been controller of the half-billion-dollar Equitable Life Assurance Society, “comprising the scrapings of thepoor.”22 Fifty-one percent of the company was left to his son James, who wastwenty-three at the time. A rather eccentric and naive millionaire, James chargedthe company for petty extravagances, such as importing barbers from France andplacing his personal chefs at all of his favorite restaurants. The muckrakers wereunable to tolerate the extravagent lifestyle of James, especially after it waslearned that on January 31, 1905, he had spent $200,000 on a Louis XV costumeball at Sherry’s. They demanded his resignation.No doubt, ever since Hyde’s father had passed on, Morgan had had his eyeon the company, but because of the Northern Pacific debacle, he had to proceedcautiously. It is plausible to consider that at the meeting concerning the Teslaproject Morgan might have suggested that Ryan’s money could be better spent ina different area. Whatever he said, it appears to have been stated in such a wayas to not completely turn off Ryan, as he did invest and maintain interest in theenterprise from the years 1903 to 1906, although he never paid Tesla more thanthe initial modest subscription.In a situation that paralleled the Northern Pacific fiasco, Morgan fought forthe Equitable on one side against Harriman and his broker, Jacob Schiff, anotherfinancier who almost went into the Tesla deal. The end result was an obscuremaneuver whereby Thomas Fortune Ryan was able to purchase the controllingshares of Equitable for a paltry $2.5 million. Young Hyde moved to France,where he remained for a quarter century.Rumors of mismanagement of the funds of a few million investorscontinued, however, and Ryan’s picture, throughout the summer of 1905, wasslapped on the front pages of every newspaper in town. Drawn as a rapaciousspider in his web, clutching his prey of the Equitable in one political cartoon,Ryan was described by southern banker and critic John Skelton Williams in ascathing article that appeared in the World: “Mr. Ryan has the tendencies which,if his lines had been cast in a humble and contracted sphere probably would havemade him a kleptomaniac. His strongest impulse is to acquire money, and hisone robust passion is to keep it…Ryan is simply an acquiring machine andoperates himself for the purpose of getting what others have.”23Although Morgan, as head of a rival insurance company, supposedly had nointerest in Equitable, Herbert Satterlee, his son-in-law, uncharacteristicallyrevealed that Ryan was actually controlled by Morgan, stating that Morgan “wasentirely conversant with Mr. Ryan’s plans…They had his thorough approval andpossibly his financial backing.”24During the government investigations that continued relentlesslythroughout the first decade of this century, it was discovered that dummy loanstotaling $1.8 million were made to a fifteen-year-old Negro messenger boy inMorgan’s New York Life Insurance Company.25 Ryan also sold his 51 percentinterest in Equitable to Morgan for $3 million in 1910. Testimony from theinvestigation explains quite clearly Ryan’s role as a Morgan puppet.Q: Untermeyer: Did Mr. Ryan offer this stock to you?A: Morgan: I asked him to sell it to me.Q: Untermeyer: Did you tell him why you wanted it?A: Morgan: No; I told him it was a good thing for me to have…He hesitatedabout it, and finally sold it.Taken from Wheeler’s Pierpont Morgan: Anatomy of a Myth, the authorended the passage as follows: “During the Panic of 1907, Morgan, in his 71styear, truly manipulated vast sums and groups of men [including PresidentTheodore Roosevelt] in commanding fashion.”26As “the power behind the throne,” clearly Morgan dominated theconversation when Ryan came to invest in Wardenclyffe. Morgan redirected hisnew chess piece into the insurance arena, but this still does not answer thequestion as to why. If Tesla’s enterprise were perceived to have becomepotentially profitable, having Ryan put in another $100,000 to complete it wouldhave been an easy thing to do. We can therefore conclude that Morgandeliberately scuttled the Tesla venture.THE GUGGENHEIM CONNECTIONAside from being annoyed with the difficult inventor, Morgan was concernedabout Tesla’s suggestion that he could transmit “unlimited power” by means ofwireless. Tesla was boasting here, since he assured Morgan in future letters thatWardenclyffe would only be able to transmit “feeble amounts” of energy.We come to a juncture here where the decisions of individuals redirectedthe course of history. As John Stewart Mill has noted, individuals make thehistory, and here is a clear instance of this proposition. For all intents andpurposes, Morgan made the decision in October 1903 to do his best to ensure theinventor’s defeat.Morgan, however, was opposed philosophically to Tesla’s overall scheme.It has been suggested that Morgan felt pressure from other Wall Street moguls,such as Bernard Baruch, Thomas Fortune Ryan’s young and highly successfulstockbroker. One day, Baruch had mistakenly suggested that Morgan, like him,was a gambler. Morgan was reported to reply, “I never gamble,” and, indeed,may have backed down from the Tesla deal for fear of taking a chance that thecontroversial inventor might fail or that he might succeed in a way detrimental toexisting corporate structures.The following quotation is from physician and inventor Andrija (Henry)Puharich, a man of Yugoslavian heritage who was tangentially involved inhelping ship Tesla’s papers to the Tesla Museum in Belgrade in the early 1950s27and who personally knew John O’Neill, Tesla’s first major biographer: “Now, I[Puharich] always got this second hand; you won’t find it anywhere in print, butJack O’Neill gave me this information as the official biographer of Nikola Tesla.He said that Bernard Baruch told J. P. Morgan, ‘Look, this guy is going crazy.What he is doing is he wants to give free electrical power to everybody and wecan’t put meters on that. We are just going to go broke supporting this guy.’ Andsuddenly, over-night, Tesla’s support was cut off, the work was neverfinished.”28From a technical and economic point of view, Morgan could not understandhow free information and/or power could yield returns. And whether it wasBaruch or not who warned Morgan, Tesla himself had voiced the opinion boldly,a decade earlier in the Sunday World, that by providing a reservoir of electricalenergy throughout the earth through his apparatus, “all monopolies” that dependon conventional means of energy distribution—that is, through wires, “will cometo a sudden end.”29As the ultimate capitalist, Morgan’s existence was greatly defined bycontrolling the price and distribution of energy and maintaining a working classto support the giant corporate monopolies (called “public” utilities). Thus, hesimply could not support a system where wireless information and power couldbe tapped by anyone with a receiving instrument and machines would replacethe work force. Reorganizing existing power, lighting, and telephone industriesto please the vision of a somewhat eccentric inventor was certainly an unlikelyundertaking for the cautious Wall Street financier. “All those businesses whowould [no longer] need loans [would] then [no longer] deposit the[ir] profits inhis bank.”30 Tesla, as the quintessential iconoclast, had struck a bargain with thewrong king.31In 1903, Bernard Baruch, just thirty-three years old and one of thewealthiest men on Wall Street, retired from the firm he had worked for, for overa decade, to set up his own office. One of his first major clients were theGuggenheim brothers. Their interest lay in metals, so Baruch met with theminers Darius Ogden Mills and John Hays Hammond Sr. to seek advice and gaininvestments. Mills suggested that Baruch go west and purchase mines himself,and Hammond was hired by the Guggenheims to act as an adviser and acquiresilver mines in Mexico. One of Baruch’s first acquisitions was the Utah CopperCompany, for “he knew that there would always be a need for copper in theworld.”32 Tesla’s wireless enterprise clearly threatened the Baruch-Guggenheiminvestment that Morgan was trying to involve himself in.By 1905 the Utah Copper Company was producing copper and other metalsat a rate in excess of $100 million per year, and this was a pace whichmaintained itself for another twenty-five years!33 In later years, John HaysHammond would claim that “the development of the electrical and automotiveindustries were possible…‘only with assured large supply of copper.’”34Unfortunately for Tesla, his ultimate world plan was perceived as a threat onquite a number of key fronts.Tesla waited through the first weeks of December for a positive sign fromthe meeting between Ryan and Morgan, but none came. With no choice left, hewas forced to confront the financial potentate eyeball to eyeball. He decided totake a pragmatic approach. “Will you permit me to call this or any otherevening,” Tesla wrote, “[I wish] to bring a small instrument along to show youone or two experiments with my ‘daylight’?…The shark who will come after mewill get the contract for lighting your home.”35Timing his visit to coincide with the holiday, Tesla purposefully chose thisopportune occasion to try and pierce the financier’s stalwart exterior. But at thesame time, he used the symbol of the shark in his letter, as this was an animalwhich ate big fish. Anne Morgan was one of his allies. She met him at the door.Having recently become “a founder of the Colony Club, the first Americanladies’ [society], patterned after a British gentlemen’s club” and designed byStanford White, Anne had entered into the midst of an androgenous theatercrowd with ties to the infamous homosexual author Oscar Wilde. With Tesla’ssexual orientation perpetually an enigma and Anne about to dabble in a lesbianfling,36 their bond transcended the surface amenities. Before meeting with herfather, Anne was able to corral the avowed celibate and discuss with him theemerging view of the new women.“Mr. Tesla, I believe that it is absurd that in this day of enlightenment,women do not yet have the right to vote.”“I concur wholeheartedly, Anne. I also believe that this struggle of thehuman female toward sex equality will end up in a new sex order, with thefemales superior.”“Indeed?” Anne responded, the pupils of her eyes widening into large blackpools. “I would have considered the sexes equal,” she said as her hand reachedout to touch the inventor.“The modern woman, who anticipates in merely superficial phenomenonthe advancement of her sex, is but a surface symptom of something deeper andmore potent fomenting in the bosom of the race. It is not in the shallow physicalimitation of men that women will assert first their equality and later theirsuperiority, but in the awakening of the intellect of women. As generationsensue, the average woman will be as well educated as the average man, and thenbetter educated, for the dormant faculties of her brain will be stimulated into anactivity that will be all the more intense because of centuries of repose.”37“Mr. Morgan will see you now,” the butler interrupted.“Mr. Tesla.”“Mr. Morgan, thank you for seeing me. My enemies have been sosuccessful in representing me as a poet and visionary that it is absolutelyimperative for me to put out something commercial without delay. If you willonly help me to do this you will preserve a property of immense value.”“I am sorry, Mr. Tesla, as I said before…”“Won’t you enable me to complete the work and show you that you havenot made a mistake in giving me a checkbook to draw on your honored house. Ifyou will imagine that I have found the stone of the philosophers you will be notfar from the truth. My invention will cause a revolution so great that almost allvalues and all human relations will be profoundly modified.”“Had you simply achieved what I had asked, you would not be in thispredicament.”“Mr. Morgan, I beg to call again to your attention that my patents controlabsolutely all essential features and that my work is in such a shape thatwhenever you tell me to go ahead, I shall girdle the globe in three months assurely as my name is Tesla. I have promised to the St. Louis people to open thedoor of the Exposition with power transmitted from here. It is a greatopportunity, Mr. Morgan. I can easily do it, but if you do not aid me soon, it willbe too late. Please think for a moment what this means for me. What I have toldyou long ago has happened. My competitors have collapsed, since theirwholesale attempts [at practicable wireless transmission] has not succeeded.Now is the time to aid me. You know this better than anyone else.”“I have done my part. There are many other businessmen out there with thecapital to complete your project.”“But you, sir, are the controlling partner. Should I obtain a commitmentfrom another, will you consider a renegotiation.”“I will think it over.”38Having met with Morgan in December, Tesla not only came away empty-handed; he also came away with the distinct feeling that his partner was notgoing to facilitate finding new investors. Avoiding Katharine at Christmastimewas one way to telegraph the bad news. Using a full range of her femininecharms, the coquettish Mrs. Filipov issued one more of her provocative missives.December 20, 1903Dear Mr. Tesla,You are most unkind…dear friend! Why do you not come to see MEinstead of always dropping into The Century to see Robert.39 I must havedone something to offend you, but what?How can you be indifferent to such devotion?…If you are unhappyand disappointed and down on your luck, then all the more reason why youshould seek the companionship and support of your loyal friends.Indeed, if the whole world were against you, the more firmly wouldthey cling to you.Faithfully yours,Katharine Johnson40Aware of Morgan’s trepidation concerning the potential for his equipmentto usurp the need for existing electrical power companies, the inventor wroteexplicitly in attempts to allay these fears:January 13, 1904Dear Mr. Morgan,The Canadian Niagara Company will agree in writing to furnish me10,000 H.P. for 20 years without charge, if I put a plant there to transmitthis power without wires to other parts of the world…As I outlined [earlier]I would use the energy not for industrial purposes, but for operating clocks,stock tickers and other apparatus which there are millions now in use,requir[ing on average] not more than 1/10 of the H.P. for each instrument…Will you help me on any terms you choose and enable me to insureand develop a great property which will ultimately yield hundredfoldreturns. Please do not do me an injustice in believing me incapable simplybecause a certain sum of money was not sufficient to carry out myundetaking…You may see that my work remains uncompleted because of alack of funds, but you will never see that machinery which I construct doesnot fulfill the purposes for which it was designed.Tesla ended the letter with “hearty wishes for the new year.”41 How couldhe know that Morgan did not doubt that Tesla could succeed. He feared it.January 13, 1904My dear Sir,In reply to your note I regret to say that I should not be willing toadvance any further amounts of money as I have already told you. Ofcourse I wish you every success in your undertaking.Yours truly,J. Pierpont MorganClose to making deals with other investors but hampered by his relationshipto Morgan, Tesla was particularly upuset that his partner replied on the same dayhis own letter was sent. Surmising that Morgan was not even considering thesituation, Tesla became enraged. For the first time he dropped all pretense andtold Morgan what he really thought of him.January 14, 1904Dear Mr. Morgan,You wish me success! It is in your hands, how can you wish it?We start on a proposition, everything duly calculated; it is financiallyfrail. You engage in impossible operations, you make me pay double, yes,make me wait 10 months for machinery. On top of that you produce apanic. When, after putting in all I could scrape together, I come to show youthat I have done the best that could be done, you fire me out like an officeboy and roar so that you are heard six blocks away: Not a cent; it is spreadall over town. I am discredited, the laughing stock of my enemies.It is just 14 months that the construction work on my plant wasstopped…Three months more with a good force of men would havecompleted it and now it would be paying $10,000 a day. More than this, Iwould have secured contracts from governments for a number of similarplants…Now, when I have practically removed all obstacles skillfully put inmy way and need only a little more to save a great property, which wouldpay you 10 million dollars as surely as one cent, you refuse to help in atrouble brought on by your own doings.Tesla suggests in the balance of the letter that a subscription of $25,000would enable him to start up operations of the production of oscillators and thefluorescent light and that eventually, “in a slow and painful way,” he would beable to obtain the necessary funds to complete the tower.I am anxious to succeed on your account as mine. What a dreadful thing itwould be to have the papers come with your name in red letters [A MORGANDEAL DEFAULTS]. It would be telegraphed all over the globe. You may notcare for it Mr. Morgan. Men are like flies to you. But I would have to work5 years to repair the damage, if repairable at all. I have told you all. Pleasedo not write to refuse. I am pained enough as it is.Yours sorrowfully,N. Tesla42Having received no response, Tesla shot off another letter the followingweek:January 22, 1904…Are you going to leave me in a hole?!!I have made a thousand powerful enemies on your account, because Ihave told them that I value one of your shoestrings more than all of them…In a hundred years from now, this country would give much for thefirst honors of transmitting power without wires. It must be done by mymethods and apparatus and I should be aided to do it first myself.April 1, 1904…Will you aid me to complete this great work?April 2, 1904Have you ever read the book of Job? If you will put my mind in placeof his body you will find my suffering accurately described. I have put allthe money I could scrape together in this plant. With $50,000 more it iscompleted, and I have an immortal crown and an immense fortune.Unable to understand why the Ryan deal went sour, Tesla neverthelessdeduced that it had been Morgan’s doing. Retaliating in any overt way wouldhave been suicide. And although Tesla had self-destructive tendencies, breachinga contract with J. Pierpont Morgan being one example, the inventor wanteddesperately to succeed. His goal was not so much to line his own pockets,although surely he sought to get rich from the invention, but rather to helpsociety. Tesla was well aware of his potential role in reshaping the course ofhuman events.Seeing no other choice, he brashly decided, in early 1904, not to hide theMorgan connection anymore but rather to publicize it and to maintain the frontthat everything was okay. To one of his worried investors, William Rankine ofthe Niagara Falls project, he wrote on April 10, “Doubt the light of the sun,doubt the brightness of the stars, but do not doubt the existence of the NikolaTesla Company.”43 Landing Morgan in the first instance had been a feather in hiscap. Now the bon vivant decided to exploit the connection and also brazenlyrebel against a man who seemed bent on sinking his ship. In quintessentialTeslaic fashion, he published a spectacular article simultaneously in ScientificAmerican and Electrical World & Engineer. In it he outlined his work to date andplans for the future, adorning the piece with breathtaking photographs of histransmission stations in Colorado Springs and Wardenclyffe.The results attained by me have made my scheme of “World Telegraphy”easily realizable. It constitutes a radical and fruitful departure from whathas been done heretofore. It involve[s] the employment of a number ofplants each of [which] will be preferably located near some importantcenter of civilization and the news it receives through any channel will beflashed to all points of the globe. A cheap and simple [pocket-sized] device,may then be set up somewhere on sea or land, and it will record the world’snews or such special messages as may be intended for it. Thus the entireearth will be converted into a huge brain, as it were, capable of response inevery one of its parts. Since a single plant of but one hundred horse-powercan operate hundreds of millions of instruments, the system will have avirtually infinite working capacity…The first of these central plants would have been already completedhad it not been for unforseen delays which, fortunately, have nothing to dowith its purely technical features. [This delay may prove] after all to beblessing in disguise…For the work done so far I am indebted to the noble generosity of Mr.J. Pierpont Morgan, which was all the more welcome as it was extended ata time when those, who have since promised most, were the greatest ofdoubters. I have also to thank my friend, Stanford White, for muchunselfish assistance. This work is now far advanced, and though the resultsmay be tardy, they are sure to come.44 