40FIFTH COLUMN (1914-16)Navy DepartmentWashington, D.C.September 14, 1916Sir:In the files of the Bureau of Steam Engineering is found a copy of aletter by Nikola Tesla to the Light House Board, under date of September27, 1899, from the Experimental Station, Colorado Springs. This letter isevidently an answer to a communication from the Light House Board,requesting information as to Tesla’s ability to supply wireless telegraphapparatus.This letter may be made use of in forthcoming litigation in which theGovernment is involved…as the discovery of suitable proof of priority ofcertain wireless usages by other than Marconi might prove of great aid tothe Government.Sincerely Yours,Franklin D. RooseveltActing Secretary of the Navy1Within two weeks of the beginning of World War I, Germany’s transatlanticcable was severed by the British. The only reasonable alternative forcommunicating with the outside world was through Telefunken’s wirelesssystem. Suddenly, the Tuckerton and Sayville plants became of paramountconcern. The Germans obviously wanted to maintain the stations to keep thekaiser abreast of President Woodrow Wilson’s intentions, but the British wantedthem shut down.In March 1914, Marconi was made a senatore in Italy, a distinguished manof science, and he spoke before the royal couple. In July in Great Britain, theland of his mother, he was decorated by the king at Buckingham Palace. Now thefight against Telefunken would be fought on military as well as commercialgrounds as it became clear that the Germans were using their plants to helpcoordinate submarine and battleship movements. The wireless lines also markedthe burgeoning alliance forming between Italy and the British Empire.2As a pacifist, Wilson maintained a strict policy of neutrality, a positionbolstered by war hero and former president Teddy Roosevelt, himself acontender for the upcoming 1916 election. Although officially neutral, thesentiments of the majority of the American population was with England,particularly after Germany stormed through the peaceful kingdom of Belgium.Nevertheless, fully one-tenth of the population was of German stock, and theirsentiments were with the other side. George Sylvester Viereck, the country’sleading poet, colleague of Johnson, and Tesla friend, began to sense the growingshift away from neutrality, especially after the U.S. Navy appropriated theTuckerton plant to send its own “radio coded messages abroad.”Having just returned from Berlin and the midst of war, Viereck courtedTeddy Roosevelt and emissaries of President Wilson. Simultaneously, he began anew publication with other leading German Americans. Initially welcomed bythe press, the Fatherland soon achieved a subscription base of 100,000.3Ignoring Viereck’s plea for neutrality, Wilson prepared a presidential decree“declaring that all radio stations within the jurisdiction of the United States ofAmerica were [to be] prohibited from transmitting or receiving…messages of anunneutral nature…By virtue of authority vested in me by the Radio Act,” thepresident continued, “one or more of the high powered radio stations within thejurisdiction of the United States…shall be taken over by the Government.”4Throughout the beginning of the war, Tesla stepped up his legal campaignagainst Marconi and continued to advise and receive compensation fromTelefunken. Since the country was officially neutral (America would not enterthe war for another three years), the arrangement was entirely aboveboard.Nevertheless, few people knew about the German-Tesla link, although theinventor made no secret of it to Jack Morgan.February 19, 1915Dear Mr. Morgan,I am expecting to embody in their plant at Sayville some features ofmy own which will make it practicable to communicate with Berlin bywireless telephone and then royalties will be very considerable. We havealready drawn papers.5Camouflaged by the smoke screen of the American-sounding AtlanticCommunication Company, Telefunken swiftly moved to increase the power ofits remaining station at Sayville. Located near the town of Patchogue out on theflats of Long Island, just a few miles from Wardenclyffe, the Sayville complexencompassed a hundred acres and employed many German workers. With itsmain offices in Manhattan and its German director, Dr. Karl George Frank, anAmerican citizen, Telefunken was legally covered, for no foreigner could own alicense to operate a wireless station in the country. (Thus, Marconi also had anAmerican affiliate.) It was an easy matter for Tesla to confer with Atlantic in thecity and also go out to the site of the plant.Within two months of Tesla’s letter to Morgan, the plant at Sayville tripledits output by erecting two more pyramid-shaped transmission towers, fivehundred feet tall. Utilizing Tesla’s theories on the importance of groundtransmission, resonating accoutrements spread out over the land for thousands ofmore feet. Thus, by shifting emphasis away from aerial transmission,Telefunken’s output was boosted from 35 kilowatts to over 100, catapultingGermany into the number-one spot in the wireless race. The New York Timesreported on their front page, “Few persons outside radio officials knew thatSayville was becoming one of the most powerful transatlantic communicatingstations in this part of the world.”6Tesla Sues Marconi on Wireless PlantAlleges That Important ApparatusInfringes Prior Rights7Calling wireless “the greatest of all inventions,” Tesla made an additionalappeal for legal assistance to Morgan. “Can you put yourself for a moment in myplace?” he wrote the financier. “Surely, you are too big a man to permit such anoutrage and historical crime to be perpetuated as is now being done by cunningpromoters.” Expecting to “receive satisfaction from the Government,” since theyhad installed “$10,000,000 of [his] apparatus,” the inventor also revealed that“the Marconi people approached me to join forces, but only in stock and this isnot acceptable.”8Again Morgan declined assistance in protecting their patents held incommon. The Wall Street mogul, however, had not at all abandoned the field, forhe was funding a college radio station near Boston at Tufts University.9The years preceding America’s entrance into World War I contained anoverwhelming quagmire of litigation involving most countries and virtuallyevery major inventor in the wireless field. At about the time of Tesla’s breakupwith Hammond, Fritz Lowenstein, who was paying royalties to both men (and toMorgan, through Tesla), began installing wireless apparatus aboard navy ships.Although the equipment was also being used by Hammond to test the guidedmissiles, this work was classified, and Hammond’s patents became immune fromlitigation.10Tesla polyphase generator used by Westinghouse Electric and Manufacturing Companyto electrify the Chicago’s World Fair of 1893.Tesla at his Houston Street laboratory in 1898 sending 500,000 volts through his body tolight a wireless fluorescent light in a multiple-exposure photograph. (MetaScienceFoundationThe wizard at his Colorado Springs laboratory sitting among sixty-foot electrical sparks inthis illustrious multiple-exposure photograph. (Nikola Tesla Museum)Wardenclyffe, circa 1903. (MetaScience Foundation)Jack Hammond (center) with some of his friends, including Leopold Stokowski, far right.Hammond had formed a partnership with Tesla, circa 1912, to perfect remote-controlledtorpedoes and guidance systems for the U.S. Navy. (Hammond Castle)A dinner of the Institute of Radio Engineers in 1915 honoring John Stone Stone,president of the society. Standing along the back wall from the left are Karl F. Braun,winner with Marconi of the Nobel Prize in physics in 1909; John Stone Stone; JonathanZeaneck, of the Sayville wireless plant; Lee DeForest, radio pioneer; Nikola Tesla; FritzLowenstein, Tesla’s longtime associate; Rudolf Goldschmidt, a physicist who workedwith Emil Meyer, third from the left, seated in center row, who ran the German wirelessplant at Tuckerton, New Jersey. Seated in back, at far left in front of Braun, is DavidSarnoff, later head of RCA and NBC-TV. (Smithsonian Institution)(Opposite) How the Wardenclyffe tower would have looked when completed. (Drawingby sci-fi artist Frank R. Paul; Smithsonian Institution)(Right) Nikola Tesla illuminated by his wireless cold lamp. (Smithsonian Institution)(Below) Nikola Tesla, circa 1925 (Nikola Tesla Museum)(Top) A statue of Nikola Tesla located in the town square of Gospić, Croatia. Designed byFranco Krsinic, this particular statue was purposely destroyed by a bomb during therecent war between Serbs, Croats, and Muslims in the former Yugoslavia. An exactreplica sits calmly on Goat Island beside Niagara Falls. (Marc J. Seifer)(Bottom) Tesla, shortly before his death in 1942, meeting with King Peter of Serbia.Tesla’s nephew, Sava Kosanovic, the ambassador from Yugoslavia, is on the left.(Smithsonion Institution)(Opposite) Time celebrated Tesla’s seventy-fifth birthday with a cover. (© 1931 Time Inc.Reprinted by permission)1990s promotional mailer. (Westinghouse Corporation)Aside from Tesla’s priority battle, Telefunken was also suing Marconi, who,in turn, was suing the U.S. Navy as well as Fritz Lowenstein for patentinfringement.During the following spring, Marconi was subpoenaed by Telefunken. Dueto the importance of the case, he sailed off for America on the Lusitania, arrivingin April 1915 to testify. “We sighted a German submarine periscope,” he toldastonished reporters and his friends at dockside.” As three merchant ships hadalready been torpedoed without warning by the German U-boats the monthbefore, Marconi’s inflammatory assertion was not taken lightly.The Brooklyn Eagle reported that this suit brought “some of the world’sgreatest inventors on hand to testify.”12 Declared a victor in the Lowensteinproceedings by a Brooklyn district-court judge, Marconi clearly had the pressbehind him. Nevertheless, he was beaten by the navy in his first go-around withthem,13 so this case against Telefunken, with all the heavyweights in town,promised to be portentous. Once and for all, it appeared, the true legal rightswould be established in America.Aside from Marconi, there was, for the defense, Columbia professorMichael Pupin, whose testimony was even quoted in papers in California. Withbraggadocio, Pupin declared, “I invented wireless before Marconi or Tesla, andit was I who gave it unreservedly to those who followed!”14 “Nevertheless,”Pupin continued, “it was Marconi’s genius who gave the idea to the world, andhe taught the world how to build a telegraphic practice upon the basis of thisidea. [As I did not take out patents on my experiments], in my opinion, the firstclaim for wireless telegraphy belongs to Mr. Marconi absolutely, and to nobodyelse.”15 Watching his fellow Serb upon the stand, Tesla’s jaw dropped so hard, italmost cracked upon the floor.When Tesla took the stand for Atlantic, he came with his attorney, Drury W.Cooper, of Kerr, Page & Cooper. Unlike Pupin, who could only state abstractlythat he was the original inventor, Tesla proceeded to explain in clear fashion allof his work from the years 1891-99. He documented his assertions withtranscripts from published articles, from the Martin text, and from publiclectures, such as his well-known wireless demonstration which he had presentedto the public in St. Louis in 1893. The inventor also brought along copies of hisvarious requisite patents which he had created while working at his HoustonStreet lab during the years 1896-99.COURT: What were the [greatest] distances between the transmitting andreceiving stations?TESLA: From the Houston laboratory to West Point, that is, I think, adistance of about thirty miles.COURT: Was that prior to 1901?TESLA: Yes, it was prior to 1897…COURT: Was there anything hidden about [the uses of your equipment], orwere they open so that anyone could use them?TESLA: There were thousands of people, distinguished men of all kinds,from kings and greatest artists and scientists in the world down to oldchums of mine, mechanics, to whom my laboratory was always open. Ishowed it to everybody; I talked freely about it.16As virtually no one knew about the West Point experiment, this statementwas somewhat deceptive, although it was true that thousands of people hadwitnessed Tesla’s other wireless experiments, such as in St. Louis in 1893.Referring explicitly to Marconi’s system, having brought the Italian’s patentalong with his own, the inventor concluded:TESLA: If you [examine these two diagrams]…you will find that absolutelynot a vestige of that apparatus of Marconi remains, and that in all thepresent systems there is nothing but my four-tuned circuits.17Another jolt to Marconi came from John Stone Stone (his mother’s maidenname, by coincidence, was also Stone). Having traveled with his father, a generalin the Union army, throughout Egypt and the Mediterranean as a boy, Stone waseducated as a physicist at Columbia University and Johns Hopkins University,where he graduated in 1890. A research scientist for Bell Labs in Boston formany years, Stone had set up his own wireless concern in 1899. The followingyear, he filed for a fundamental patent on tuning, which was allowed by the U.S.Patent Office over a year before Marconi’s.18 Stone, who never consideredhimself the original inventor of the radio, as president of the Institute of RadioEngineers and owner of a wireless enterprise, put together a dossier of inventorpriorities in “continuous-wave radio frequency apparatus.” He wanted todetermine for himself the etiology of the invention. Adorned in a formal suit,silk ascot, high starched collar, and pince-nez attached by a ribbon to his neck,the worldly aristocrat took the stand:Marconi, receiving his inspiration from Hertz and Righi…[was] impressedwith the electric radiation aspect of the subject…and it was a long timebefore he seemed to appreciate the real role of the earth…, though he earlyrecognized that the connection of his oscillator to the earth was verymaterial value…Tesla’s electric earth waves explanation was the moreserviceable in that it explained [how]…the waves were enabled to travelover and around hills and were not obstructed by the sphericity of theearth’s surface, while Marconi’s view led many to place an altogether toolimited scope to the possible range of transmission…With the removal ofthe spark gap from the antenna, the development of earthed antenna, andthe gradual enlargement of the size of stations…greater range could beobtained with larger power used at lower frequencies, [and] the art returnedto the state to which Tesla developed it.Attributing the opposition, and alas, even himself, to having been afflictedwith “intellectual myopia,” Stone concluded that although he had been designingwireless equipment and running wireless companies since the turn of the century,it wasn’t until he “commenced with this study” that he really understood Tesla’s“trail blazing” contribution to the development of the field. “I think we allmisunderstood Tesla,” Stone concluded. “He was so far ahead of his time thatthe best of us mistook him for a dreamer.”19Another case which did not receive much publicity but which became vitalto the Supreme Court’s 1943 ruling in Tesla’s favor, was Marconi v. U.S. Navy,brought July 29, 1916, two years after their first go-around. The Italian wasseeking $43,000 in damages, suing for infringement of fundamental wirelesspatent no. 763,772, which had been allowed in June 1904.E. F. Sweet, acting secretary of the navy, and also Assistant SecretaryFranklin D. Roosevelt began a correspondence in September to review Tesla’s1899 file to the Light House Board.20 The history of Marconi’s patentapplications to the U.S. Patent Office provided additional ammunition. In 1900,John Seymour, the commissioner of patents, who had protected Tesla against thedemands of Michael Pupin for an AC claim at this same time, disqualifiedMarconi’s first attempts at achieving a patent because of prior claims of Lodgeand Braun and particularly Tesla. “Marconi’s pretended ignorance of the natureof a ‘Tesla oscillator’ [is] little short of absurd,” wrote the commissioner. “Eversince Tesla’s famous [1891-93 lectures]…widely published in all languages, theterm ‘Tesla oscillator’ has become a household word on both continents.” Thepatent office also cited quotations from Marconi himself admitting use of a Teslaoscillator.Two years later, in 1902, Stone was granted his patent on tuning which thegovernment cited as anticipating Marconi, and two years after that, afterSeymour retired, Marconi was granted his infamous 1904 patent.21EDWIN ARMSTRONG“I have had a lot of fun at Columbia,” Armstrong said. The lecturer inphysics that semester loftily disparaged the experiments of Nikola Tesla. “Heeven went so far as to say that there was very little originality about Tesla.” Everthe audacious student, Armstrong used the professor’s ignorance of Tesla’steachings to cause the man to receive a hearty shock from some electricalequipment. “He couldn’t let go, and pulled most of the apparatus off the tablebefore the current was turned off.”22Just after graduation, Armstrong invented a feedback amplifier, which was,in essence, a refinement and further development of De Forest’s audion tube.Influenced by the “Edison effect” or flow of electrons studied by Tesla in theearly 1890s in his “brush” vacuum tube, Armstrong had discovered a way to takethe De Forest audion and amplify its sensitivity and boost its power to anothermagnitude by connecting a second circuit, or wing circuit, to the grid inside thetube and feeding it back into the grid. The end result was that with this newinvention the young whippersnapper could pick up wireless messages from NovaScotia, Ireland, Germany, San Francisco, and even Honolulu.As Armstrong was one of Professor Pupin’s star pupils, Pupin was able toset up meetings with Lee De Forest, David Sarnoff, representing MarconiWireless, and Dr. Karl Frank, head of the Atlantic Communication Company.Since De Forest’s audion lay at the center of the new device, De Forest claimedthe “ultra-audion” as his own invention, so Marconi Wireless stepped aside towait for the dust to settle. Frank, on the other hand, had Armstrong put theequipment into the wireless plant at Sayville and paid him a royalty of $100 permonth.23 Destined to invent AM and FM radio and a nonconformist by nature,this new wizard on the block had come upon his 1912 discovery because he hadrejected the inferior Marconi spark-gap apparatus that most of his wirelessbuddies were still playing with and, like Stone, plunged himself into thecontinuous-wave technology developed by Tesla.With Professor Pupin training many of the new breed of electricalengineers, it is no wonder that few of them would have the gumption of anArmstrong to see that Marconi’s success was based on the work of another and,furthermore, that Marconi succeeded in spite of the fact that he only partiallyunderstood what Tesla had attempted. Blinded by the Hertzian spark-gapresearch, Marconi spread his “myopic vision” through Pupin to the vast hordesof researchers in the field of wireless; and this policy has continued to this day.With Marconi’s highly visible early success, large-scale wireless enterprise, andNobel Prize on his side of the balance, it became much easier to credit him withthe discovery. The ongoing Great War served to further cloud the issue, as theimportant legal battle between Atlantic Cable Company (Telefunken) andMarconi Wireless was abandoned before it was resolved.Due to the dangers that existed on the high seas, and the rumors that theGermans were out for Marconi’s head, the senatore did not sail back on theLusitania; he returned on the St. Paul with a disguised identity and under anassumed name.Marconi set sail as the new head of the AIEE, John S. Stone, was honoredat a dinner attended by a potpourri of leaders in the industry. Guests includedLee De Forest, who was about to receive a quarter of a million dollars for sale ofhis patents to AT&T, J. A. White, editor of Wireless magazine; David Sarnoff, onthe verge of launching his radio empire; Rudolf Goldschmidt, the force behindthe Tuckerton plant; A. E. Kennelly; Fritz Lowenstein, who was about to earn$150,000 from AT&T for one of his inventions; and Nikola Tesla, who stoodbetween De Forest and Lowenstein for an official photograph.24A fortnight later; in May 1915, a German submarine torpedoed theLusitania, killing 1,134 persons. The sinking, in lieu of the alternative procedureof boarding unarmed passenger ships to check cargo, was unheard of. Quitepossibly, Marconi could have been a target; however, the Germans used as theirreason the cargo of armaments onboard headed for Great Britain. With only 750survivors, this “turkey shoot” took almost as many lives as the sinking of theTitanic. According to Lloyd Scott of the Navy Consulting Board, “press reportsstated that the Germans seemed to revel in this crime, and that variouscelebrations were held in Germany on account of it. Medals were being struck tocommemorate the sinking, and holidays were given to school children.”25 Nolonger neutral, Teddy Roosevelt hailed the event as “murder on the open seas.”The huge loss of life, however, did not stop George Sylvester Viereck fromsupporting the German position. Having traveled by zeppelin above Berlinduring the war, Viereck stated in the New York Times that had the weapons madeit to England, “more Germans would have been killed than died in the [boat]attack.” Viereck’s callous argument inflamed the populace against him. Theformer renowned poet was now hailed as “a venom-bloated toad of treason.”26The enemy seemed within. German spies were everywhere. Reports startedfiltering in that the Germans were creating a secret submarine base aroundislands off the coast of Maine. It was also alleged that the broadcasting stationout at Sayville was not merely sending neutral dispatches to Berlin but alsocoded messages to battleships and submarines.As Tesla, just a few months earlier, had boasted to Morgan that he wasworking for the Germans and with the Times reporting on their front page that“Grand Admiral von Tirpitz [was] contemplat[ing] a more vigorous campaignagainst freight ships…[and planning] a secret base on this side of the Atlantic,”27it is quite possible that the inventor became tainted with a smattering of “venom-bloated toad’s blood.”On July 2, 1915, the senate chambers in Washington were rocked by aterrorist bomb. The following day, the fanatic who planted it, Frank Holt, ateacher of German from Cornell University, walked into Jack Morgan’s LongIsland home toting a six-gun in each hand. With his wife and daughter leaping atthe assailant, Morgan charged forward. Shot twice in the groin, Morgan wasable, with the help of his fearsome wife, to wrestle the guns from the man andget him arrested. Recuperating at the hospital, the hero received a get-well letterfrom Nikola Tesla.28When questioned, Holt claimed he had not planned to kill the Wall Streetmonarch. He only wanted the financier to stop the flow of arms to Europe. A fewdays later, as Morgan recovered quickly and fired all German and Austrianworkers from his office, the self-righteous pacifist committed suicide in his jailcell. His secret had been unveiled. Holt’s real name was Dr. Erich Muenter; hewas a former German teacher from Harvard who had disappeared aftermurdering his wife with poison in 1906.29A week later, on Tesla’s fifty-ninth birthday, the Times reported that notonly were the Germans dropping bombs over London from zeppelins; they werealso “controlling air torpedoes” by means of radiodynamics. Fired fromzeppelins, the supposed “German aerial torpedo[es] can theoretically remain inthe air three hours, and can be controlled from a distance of two miles…Undoubtedly, this is the secret invention of which we have heard so manywhispers that the Germans have held in reserve for the British fleet.”30 Althoughit seemed as if Tesla’s devil automata had come into being, as the wizard hadpredicted a decade before, Tesla himself announced to the press that “the newsof these magic bombs cannot be accepted as true, [though] they reveal just somany startling possibilities.”“Aghast at the pernicious existing regime of the Germans,” Tesla accusedGermany of being an “unfeeling automaton, a diabolic contrivance for scientific,pitiless, wholesale destruction the like of which was not dreamed of before…Such is the formidable engine Germany has perfected for the protection of herKultur and conquest of the globe.” Predicting the ultimate defeat of thefatherland, the Serb, whose former countrymen were fighting for their ownsurvival against the kaiser, no doubt stopped doing business with von Tirpitz,although he probably continued his relationship with Professor Slaby, who mayhave been morally opposed to the war.Tesla’s solution to war was twofold, a better defense, through an electronicStar Wars type of shield he was working on, and “the eradication from our heartsof nationalism.” If blind patriotism could be replaced with “love of nature andscientific ideal…permanent peace [could] be established.”31The period from 1915 to the date of the United States entry into the war, in1917, was marked by numerous reports of espionage. Spies had infiltrated theBrooklyn Navy Yard to use the station to send secret coded messages to Berlin;through Richard Pfund, head of the Sayville plant, they had also installedequipment on the roof of 111 Broadway, the building that housed Telefunken’soffices.32 Shortly after America’s entrance into the war, Tesla informed Scherffthat Lt. Emil Meyers, “who ran the Tuckerton operation…[had been placed] in aDetention Camp in Georgia,” suspected of spying.33 Thus, the monthly stipendfrom Telefunken had come to an abrupt end.34The secretary of the navy, whose job it became to take over all wirelessstations, was Josephus Daniels; his assistant was Franklin Delano Roosevelt. Inthe summer of 1915, Daniels, who was actively monitoring Jack Hammond’swork, had read a recent interview with Thomas Alva Edison. Impressed with thecontents, the secretary called Edison and set up a meeting with the idea ofcreating an advisory board of inventors. The hope was that should the country goto war, a civilian think tank, much like the one created in Great Britain, could becreated. (Great Britain’s consulting board included J. J. Thomson, W. H. Bragg,Sir William Crookes, Sir Oliver Lodge, and Ernest Rutherford.) Edison, whohimself had received death threats from the fifth column, became president ofthis “Naval Consultant Board.” Working with Franklin Roosevelt, Edisonappointed numerous inventors to various positions, including Gano Dunne,Reginald Fessenden, Benjamine Lamme, Irving Langmuir, R. A. Millikan,Michael Pupin, Charles S. Scott, Elmer Sperry, Frank Sprague, and ElihuThomson. The journalist Waldemar Kaempffert was also included because of hiswriting prowess.35It is possible that Tesla’s link to Telefunken was the reason his name wasnot on the list, although many other inventors were also excluded, for example,Hammond, Stone, and De Forest. Tesla also was not one to work again forThomas Edison. Tesla’s work, however, was obviously vital to the government.With President Wilson allowing his adviser, Col. William House, to set up asecret fund for Hammond to advance the Tesla inventions, Tesla himself slippedinto a more surreptitious realm.36 