17MARTIAN FEVER (1895-96)If there are intelligent inhabitants of Mars or any other planet, it seems tome that we can do something to attract their attention…I have had thisscheme under consideration for five or six years.NIKOLA TESLA1John Jacob Astor III graduated from Harvard University at the age of twenty-two in 1888. He was one of the wealthiest men on the planet, with assets in theneighborhood of $100 million. By comparison, J. Pierpont Morgan’s wealth wasperhaps $30 million. As a youth, Astor had been an inventor, having patented abicycle brake and a pneumatic walkway which won a prize at the 1893 ChicagoWorld’s Fair. Other inventions included a storage battery, an internal-combustionengine, and a flying machine.2During his college years, when he was known by the unfortunate nicknameof “Jack Ass,” Astor, who now sported long, tapered sideburns and a waxedmustache, had undertaken courses with the inimitable astronomy professorWilliam Pickering. One of Astor’s pet projects was to find a way to create rainby “pumping warm, moist air from the earth’s surface into the upperatomosphere,” but the U.S. Patent Office had turned him down.3 Thus, whenPickering mentioned that the seasons were due to the inclination of the earth’saxis off of the ecliptic, Astor became intrigued. If the earth were not tilted awayfrom the sun, Pickering suggested, it would probably have one uniform,moderate climate even at the extreme north and south latitudes.As part of the curriculum, Astor was introduced to the HarvardObservatory. There, along with such up and comers as Perceival Lowell, brotherof the president of the university, Astor could peer through the great telescopeand view such wonders as the craters on the moon, the satellites of Jupiter, andSaturn’s spectacular rings.In April 1890, Professor Pickering made headlines when he photographedwhat he said was a snowstorm on the planet Mars. He calculated that the areacovered was almost equal to that of the United States.4 Two years later, during acelebrated trip to Harvard’s observatory in Arequipa, Peru, the bushily beardedprofessor announced another major discovery: “lakes in great numbers on Mars.The canals,” Pickering proclaimed, “have dark as well as bright regions. We alsoobserved clouds, and the melting of snows, and this confirmed Herschel’shypothesis that there was vegetation around the regions of water.”5The idea of attempting to signal “Marsians,” as they were then called, was afamiliar ambition of the day, and Astor, like Tesla, was caught in the fancy of it.In 1894, Perceival Lowell announced in Nature his description of the canals ofMars. At the same time, Astor, just thirty years old, completed a science fictionnovel about space travel. Entitled A Journey in Other Worlds, his book offered afuturistic vision of what takes place one century into the future. A few monthsafter publication, in February 1895, the financier presented a copy to the greatinventor.Although Tesla did not appear to be particularly impressed by the work, theinventor promised Astor to keep it “as an interesting and pleasant memento ofour acquaintance.”6Adorned with ethereal outer-space illustrations by Dan Beard, Astor’s talebegins in the year 2000, with a meeting at Delmonico’s restaurant of theTerrestrial Axis Straightening Company, whose task it is to create fair weatherthroughout the planet.Astor envisions for “the close of the 20th Century” a picture telephone, anairplane with the ability to fly to Europe in one day, an electric automobile,hidden phonographs by the police to record conversations of criminals, colorphotography, a rain-making device, the idea of colonizing the solar system, andthe understanding that the earth would appear like a crescent moon when seenfrom outer space.Perhaps Astor’s most impressive prediction is the path that his “spaceship”Callisto takes on its journey to Jupiter. Astor hypothesizes that just as magnetismhas a repelling force, gravity should as well. This energy, which he calledapergy, is simply the opposite of gravity. By harnessing apergy, the astronauts inthe story aim their ship first toward the sun, then “change their course tosomething like a tangent to the earth, and [receive] their final right direction[back out toward Jupiter] in swinging near the moon…to bring apergy intoplay.”7 Exactly a century after this book appeared, NASA actually did send aspacecraft, named the Galileo, on a voyage along a remarkably similartrajectory, using Venus instead of the moon as the pivot for the swing-back outtoward Jupiter. Whereas this modern trip will take a few years, Astor’s wearytravelers cover the distance in a matter of days. Jupiter is abundant with life.Flowers greet them by “sing[ing] with the volume of a cathedral organ.” The redspot, they find out, was caused by a forest changing color due to a cold snap.8Armed, the astronauts are able to hunt down animals resembling mastodonswhich they kill for food. Fortunately, they also have the wherewithall to hopback onto the Callisto so that they can return to Earth.Fueled by a competitive spirit, the newspapers and magazines continued topromulgate the idea that Mars was inhabited by beings possibly more intelligentthan we. As Tesla made headlines in the New York dailies and electrical journalsfor his bold prediction that he would “signal the stars” and Astor made thebookstores with his space traveling “romance of the future,” other luminarieswere also capitalizing on the extraterrestrial fervor.In 1895, George Lathrop, son-in-law of novelist Nathaniel Hawthorne, hadearthlings battle warriors from the Red Planet on the pages of the New YorkJournal. Their weapons were disintegrating death rays invented by the Wizard ofMenlo Park, Thomas Edison. The following year, George duMaurier,grandfather of Daphne, wrote the novel The Martian, in which he describestelepathic winged beings “that descend from no monkey” but are able to adornmarble statues and irrigate the entire planet.9 And the year after, H. G. Wellsgained notoriety with his serialized Person’s magazine horror story War of theWorlds, in which ghastly octupus-like Martians storm Earth in their egg-shapedspaceships and take over.Although fictional, these stories were based on prognostications putforward by supposedly sober scientists. The major culprit was the Frenchastronomer and psychic researcher Camille Flammarion. In Stories of Infinity:Lumen—History of a Comet in Infinity, published in 1873, Flammarioninterviewed “Lumen,” a sagacious returning comet, on such topics as the speedof light, time travel, and life on other planets. Lumen: “Ah, if you knew theorganisms that vibrate on Jupiter or Uranus…you would know that some livingbeings can understand without eyes, ears or smell; that there are other facultiesof an unascertainable number in nature essentially different than yours.”10This idea, called the plurality of worlds hypothesis, is an antediluvianconcept which, through the ages, has counted numerous scientists among itsadherents. Early astronomers such as Kepler, Newton, Laplace, and Herscheltook this position, along with such modern astrophysicists as Carl Sagan.Human beings, grasping the immensity of the cosmos, know that life is notnecessarily unique to Earth. Roman and Greek mythology, which concerned thelives and responsibilities of specific deities and included a god for each of theknown planets, probably served as a psychological template for astronomers’speculations and corresponding religious beliefs.Carl Jung has linked such mythological thinking to the belief in UFOs, thesearch for meaning, and the search for God. Identifying God with theunknowable, the unconscious, and the wisdom revealed in dream interpretation,Jung says that the myth arises through attempts by the conscious to understandthe unconscious.11 Thus, the mysteries of outer space are connected with thoseof inner space. Primordial instincts, archetypes, would therefore be themechanism evolved through attempts to explain celestial natural phenomena.Over time, these were transformed into the myths of our forefathers.This belief in ancient sky gods and extraterrestrial existence stems from acommon motif, that is, that humans cannot be the highest beings in the cosmosand, furthermore, that there is a supreme creator. Because the idea strikes a deepchord, through the centuries numerous scientists, artists, and authors have beenseized by this notion.In 1835, Richard Adams Locke of the New York Sun created a series offront-page articles on astronomer Sir John Herschel, discoverer of Uranus andalleged discoverer of advanced life-forms on the moon. Locke’s hoax, whichspread around the world before it was exposed, was made possible by the factthat Herschel was in South Africa at the time and therefore out of contact withthe press. Herschel’s supposed discoveries of unicorn-like animals and wingedhumanoids were made via a marvelous (and fictitious) telescope that was 150feet long and could magnify the heavens forty-two thousand times.12 Thirtyyears later, Jules Verne journeyed his readers to the moon, but by the late 1870sthe destination had shifted to Mars.The first attempt to create a map of Mars and delineate the features seen onit can be traced back to Bernard de Fontana and Christian Huygens in the mid-1600s. More detailed drawings were sketched by Herschel in 1830 and bynumerous other scientists in the 1860s and 1870s, such as CamilleFlammarion,13 and in the 1880s by Giovanni Schiaparelli, who named thesechannels canali.In two scientific treatises, The Plurality of Worlds and Mars and ItsInhabitants, Flammarion stated his belief that Mars not only housed life but alsointelligent beings. Dwarfed in stature, positioned next to his fifteenfoot-talltelescope, the bearded French astronomer described in detail the mountains,valleys, craters, lakes, and oceans of Mars in North American Review in 1896.“It is obvious,” Flammarion concluded, “the world of Mars is…vigorouslyalive.” Perhaps unconsciously influenced by the 1835 New York Sun hoax, or duMaurier’s story, Flammarion suggested that due to the lightness of theatmosphere, “the inhabitants…may have received the privilege of flight…Maythey not rather be like dragon-flies fluttering in the air above the lakes and thecanals?”14Whereas Flammarion only set out to describe the Martians, Tesla actuallymade plans to contact them. The most influential American proponent, however,was undoubtedly the erudite Perceival Lowell, descendant of the famousMassachusetts Lowell family. Influenced by Flammarion, Lowell would capturethe front page of the newspapers on many occasions with “Mars inhabited”headlines. He would also come to author a number of scholarly accounts coveredin such prestigious journals as Nature and Scientific American,15 all culminatingin his weighty text The Canals of Mars, disseminated by the distinguishedMacmillan Publishing Company.16Unlike the warlike humans of Earth, Martians dwelled in a coordinatedworld, Lowell speculated. They had outgrown their savage instincts and“consciously practice peace.” These Martians were “sagacious builders” whoconserved their precious water and learned to live in a civilized global society.Mars was an older and thus more experienced planet. Its people had livedthrough the technological revolution aeons ago, so they had learned to harvestand cultivate their planet from a global perspective.With humanity at the dawn of a new technological society, it wascomforting to think that we would not have to face this rapidly advancingcondition alone. As one of a community of intelligent planets, we had neighborsto whom we could turn for guidance.By the late 1890s, Lowell had completed construction of his owngargantuan telescope at Flagstaff, Arizona, where it is still, today, one of thefinest in the world. There he would report each new discovery, including thecataloging of galaxies, which at the time were called “island universes.”It is hard to overestimate Lowell’s impact on contemporary thinking. Forinstance, the vegetation hypothesis was echoed by Wernher von Braun, WillyLey, and P. Bonestell, who cowrote in their 1956 text The Exploration of Mars:“And this is the picture of Mars at mid-century: a small planet which ¾ths iscold desert, with the rest covered with a sort of plant life [most likely lichen]…Mars is not the dead planet…but neither can it be inhabited by the kind ofintelligent beings that many people dreamed of in 1900.”17A society’s beliefs determines its reality. But society is made up ofindividuals, and in the case of the idea that Mars was inhabited, these individualsoften embellished their supposed objective scientific findings. Supportedvigorously by the press, the most important proponents of the “life on Mars”scenario were the astronomers, but the position was also championed by theinventors.Elihu Thomson, a longtime stargazer and friend of Professor Pickering’s,was so enthusiastic that he often took his telescope to his factories so thatworkers could see the Martian canal system with their own eyes.18 Othereminent scientists included Lord Kelvin, who, upon his arrival in America inSeptember 1897, announced to the press his idea to flash a signal at night fromthe glittering metropolis of New York City to Mars to let them know we are here.No doubt he discussed this plan with Tesla when he visited his laboratory duringthe journey.19 Edison, too, was caught up in esoteric causes, but his wish was toinvent a telephone-like device to contact departed spirits rather than livingMartians.“The possibility of beckoning Martians was the extreme application of [my]principle of propagation of electric waves,” Mr. Tesla told the interviewers in1896 in the article “Is Tesla to Signal the Stars?” “The same principle may beemployed with good effects for the transmission of news to all parts of theearth…Every city on the globe could be on an immense circuit. [Thus] amessage sent from New York would be in England, Africa and Australia in aninstant. What a grand thing it would be.”20 