30WORLD TELEGRAPHY CENTER(1901)Dear Mr. Morgan,How can I begin to thank you in the name of my profession and myown, great generous man! My work will proclaim loudly your name to theworld. You will soon see that not only am I capable of appreciating deeplythe nobility of your action, but also of making your primarily philanthropicinvestment worth a hundred times the sum you have put at my disposal insuch a magnanimous and princely way!With many many wishes from all my heart for your happiness andwelfare, believe me.Ever yours most faithfully,N. Tesla1In March 1900 there was a fire in the East Houston Street building that housedTesla’s laboratory. “The Jews on the lower floor [were] burned out…[and this]frightened me nearly to death,” Tesla wrote the Johnsons. “It was a close shave,and if the misfortune had happened, it would have been probably the last of yourfriend Nikola.”2 Throughout this period the onslaught by the press alsocontinued in an unbridled fashion.February 25, 1901My dear Mr. Tesla,We never forget old friends and defend them against all maliciousassailants at all hazards.Yours truly,Earnest HeinrichOne of the old guard from the Westinghouse corporation, Heinreich,included a newspaper clipping which he had written. “Anyone who is ignorant,”Heinreich wrote, “…does not know that Tesla stands in the front rank ofelectrical inventors by what he has actually accomplished.”3Another who came to Tesla’s defense was T. C. Martin, who authored aword of praise in Science. “The ship was off its course,” Tesla wrote, “but Ialways had faith in the captain.”4December 13, 1900My dear Tesla,I am delighted to get your kind favor of Dec. 12. I know of no changewhatever in my sentiments towards you these many years from thebeginning until now. I shall always be very proudof my modest association with your earlier work…As ever,T. C. Martin5Unfortunately, there was also bickering between Tesla and Martin about theprevious editorial attacking Tesla in Martin’s journal and about Tesla’s slowprogress on his other inventions. Concerning the vacuum lamps, Martin wrote:“I should be delighted to see you or any other man give us the commercial art.”Perturbed, Tesla cut off his correspondence, and so the friendship remainedimpaired.6Just three months later, in March 1901, Tesla invited an admirer anddisciple of Swami Vivekananda, Miss Emma C. Thursby, to his laboratory. “Mylight will then be permanently installed and you and your friends—Miss Farmerin particular—will be most welcome to see it.”7Tesla’s New SurpriseJulian HawthorneGreat preparations for an experiment upon a stupendous scale arebeing made at the wizard’s laboratory on East Houston Street…Anunannounced visitor gained entrance today by chance. Tesla was not there.But what the visitor saw chained him to the spot.A Wonderful ColorFrom a stout beam [from] the…ceiling hung three dazzling, pulsatingclots of purple-violet light. The room glowed with the warmth of a strange,unearthly rich color—a hue that is not listed in the spectrum. Above andbelow the beams twisted long glass spirals closely coiled—snakes ofbeating violet flame…Sudden DarknessOne of Tesla’s workman found the unannounced visitor spellbound. Aquick spring to the wall, a concealed button touched, and darkness.Those who knew say this violet light is the wizard Tesla’s new flashsignal to the Martians. He will reveal it to the world soon. It is even hintedaround the corner of Mulberry St. at Police Headquarters that Tesla hasalready wig-wagged the red planet and had a response.8Hawthorne was living in Yonkers and often took a train down to Manhattan,dining with Tesla at the beginning of the year.9 They shared a number ofcommon friends, including Stanford White, whose father, Richard Grant White,had confessed to Hawthorne once “among other sacred confidences of a womanwhom he had found and loved in New York.” The rumor, in essence, was that hehad been essentially a bigamist, maintaining one home for his family and one forhis concubine.10 Perhaps this explained Stanny’s penchant for philandering. Theson, however, easily surpassed the father, as he was able to maintain five or sixretreats, including an estate on Long Island, an apartment in Gramercy Park, theGarden Tower suite, “the Morgue” on West Fifty-fifth Street, which he and hiscompatriots, like Saint-Gaudens, “used in a pinch,” and his “most infamoushaunt,” at 22 West Twenty-fourth St.11In March, Stanford became smitten by the exotic charms of the sixteen-year-old Floradora siren, Evelyn Nesbit, who had been featured as a Gibsoncenterfold for Colliers and as a nearly bare-breasted Spanish dancer in a popularmusical on Broadway. White watched her perform night after night for manyweeks before he was able to arrange a rendezvous, which first took place in theheat of the summer at the Twenty-fourth Street studio.12“Stanford had me put in an electric door,” the inventor told Hawthorne.“You press a button, and it automatically opens.”White had decorated his bachelor den in shades of red, with velvet curtainson the windows, soft cushions on the floor, and tapestries, statues, and paintings,mostly nudes all around. In his loft, with the room set like a small forest, lit witha bright skylight, could be found a red velvet swing hanging from the ceiling,like one of Chaucer’s toys, with green ropes trailing down from the seat, likevines from a tree.13Besides meeting with the mystical son of the renowned Gothic author,Nathaniel Hawthorne, Tesla dined with Stanford White and sometimes MarkTwain at the Players’ Club, or with Spanish-American War hero, RichmondHobson, Rudyard Kipling, or, of course, the Johnsons throughout this period.Katharine was caught up in her interest in spiritualism and tried an experiment inthought transference without the inventor knowing. In jest, Tesla wrote back:My dear Mrs. Johnson,There was no telepathic influence this time. I never thought of youeven for a moment.Sincerely,Millionaire Kid!14Rooted in his materialistic philosophy, the superstitious “wizard who talkswith other worlds”15 continued to repudiate the notion that human minds couldinteract by extrasensory means, even though he had recently saved some friendsfrom a train wreck because of a premonition.16 Overtly, however, he wouldmaintain that psychic phenomena was poppycock. Katharine would not only beteased for her mystical bent but also over possession of Hobson and over herlooks.My dear Luka,When Mrs. Filipov is out of town I think of Mrs. de Kay as the mostcharming lady of my experience. It would be advisable, Luka, to keep bothladies in ignorance of this. A word to the wise is sufficient.17Considered much like an uncle to the family, Tesla also expressed hiscontinuing affection for the Johnson children. For Agnes, he would sign a NewYear’s card “Nikola Hobson,” and for Owen, he took the time to read theyoungster’s first novel, The Arrow of the Almighty. He also congratulated Owenon his impending marriage. Agnes would also later marry, and she would inheritthe vast Johnson correspondence, much of which was donated to ColumbiaUniversity. According to the present Mrs. Robert Underwood Johnson, the wifeof Owen’s son (named after the grandfather), Agnes was “awful. I didn’t like herat all. Her daughter, however, was very beautiful. Paderewski felt that Ann hadgreat talent…Owen was very dashing and attractive, and had a lot of hismother’s qualities. As a writer, he authored the Lawrenceville series and made agood living as a novelist.”The present Mrs. Johnson stated that Katharine had “an Irish personality.”She could be “gay and lively and fun loving, but also depressive underneath.”The present Robert Underwood Johnson lived with his grandparents. “They hadtwo Irish servants, Josie and Norah. Katharine would go into one of her moods,and just stay in her room and wouldn’t come down even for meals. Herdepression became more severe…after World War I.” She said that Robert wasconsidered to be “boring, very formal with old world manners…a fine oldgentleman. Katharine was attracted to Tesla because he was imaginative andexciting from a European point of view. He might have brought more gaiety intothe house.”18Wardenclyffe“Inventor Nikola Tesla has purchased a 200-acre tract at Wardenclyffe onthe Sound, nine miles east of Port Jefferson for the establishment of awireless telegraphy plant. The land and improvements will cost$150,000.”19On March 1, 1901, Tesla officially signed his contract with Morgan. He wasnow able to begin construction of his laboratory and tower on Long Island, sixty-five miles from New York City. Two days later, Morgan officially announced thecreation of U.S. Steel. No such announcement was made about the TeslaCompany. The above article, which appeared in a local paper, the Long IslandDemocrat, was perhaps the only one to make reference to the correct figure of$150,000, which Morgan provided. When John O’Neill wrote his biography in1944, he did not know the details of the Morgan-Tesla relationship, even thoughhe had personally known Tesla for over thirty years. The inventor, whose paperswere still under lock and key at the time of the completion of the biography, hadtold O’Neill that the financier provided the funds in his capacity as aphilanthropist, although this was not the case at all. It was a simple businesspartnership.Tesla celebrated the new connection by giving a large party at the Waldorf-Astoria. He had discussed with Oscar the details of the menu and participated intasting the various sauces. Impeccably dressed, he reserved one of the smallerbanquet halls, requesting his guests to arrive at seventhirty sharp. White wasprobably there, along with the Johnsons, Hobson, and perhaps Miss Merringtonor Vivekananda acolytes Miss Thursby or Miss Farmer or Anne Morgan. Aslegend tells it, when it came time for dinner to be served, the maître d’ wasforced to call Tesla aside to inform him that he owed the hotel back bills totalingmore than $900. He was under orders. Dinner could not be served unless thematter was straightened out first. With an ace up his sleeve, Tesla nonchalantlywelcomed his guests and then eased out to see the manager. Mr. Boldt wascordial but insistent, so Tesla made a call and put him on the phone withMorgan. Flustered, Boldt was nevertheless able to hold his ground. A check wassent immediately, and the inventor was saved from embarrassment.20Soon after, Tesla met with real estate mogul Charles R. Flint, who arrangeda meeting with James Warden, director of the North Shore Industrial Company.Warden, who was in control of an eighteen-hundredacre potato farm on LongIsland Sound, in Suffolk County, provided Tesla with two hundred acres adjacentto what is today called Route 25A. The inventor was also given the option topurchase the remaining parcel. Perhaps to sweeten the deal or in lieu of certainother arrangements, the cite was named Wardenclyffe, after the owner, and apost office under that appellation was established on April 2. Five years later, in1906, the name was officially changed to the Village of Shoreham.21Electrical World & Engineer reported: “The company is offering its stockfor sale at $100 per share, expecting to pay 15 per cent dividends…TheWardenclyffe Building Company shall have the first rightand privilege to do all building and make all constructional improvements…andshall have the first right of purchase of any additional land offered by it for sale.”Warden, who was interviewed for the article, predicted that “large profits will berealized in the future.” Describing Tesla as “the foremost electrician of the age,whose achievements in electrical science eclipse in practical importance all otherdiscoveries of the century,” Warden noted that the inventor “has just closed acontract to expend…a very large sum of money in constructing electricallaboratories and the main station for his wireless telegraphy system ofcommunication with Europe and Australasia. This development will require alarge number of houses for the accommodation of the several hundreds of peoplewhom Mr. Tesla will employ.”22Tesla’s ultimate plan was to construct a “World Telegraphy Center,” with alaboratory, wireless transmitter, and production facilities for manufacturing hisoscillators and vacuum tubes. He had negotiated with Morgan the first step, thatis, to build the laboratory and a simple tower for reporting yacht races, signalingocean steamers, and sending Morse-coded messages to England. Simultaneously,he discussed with McKim, Mead & White the construction of an entiremetropolis, “a model city,” using the eighteen-hundred acres available, withhomes, stores, and buildings to house upwards of twenty-five hundredworkers.23 “Wardenclyffe will be the largest operation of its kind in the world,”Tesla told the local newspapers. “The laboratory will draw men from the highestscientific circles and their presence will benefit all of Long Island…24 With astaff of 75 draftsmen, the eminent architectural firm of McKim, Mead and Whiteis well suited to the task,” Tesla concluded. They billed him $1,168 forblueprints.25White, it appears, was placed in a precarious position: Morgan still hadreservations about his connection with the flamboyant engineer. In his capacityas interior decorator, White, in February, had located a statue in London whichhe knew the financier was interested in. “My dear Commodore,” the engagingredhead wrote, “it is really like parting with a pieceof my heart to give it up…[Thus] I would honestly rather [present it toyou, than sell it]…as my only desire…is to please you.” But Morganinsisted on compensating him for the statue, paying White “double the normalcommission” in order to show that he, too, felt their affiliation transcended“business.”26April 26, 1901Dear Nikola,I send you with this a new revised plan for your power house, also avery close estimate which we have made ourselves in this office…The workcould be done for about $14,000. I am very sure for a building of this size,that it would be impossible to get these figures down lower.Affectionately,Stanford White27Bids were taken from Sturgis and Hill and also Mertz and Co., twocontractors White often worked with. In May blueprints for the laboratory weresent over to Tesla for his approval, in June a contract with Sturgis and Hill wasfinalized,28 and in July the land was cleared, and a road was put in.29 Whiterecommended one of his associates, W. D. Crow, as architect in charge. Crowwould also do the actual construction of the tower.30The sun was out bright one morning in the early spring as the inventorstrutted down Peacock Alley and up Fifth Avenue toward Forty-second Streetand Grand Central Station, to transfer to Pennsylvania Station and take an earlytrain to Wardenclyffe. Golden shafts of light billowed through the upperwindows of the cathedral-like edifice as Tesla crossed the mighty corridor andstepped aboard the luxury car. Ordering a pot of coffee, he began to peruse hismail. The train rattled out of the city, past Manhassett, Oyster Bay, where VicePresident Roosevelt lived, St. James near Smithtown, where White had hisfamily estate, Port Jefferson, and finally to Wardenclyffe. With stops at thevarious towns, the trip took about an hour and a half, the Connecticut shorelinesometimes visible across the Sound. It was when he reached page 280 of theElectrical Review that his jaw dropped and his cup of coffee spilled all over theprim white tablecloth.Syntonic Wireless TelegraphyGuglielmo MarconiA large amount of inacurrate and misleading information is beingpublished…even in the scientific press…[on] telegraphy through space…Ishall endeavor to correct some of the[se] misstatements…It is my intention to describe fully the efforts I have made in order totune or syntonize the wireless system, efforts which, I am glad to say, havebeen crowned with complete success…I first constructed an arrangement which consists of a Leyden jar orcondenser circuit in which included the primary of what may be called aTesla coil [and a] secondary [which] is connected to the earth or aerialconductor. The idea of using a Tesla coil to produce oscillations is not new.It was tried by the Post Office [i.e., with Preece] when experimenting withmy system in 1898 and also suggested in a patent specification by Dr.Lodge dated May 10, 1897 (No. 11,) and by Professor Braun in…1899.31Tesla described to Morgan in a letter written three years later how thisinformation affected him:When I discovered, rather accidentally, that others, who openly cast ridiculeon what I had undertaken and discredited my apparatus were secretlyemploying it, evidently bent on the same task, I found myself confrontedwith wholly unforeseen conditions…Your [Morgan’s] participation calledfor a careful revision of my plans. I could not develop the business slowlyin grocery-shop fashion. I could not report yacht races or signal incomingsteamers. There was no money in this. This was no business for a man ofyour position and importance. Perhaps you have never fully appreciated thesense of this obligation.32This passage displays misunderstanding by Tesla of Morgan’s personality.Unlike the inventor, whose ideas existed in abstract and futuristic forms, thepragmatic financier’s mind was on the present. Morgan loved sailing and yachtraces and would resent another suggesting what a man in his position should orshould not do.Tesla reveals in this letter that he had to change his plans due to the“advantage shrewd competitors had” (e.g., due to Marconi’s pirating andconnections with Pupin, Edison, European investors, and sovereign rulers). Hethereupon decided to abandon the agreed-upon scheme of building a modest-sized transmitter and replaced it with the idea of constructing a skyscrapingtower six hundred feet high, designs for which he scratched out on his fancyWaldorf-Astoria stationery.33 Ironically, for the ofttimes altruistic Tesla, it washis greed, vanity, and megalomania which drove him into the new venture. Tohave his ideas stolen from him was abhorrent. In his autobiography, Tesla wouldlater refer to Marconi (although not by name) as a “parasite and microbe of anasty disease.” It was at this moment that the inventor decided to scrap the trivialidea of sending mere Morse codes across the Atlantic. He would inaugurate aworld communications enterprise to pulverize the vermin as a pachyderm wouldcrush a toad.Having reached the pinnacle of the ruling class, Tesla’s self-image swelledwith the occasion, for he had conceived a telecommunications enterprise moreefficient than the combined forces of today’s radio, television, wire service,lighting, telephone, and power systems! His ultimate plan even included theproduction of rain in the deserts, the lighting of skies above shipping lanes, thewireless production of energy for automobiles and airships, a universal time-keeping apparatus, and a mechanism for achieving interplanetarycommunication. Having attained cosmic consciousness, he offered this creationto the king of the financial world, and the king had accepted. To the inventor, itwas simply a detail that this vision was not in agreement with the specifics of thecontract or that Tesla never really told Morgan his greater scheme; this work,like White’s statue, transcended the traditional rules of business.PANIC ON WALL STREETIt was just sixty days since Tesla had signed his contract with Morgan, thirtydays after Morgan sailed for Europe. Yet already Tesla had irreversibly changedhis plans. Since he had been a gambler and pool player in his salad days and wasnow living among the most audacious of high rollers at the Waldorf, these oldtendencies resurfaced now that he had “hooked the biggest fish on Wall Street.”He had calculated the odds based on certain assumptions about the stability ofthe economy and the quickness of his access to Morgan’s $150,000, and heproceeded boldly with the completion of the masterwork.How could the inventor know that on May 10 the stock market would crashand that the main culprit in the catastrophe would be his backer, J. PierpontMorgan?The collapse of the stock market occurred because of a bitter rivalry thatexisted between Morgan and Ned Harriman. Morgan, who was in charge of theNorthern Pacific Railroad, having tossed Henry Villard out a decade earlier, hadbought control of an enormous line called the Chicago Burlington. This concernstretched its tracks from Atlantic ports to Chicago and down the Mississippi allthe way to New Orleans. Harriman, who controlled the Union Pacific, orsouthern route to the west, wanted access to the Burlington as well, and he triedto negotiate with Morgan for a seat on the board of directors. Unfortunately, dueto bitter disagreements stemming from an old railroad deal in which the craftyHarriman had outwitted the commodore, Morgan came to detest the man.Therefore, he would not share the Burlington and became irrational wheneverHarriman’s name was mentioned.34Thus, while Morgan enjoyed his art purchases in England and his mistressin France, Harriman, with the help of his broker, Jacob Schiff, clandestinelybegan purchasing Morgan’s Northern Pacific. Instead of trying to outbid Morganfor the Burlington, Harriman boldly bought Morgan’s own holding company outfrom underneath him! To accomplish this coup(!), it would take theadventuresome Harriman close to $100 million, which he raised by sellingenormous blocks of Union Pacific bonds, and Harriman actually successfullycarried out the operation. By the first week in May, Harriman owned more than50 percent of Morgan’s precious company, which had been affectionately calledthe Nipper. When Morgan received the fateful telegram from his underlingswhile in France, he tossed his paramour off his lap and wired back the order tobuy Northern Pacific back at any price, for Harriman did not yet own a majorityof the voting common shares.On May 9, the stock rocketed from $150 to $1,000 per share! A panicensued as people who bought in on the Nipper were unable to obtain possessionof their shares, as neither Morgan nor Harriman would release any; most of theother stocks dropped when investors sold in order to cover their losses. The endproduct was the tumbling of the market and the creation of extreme economicand political times and also monetary chaos. Stanford White was one of manywho lost heavily in the market. For Tesla, costs increased dramatically, andcredit was nearly impossible to obtain. The front page of the New York Timesreported the calamity: “The greatest general panic that Wall Street has everknown came upon the stock market yesterday, with the result that before it waschecked many fortunes had been swept away…”35Even Morgan’s precious U.S. Steel dropped from its current price of forty-six to a low of eight dollars a share.36 Numerous investors were financiallyruined, and some purportedly committed suicide. (One rumor concerning thisfamous event was that Morgan won back the company because Harriman’sbroker, Jacob Schiff, was in the synagogue on the fateful Saturday when Morganbegan buying more shares of Northern Pacific. Schiff, however, never intendedto wrest the company from Morgan. His goal was simply to obtain a largeenough percentage of the company to force Morgan to give Harriman a piece ofthe Chicago Burlington. Harriman, in his frenzy, wanted to change their plan soas to gain control over all three railroads, but Schiff overruled him. Thus, theskyrocketing of the stock and ensuing crash of the market were based solely onMorgan’s buy orders.)The economic upheaval created heavy financial burdens on Tesla. However,he would not completely realize the increasing financial difficulties immediately,for the affects on construction costs, wages, and incidentals would ripplethroughout the summer and fall.Before Pierpont’s departure for England, in April, he had assured Tesla thatnow he “had no doubts” about the inventor’s abilities,37 and even if, by somefluke of misfortune, Morgan should not supply additional funds, Tesla still hadhis own money and the personality to attract additional investors. At forty-fiveyears of age, wealthy, established as a leader of his field (however controversial),and rubbing elbows with the crème de la crème, the tall inventor was wellequipped for the task he foresaw. 