23VRIL POWER (1898)We entered an immense hall, lighted by…[a] lustre…but diffusing afragrant odor. The floor was in large tesselated blocks of precious metals,and partly covered with a sort of matlike carpeting. A strain of low music,above and around, undulated as if from invisible instruments…In a simpler garb than that of my guide, [a figure] was standingmotionless near the threshold. My guide touched it twice with his staff, andit put itself into a rapid and gliding movement, skimming noiselessly overthe floor. Gazing on it, I then saw that it was no living form, but amechanical automaton…Several [other] automata…stood dumb andmotionless by the walls.THE COMING RACE, EDWARD BULWER-LYTTON1One of Tesla’s major inventions in terms of ingenuity, originality, andcomplexity of design was a remote-controlled robotic boat which he called thetelautomaton. This device was unveiled at the Electrical Exposition held atMadison Square Garden during the height of the Spanish-American War in May1898, but earlier precursors could be traced to wireless motors which hedisplayed before the Institute of Electrical Engineers in 1892.This single invention not only established all of the essential principles ofwhat came to be known a few years later as the radio; it also lay as the basis ofsuch other creations as the wireless telephone, garage-door opener, the car radio,the facsimile machine, television, the cable-TV scrambler, and remote-controlledrobotics. The precise nature of the invention, virtually its patent application, waspublished in most of the technical journals at the time of its inauguration.2The telautomaton paralleled precisely a model developed by Britishnovelist Edward Bulwer-Lytton in 1871, although Tesla insisted in a missive toJohnson, written two years after the invention’s inauguration, that he had notbeen inspired by this science-fiction tale.3As Bulwer-Lytton was perhaps the most popular author next to CharlesDickens at that time, it is unlikely that Tesla was unaware of this story when heconceived of the invention. In The Coming Race, Bulwer-Lytton describes aconcept which he called “vril power.” This was an energy transmitted from theeye and body of the fictional advanced species which was used to animateautomatons.4 In essence, Tesla built a working model that substituted electricityfor the novelist’s “vril.” The story begins when the protagonist falls into a holein the earth and comes upon an advanced civilization: “In all service, whether inor out of doors, they [the people of Vril-ya] make great use of automaton figures,which are so ingenious, and so pliant to the operations of vril, that they actuallyseem gifted with reason. It was scarcely possible to distinguish the figures Ibeheld, apparently guiding…the rapid movements of vast engines, from humanforms endowed with thought.”5 As we shall see, key aspects of Bulwer-Lytton’sstory correlate quite closely with positions espoused by Tesla.The electrical exhibition was organized by Stanford White, who workedwith Tesla to fashion a rainbow room of neon lights at the entrance, and it waspresided over by Chauncey Depew, another Tesla friend, who was also one ofthe principals of the New York Central Railroad and a U.S. senator from NewYork. It had been hoped that President McKinley would illuminate theexposition by means of telegraph lines from Washington, but something wentawry, so Vice President Garret Hobart opened the proceedings instead.Representing the Marconi company was Tom Edison’s son, Tom Junior, whoobtained the position through T. C. Martin. This liaison marked the beginning ofa partnership between Marconi and Edison, as the Menlo Park wizard hadwireless patents which the Italian wanted to own in order to boost his legalposition on priority of discovery. The event also portended the upcoming breakin the friendship between Tesla and Martin.Animosities between Spain and the United States had run high for a numberof years. Ever since 1895, when the Spaniards took repressive measures againstrebelling Cubans, many Americans began to champion the cause of Cubanannexation.The sinking of the battleship Maine in Havana harbor in February of 1898eliminated any doubts, and war was officially declared two months later. Teslahad been meeting with John Jacob Astor throughout this period in his continuingattempts to woo the financier as Astor spelled out more clearly his position onrelevant issues.6 While his wife played mah-jongg at home, the colonel jauntedalong the deck of his mighty ship, the Nourmahal, which he had armed with fourmachine guns in order to protect against potential pirates. Labeled as insipid andhenpecked by gossip columnists, Astor sought his freedom on the high seas.Perhaps it was during an outing on Astor’s yacht that the inventorconceived of the idea of fashioning the teleautomaton in the form of a torpedo.“Come to Cuba with me where you can demonstrate your work upon theinsufferable scoundrels,” Astor suggested.Tesla may have been tempted, but in the midst of a whirlwind of invention,he graciously declined as he had been called “for a higher duty.”7Tesla finalized construction of his remote-controlled boat and consideredhow to make amends as Astor conferred with President McKinley in Washingtonand then hastened to the front lines. The colonel had donated $75,000 to the U.S.Army to equip an artillery division for use in the Philippines and lent theNourmahal to the navy for use in battle. The tall ship, nearly a hundred yards inlength, was equipped with a corps of military seamen. Able to feed sixty-five atone sitting, the steam-driven three-masted schooner made a formidable warship.With his honorary rank stepped up to inspector general, Colonel Astor sailed hisbattalion down to Cuba, where he could “watch Teddy Roosevelt in the Battle ofSan Juan Hill through a pair of field glasses.”8Beating the Spanish with modern instruments of destruction became theoverriding theme of the exposition. Tesla would have far and away the mostsophisticated construction, but he chose to portray it by deceptively emphasizingmysterious features: “In demonstrating my invention before audiences, thevisitors were requested to ask any question, however involved, and theautomaton would answer them by signs. This was considered magic at the time,but was extremely simple, for it was myself who gave the replies by means ofthe device.”9The boat, approximately four feet in length and three feet high, was placedin a large tank in the center of a private auditorium, set up for special viewing forkey investors like J. O. Ashton, George Westinghouse, J. Pierpont Morgan, andCornelius Vanderbilt.10 By means of a variety of transmitters and frequencies,the inventor could start, stop, propel, steer, and operate other features, such asputting lights on or off. Tesla was also planning on constructing a prototypesubmersible, perhaps to compete in the mock battles that were staged betweenmodels of the American ships and the Spanish fleet, but it was never built.Due to the lack of access the press had to this exclusive invention thenewspapers featured Marconi’s wireless detonation system instead. By means ofa bomb planted onboard the enemy frigate and a simple button placed in thehands of Tom Junior, “Spanish” ships were blown to smithereens. Marconi,however, had not solved the problem of tuning a frequency, and so, on oneoccasion, Edison’s son accidentally blew up a desk in a back room that hadhoused other bombs. Fortunately, no one was injured.11It appears that the public appreciated the dramatic Marconi contraption,which appealed to baser instincts, as compared to Tesla’s masterwork, which wassixteen years ahead of its time operationally and at least a century ahead of itstime conceptually, that is, as envisioned in final form. Only the scientificjournals explained with any clarity the complexity of the device.12Tesla’s coy portrayal kindled a blitzkrieg of epithets from the press. Thefollowing fantastic prognostication particularly upset them:Torpedo Boat Without a CrewMy submarine boat, loaded with its torpedoes, can start out from aprotected bay or be dropped over a ship side, make its devious way alongthe surface, through dangerous channels of mine beds…watching for itsprey, then dart upon it at a favorite moment…discharge its deadly weaponand return to the hand that sent it…I am aware that this sounds almostincredible and I have refrained from making this invention public until Ihad worked out practically every detail.13By allowing the following editorial to appear in his journal ElectricalEngineer, T. C. Martin was, in a backhanded way, another to lead the assault.Mr. Tesla and the CzarMr. Tesla fools himself, if he fools anybody, when he launches into thedazzling theories and speculations associated with his name…Just of lateMr. Tesla has been given publicity to some of his newest work…We shouldbe glad personally to see him finish up some of the many other things thathave occupied his energies these ten years past.The editorial then went on to criticize Tesla’s oscillator and his method of“delivering large quantities of current…without wires, say from Niagara Falls toParis [which has also yet to happen]…Mr. Marconi has already telegraphed fromballoon to balloon without wires…over twenty miles, thus proving in advancethe tenability of Mr. Tesla’s proposition.14Discredit of the wireless torpedo followed. This was in reaction to Tesla’ssuggestion that the ultimate weapons could be “devil automata.” Caught up inwar fever, Tesla emphasized nefarious implications of his work: Automatonswould fight while humans would live. He wrote, “The continuous developmentin this direction must ultimately make war a mere context of machines withoutmen and without loss of life—a condition [which will lead]…in my opinion…topermanent peace.”15This position was refuted by a number of individuals, the most eloquent byFrenchman M. Huart:The Genius of DestructionLike all inventors of destructive machines, [Tesla] claims that his [devilautomata] will make the governments which are inclined to createinternational conflagrations hesitate. On this account Nikola Tesla claims aright to be called a benefactor of humanity. The genius of destruction wouldseem to have, then, two aims. It creates evil but mostly good. Through itshelp the abolition of wars may no longer be a utopia of generous dreamers.A blessed era will open up to the people, whose quarrels will be settled inview of the terror of the cataclysms promised by science. Whatcontradictions of conception is the human mind subject to?16Coincidentally, this view was espoused by Mark Twain, who wrote to Teslafrom Europe wanting to sell the patents to cabinet ministers in Austria, Germany,and England, by Bulwer-Lytton, and by Czar Nicholas of Russia, whom Teslahimself was negotiating with.17 (And that was how “Nicholas” Tesla becameassociated with the czar.) In the modern era, Edward Teller, one of the inventorsof the hydrogen bomb, and, more recently, President Ronald Reagan in his 1980sStar Wars speeches, have also expounded on this position. But Tesla (much likeEinstein) came to regret his initial view of how the agents of Armageddon couldlead humans to peace.The brazen essay, which had appeared in Martin’s journal, continued as anintroduction to Tesla’s “thoughtful” paper on electrotherapeutics and thenconcluded with the following convoluted backhand compliment:It is not our desire to pose as apologists or publicists for Mr. Tesla. Heneeds no assistance of that kind; and so long as he commands freely wholepages of the Sunday papers, for which Mr. Wanamaker pays gladly histhousands of dollars, the scientific journals have little to do with the matter.All we wish to say is that it is not fair to condemn, as many do, Mr. Tesla asa visionary and impractical. No man has finished his work till he is dead,and even then there are long, long centuries in which his ideas can provethemselves true. The visionaries are thus often in the end the most sordid ofrealists—something Mr. Tesla will never be.18As Martin had been, in a sense, Tesla’s advance man, his decision to allowthis critique in his journal became a tacit sanction for other writers to unfurl theircondemnation. For instance, another scathing review appeared in both TheScientific American and the more popular Public Opinion. The article appearedon the same page as the obituary of mountebank inventor John Worrell Keely.Was Keely a Charlatan?In the death of J. W. Keely of Keely Motor fame…the world has beenrobbed of one of its most unique and fascinating characters…[Keely] wasalways going to startle the world but never did. It is sincerely to be hopedthat Keely’s alleged secrets have died with him.Science and Sensationalism…That the author of the multiphase system of transmission should, at thislate date, be flooding the press with rhetorical bombast that recalls thewildest days of the Keely Motor mania is inconsistent and inexplicable tothe last degree…The facts of Mr. Tesla’s invention are few and simple asthe fancies which have been woven around it are many and extravagant.The principles of the invention are not new, nor was Tesla the originaldiscoverer.19This implication that Tesla was not the author of his system of wirelesscommunication echoed previous charges that he was not the genuine inventor ofthe AC polyphase system. This was what particularly angered him, as it wasessential that his work be original. “I wish I could lay upon the fellow all theforked lightning in my laboratory,” Tesla told the Johnsons at dinner at theirhome.20“Perhaps it would be more effective if an outside person came to yourdefense,” Robert suggested.“My dear Luka, I know that you are a noble fellow and devoted friend and Iappreciate your indignation at these uncalled for attacks, but I beg you not to getinvolved under any condition as you would offend me. Let my ‘friends’ do theirworst, I like it better so. Let them spring on scientific societies worthlessschemes, oppose a cause which is deserving, throw sand into the eyes of thosewho might see. They will reap their reward in time.”21“Then how can we redress such an outrageous individual?”“Let us have a profound contempt for the creature,” Tesla concluded.“I don’t see Commerford in this same category,” Katharine offered, tryingto set the stage for a reconciliation.“I know you and Luka want me to forgive your friend Martin for hisdisparaging editorial. It was well done, but not so painstakingly as many othersbefore. He renders me more and more valuable services.”“At least talk to him,” Katharine pleaded.Tesla grabbed his hat, coat, and gloves and waved his hand. “Sorry for him.That is all,” he said as he departed.22Tesla counterattacked with a spirited response to Electrical Engineer whichthey were forced to publish:On more than one occasion you have offended me, but in my qualities bothas Christian and philosopher I have always forgiven you and only pitiedyou for your errors. This time, though, your offense is graver than theprevious ones, for you have dared to cast a shadow on my honor…Being abearer of high honors from a number of American universities, it is myduty, in view of this slur, to exact from you a complete and humbleapology…On this condition I will again forgive you, but I would advise youto limit yourself in your future attacks to statements for which you are notliable to be punished by law.23Tesla, of course, was angry with the general tone of their editorial; but whatparticularly upset him was the implication that he had abandoned his mechanicaland electrical oscillators and his cold lamps without filaments (fluorescentlights). He was in the midst of negotiating a large business transaction with anumber of investors, particularly Astor. In no way did he want there to be anyimplication that these endeavors were being abandoned.Martin’s rebuttal was published right after Tesla’s letter:His Friends to Mr. TeslaOne foremost electrical inventor [unnamed—probably Elihu Thomson]…has been kind enough to say that the Electrical Engineer made Mr. Tesla.This statement was disputed by Martin as “a person’s actions make theperson”; however, the journal (i.e., Martin) did cite the fact that in the past itpublished Tesla’s articles and book of his inventions and lectures and,furthermore, that it was their editor who has “striven with all the abilitypossessed to explain Mr. Tesla’s ideas.” This is completely true. For an eight-year period, 1890-98, Electrical Engineer published 167 articles by or aboutTesla, 40 more than Electrical Review and 70 more than Electrical World.24Moreover, it was clearly Martin who choreographed the reclusive inventor’sentrée into the American electrical arena.As Tesla often promised more than he delivered, the journal, as a “truefriend,” felt an obligation to urge him to complete “a long trial of beautiful butunfinished inventions.” They (i.e., Martin) also took keen exception to thefantastic statements about Tesla’s remote-controlled flying machine that couldchange its direction in flight, “explode at will and…never make a miss.” Martincontinued: “Our past admiration of Mr. Tesla’s real, tangible work is on record,and stands; but we draw the line at such things as these. We are sorry Mr. Teslafeels so keenly, but we cannot help it.”25Given that this assault stemmed from one of Tesla’s closest allies, it bearscareful consideration. However, from a historical perspective, we should alsoconsider hidden agendas. For instance, in 1894, Tesla was freely distributing hiscollected works and not paying for additional copies.“I made some money out of my Tesla book,” Martin confessed to ElihuThomson many years later, “[but it was] promptly borrowed from me by thetitular component, so that two years of work went for nothing.”26 The followingyear, in 1895, Tesla’s laboratory burned to the ground, and Martin wrote anadmirable tribute.27 Perhaps that is why he did not insist Tesla repay him.Martin had been placed in an awkward position, for he was also a goodfriend of Tom Edison’s, a powerful Tesla rival; and as a reporter he had to beobjective in covering advances from other rivals, such as Marconi. Tesla’sirritating habit of living beyond his means and seeing projects completed beforethey actually materialized was forever a source of frustration to his longtimeprotector. And history has so proved, in many ways, that Martin was right.Tesla’s oscillators were never a commercial success; his wireless system ofdistributing light, information, and power (in its total form) was never realized;and for reasons difficult to understand, Tesla’s fluorescent lights were nevermarketed.On the other hand, Tesla was extremely prolific. He did build workingmodels of all of his inventions. For instance, the telautomaton was a fullyfunctioning prototype. And it takes many years for one’s endeavors to come tofruition. Tesla had already proved himself in a variety of ways. That all of hisprojects never materialized is understandable given the great scope of his efforts.Tesla’s telautomaton remains one of the single most important technologicaltriumphs of the modern age. In its final form, it was conceived as a newmechanical species capable of thinking as humans do, capable of carrying outcomplex assignments and even capable of reproduction. The invention alsocomprised all of the essential features of wireless transmission and selectivetuning. Here was a true work of genius.Surprisingly, Tesla was an adherent of a stimulus-response model forexplaining human behavior and consciousness rather than a proponent of amodel espousing a creative unconscious. The rivalry between Ernst Mach andCarl Stumpf, Tesla’s philosophy teacher, discussed earlier, and the work ofDescartes on the self-propelled automata correlate to a number of key positionsTesla took which influenced directly the development of his telautomaton. Themind, according to this proposition, was nothing more than a simple compilationof cause-and-effect sensations. What we call ideas were secondary impressionsderived from these primary sensations.Paradoxically, although Tesla’s achievement was highly original andalthough he touted himself as the “creator of new principles,” in no way did theinventor think that he had ever produced a new idea that did not stem fromsomething external, for example, a mechanism present in nature or deriving fromthe work of others. A reader of great philosophers, Tesla fully understood whatthe adoption of his telautomaton would mean to the world. He saw clearly theimplication in the “coming race.” Machines would not only replace laborers,they would think for themselves. Tesla’s genius, therefore, was not only in theappreciation of the advanced thinking of others but also and more important, inimplementing on a practical basis their abstract ideas. Whereas others sought tochange the world with thoughts, Tesla manifested on the physical plane realworking models. He certainly was the father of remote-controlled electronic“beings,” but he would have been the last person to claim that he was the fatherof the idea.In a famous article printed in the Century in 1900, Tesla explained theentire conceptualization behind his telautomaton: “I have, by every thought andevery act of mine, demonstrated and do so daily, to my absolute satisfaction thatI am an automaton endowed with a power of movement, which merely respondsto external stimuli beating upon my sense organs, and thinks and actsaccordingly. I remember only one or two cases in all my life which I was unableto locate the first impression which prompted a movement, or a thought, or evena dream.”28Tesla neglects to mention that one of these two instances was the revelationhe had in Professor Poeschl’s class: He had seen that the commutator could beeliminated in the DC machines. In other words, Tesla’s most successfulinvention, the AC polyphase system, was initiated from intuitive insight.Nevertheless, Tesla stubbornly clung to the “tabula rasa” premise. Noinspiration, according to this pundit, began from within; self-directed responseswere initiated only after external stimuli were received. This is a complex idea,as it seems from the first paragraph below that Tesla believes the reverse.How Cosmic Forces Shape Our DestiniesEvery living being is an engine geared to the wheelwork of the universe…There is no constellation or nebula, no sun or planet…that does not exercisesome control over its destiny—not in the vague and delusive sense ofastrology, but in the rigid and positive meaning of physical science.More than this can be said. There is no thing endowed with life—fromman who is enslaving the elements, to the humblest creature—in all theworld that does not sway in its turn.29At the time he conceived these ideas, that is, in the early 1890s, Tesla wasstudying Herbert Spencer and also Buddhist writings. He even gave his friendJohnson a copy of a book on Buddhism to read. Nevertheless, the influence ofMach’s principle and Newton’s laws concerning such correlates as the angularmomentum of the earth, sun, and galaxy also figured into his cosmologicalparadigm. “The Buddhist expresses it one way, the Christian in another, but bothsay the same: We are all one…Science, too, recognizes this connectedness ofseparate individuals, though not quite in the same sense that it admits that thesuns, planets and moons of a constellation are one body, and there can be nodoubt that it will be experimentally confirmed in times to come.30Having studied will psychology (occult psychological principles) as ayouth, Tesla was a firm believer in self-determination and the incredible powerof the will. Somehow, however, he reconciled this internal procedure, which thephilosopher George Gurdjieff links to a direct expression of the soul, to hisexternal-behavioristic paradigm. For Tesla, the spark of life is not only biologicalbut also present in the structure of matter: “Even matter called inorganic,believed to be dead, responds to irritants and gives unmistakable evidence of aliving principle within.”31Such things as metals respond to stimuli (e.g., magnets). Tesla refuses toseparate the motive forces involved in electromagnetic effects from reactions of“living” matter. This in essence was Bulwer-Lytton’s “vril power.” The energythat runs the universe directs life. “Thus, everything that exists, organic orinorganic, animated or inert, is susceptible to stimulus from the outside. There isno gap between, no break in continuity, no special and distinguishing vital agent.The momentous question of Spencer, What is it that causes inorganic matter torun into organic forms? has been answered. It is the sun’s heat and light.Wherever they are there is life.”32As Tesla himself was a “self-propelled automaton entirely under the controlof external influences,” he could use the model of himself to build histelautomaton. What we call memory, Tesla further stated, “is but increasedresponsiveness to repeated stimuli.” Creative thinking and also dreaming wouldbe derived from secondary reverberations of these initial external stimuli.Long ago I conceived the idea of constructing an automaton which wouldmechanically represent me, and which would respond, as I do myself, butof course, in a much more primitive manner to external influences. Such anautomaton evidently had to have motive power, organs for locomotion,directive organs and one or more sensitive organs so adapted as to beexcited by external stimuli…Whether the automaton be of flesh and bone, or of wood and steel, itmattered little, provided it could provide all the duties required of it like anintelligent being.33To Tesla, his remote-controlled boat was not simply a machine, it was anew technological creation endowed with the ability to think. In Tesla’s view, itwas also, in a sense, the first nonbiological life-form on the planet. As aprototype, this first new life-form was “embodied,” in Tesla words, with a“borrowed mind,” his own! “[It will be able] to follow a course laid out or…obey commands given far in advance, it will be capable of distinguishingbetween what it ought and what it ought not to do…and of recordingimpressions which will definitely affect its subsequent actions.”34Very few individuals could comprehend the magnitude of the creation in1898, and so they lashed out at Tesla instead.In November 1898, the examiner in chief of patents came to witness ademonstration of Tesla’s telautomaton before granting a patent, so“unbelievable” was the claim. “I remember that when later I called on an officialin Washington, with a view of offering the invention to the Government,” Teslawrote, “he burst out in laughter…Nobody thought then that there was the faintestprospect of perfecting such a device.”35 