37BLADELESS TURBINES (1909-10)March 22, 1909My dear Col. Astor:I was very glad to know from the papers that you have returnedto thecity and hasten to tell you that my steam and gas turbine, pump, waterturbine, air compressor and propeller have all proved a great success. Inthe opinion of very competent men these inventions will create an enormousrevolution. My gas turbine will be the finest thing in the world for a flyingmachine because it makes it possible to attain as much as 4 or 5 HP foreach pound of weight. I have been hard at work on a design of the flyingmachine and it is going to be something very fine. It will have no screwpropeller or inclined plane, rudder or wane—in fact nothing of the old, andit will enable us to lift much greater weights and propel them in the air withever so much greater speed than has been possible so far. We are making upan automobile in which these new principles are embodied and I am alsodesigning a locomotive for a railroad and am adapting my new propulsionscheme to one of the biggest Atlantic liners. All this information isconfidential. I am merely writing knowing that you will be pleased with mysuccess.With kind regards, I am,Sincerely yours,Nikola TeslaWith the death of the fragile poet Robert Watson Gilder in November 1909came the advance in position from associate editor to editor in chief by RobertUnderwood Johnson. Numerous dignitaries attended the somber affair, includingMark Twain and the latest rising star in the world of poetry, the twenty-four-year-old “wonder child” George Sylvester Viereck. It was an undesirable way forLuka to gain the promotion, but clearly the trustees had never considered anyoneelse for the post. Gilder’s passing was yet another tangible sign of the end of animportant era for the Century.Tesla came over for Christmas dinner, and the discussion drifted to theproblems Robert would now have in boosting a steadily declining circulation. Incompetition with a new crop of plebeian journals, Luka was forced to lower hisstandards by allowing the introduction of such four letter words as “hell” tograce the Century’s pages.Katharine was interested in discussing Sir Oliver Lodge’s recent contentionthat he had located a medium that had spoken to “dead members of the Societyof Psychical Research,” but Tesla thought such form of “wirelesscommunication” poppycock. He was more interested in tearing apart ProfessorPickering’s supposition that he could erect a set of mirrors in Texas with $10,000to signal the Martians.“The idea that mirrors might be manufactured which will reflect sunlight inparallel beams, for the time being is beyond our range of ability. But there is onemethod of putting ourselves in touch with other planets,” Tesla said as the eyesof his hosts lit up once again with the idea of Wardenclyffe. Capital, of course,was the problem, so Tesla began to describe his newest moneymaking scheme; itwas his latest invention.2Accused of being a visionary and dreamer, the consummate inventor “taxedhis powers of concentration in the calm retirement of the night” to cultivate away to bail himself out.3 Often he would leave his Waldorf suite to walk thestreets after hours and cogitate. His favorite sanctum was the colossal hall atGrand Central Station.1 There, in the slumbering chapel, at four in the morning,he could follow the echo of his solitary thoughts down and into the tunnels towhere the trains were berthed or up and around the majestic marble staircaseswhich overlooked the vast commuters’ arena and skyward to the starry dome,where the constellations and corresponding mythical gods were painted on theceiling. This was his grand station for bouncing ideas off Pegasus or Hercules,Virgo, Centaurus, Gemini, Hydra, or Orion. Perhaps Argus (the ship) couldprovide a clue.Wardenclyffe had become his obsession, and unless he was able to resurrectit in toto, he would never feel fulfilled. In-between measures were out of thequestion. Either he launched the entire edifice, or he would launch none of it.Scherff would visit the plant periodically with his wife, his father, and newbornbaby and handle the money on the taxes and salary for Mr. Hawkins, who wasretained as a guard.But Tesla’s competition had now caught up and in some ways wassurpassing, if not replacing his vision. Airplanes and zeppelins were dotting theskies, the powers opposing illuminants without filaments were becoming moreentrenched, and wireless transmitters were springing up like mushrooms at thebanks of a woodland stream. In January 1908 the French placed a broadcaststation atop the Eiffel Tower for the purpose of transmitting messages toMorocco. The director of operations predicted that such impulses “shouldtheoretically go around the world [and] return to the tower.”5 Lee De Forestbegan to gain momentum in the States and soon began contracting with thegovernment and the millionaires for the erection of “radio-telephones,” which heplaced on the roofs of the tallest structures in Manhattan. In 1907 he had airedthe voice of Enrico Caruso, who was singing at the Metropolitan Opera House.Most of the listeners were in nearby boats. Concurrently, De Forest had refined away to boost the speed of Morse-code transmissions. He could now directtelegrams at the astonishing rate of six hundred words per minute.“I can confidently predict,” De Forest proclaimed, “that within the next fiveyears, every ship…will be equipped with the wireless telephone…I look forwardto the day when by this means, the opera may be brought into every home. Someday, the news and even advertising will be sent out to the public over thewireless telephone.” De Forest went on to criticize Marconi’s devices, which stillhad not solved the problem of static interference, and predicted that his newsystem for tuning would eventually become standard.6 The following year, hesigned a contract for the “radio wireless” with Bell Telephone and installedoperations between Philadelphia and New York.7 Tesla was becoming a footnoteto the field, Mr. Boldt hurling his own insult by hiring United Wireless to placetwo forty-foot wireless transmitters on the roof of the Waldorf and paying them$3,000 for the work.8Marconi, however, was still the man of the hour, his name a householdword, as the New York Times boasted in every Sunday supplement, a crest bannerabove their masthead boldly depicting Marconi wireless transmitters traversingcontinents and seas.The Prime MoverThe Tesla turbine is the apotheosis of simplicity. It is so violently opposedto all precedent that it seems unbelievable.9With his wireless “project…evidently far in advance of the times,” Tesladevoted himself “to other inventions which appealed more to practical men.After years of careful thinking, I found that what the world needed most…wasan efficient prime mover.” Tesla was referring to his new invention of a powerfuland lightweight turbine, one that could be used to replace the gasoline engine inthe car, fitted on airplanes, torpedoes, or ocean liners, or converted into a pumpfor transporting air, solids, or fluids. This remarkable machine could be used tocreate liquid oxygen or even be placed above incinerators to convert wasted heatinto electricity. Born of Dane and Niko’s childhood play with waterwheels inSmiljan, the multifaceted and revolutionary device first became manifest in1906-07. It was called the bladeless turbine.10Latest Marvel From the Monarch of MechanicsFrank Parker Stockbridge“You have got what Professor Langley was trying to evolve for his flyingmachine, an engine that will give a horse power for a pound of weight,” Isuggested.“I have got more than that,” replied Dr. Tesla. “I have an engine thatwill give ten horse power to a pound of weight. This is twenty-five times aspowerful as the lightest weight engines in use today. The lightest gas engineused on aeroplanes weighs two and one half pounds [and produces one]horse power. With [that weight] I can produce twenty-five horse power.“This means the solution of the problem of flying,” I suggested.“Yes, and many more,” was the reply. “It is the perfect rotary engine. Itis an accomplishment that mechanical engineers have been dreaming aboutever since the invention of steam power.”11The inventor thereupon proceeded to explain its principles. Having studiedthe properties of water and steam as they passed through a propeller, Teslaexplored the relationship of viscosity and adhesion to the blade’s correspondingspin.“The metal does not absorb any of the water, but [some of] the wateradheres to it. The drop of water may change its shape, [yet its] particles remainintact. This tendency of all fluids to resist separation is viscosity,” the inventorexplained. By exploiting these principles, Tesla had patented an entirely newkind of turbine which did away with the blades of an everyday propeller andreplaced them with a series of disks thinly spaced apart like a stack of pennies ontheir side. Each disk had a hole in its center for removing the incoming fluid andfor turning the central shaft. Whereas “skin friction impedes a ship in itsprogress through the sea or an aeroplane through the air,” Tesla exploited thisseeming obstacle so that the spin of the turbine would be enhanced rather thanretarded by the adhesion and viscosity of the medium. It was another stroke ofgenius from the master.Spiral action was initiated at the periphery of each disk as the water formeda tighter and tighter corkscrew pattern as the center hole was approached thusaugmenting spiral action. In this way, a fluid under pressure, such as steam,could enter the sealed chamber which housed the horizontal stack of disks andcause them to rotate. Following the natural tendency to create a whirlpool (likewater exiting a drain), the fluid would naturally spin faster and faster as it movedtoward the center. Simultaneously, its property of adhesion would carry, or drag,the corresponding disk around and around at a faster rate, and this spin could beused, for instance, as a turbine to generate electricity; reversing the entireprocess would turn the instrument into a pump; and hooking it up to an inductionmotor could transform the instrument into a jet engine.“One such pump now in operation, with eight disks, eighteen inches indiameter, pumps four thousand gallons a minute to a height of 360 feet…“Suppose now we reversed the operation,” continued the inventor…Suppose we had water, or air under pressure, or steam under pressure…andlet it run into the case in which the disks are contained—what wouldhappen?”“The disks would revolve and any machinery attached to the shaftwould be operated—you would convert the pump into an engine,” Isuggested.“That is exactly what would happen—what does happen,” replied Dr.Tesla…“Then too,” Dr. Tesla went on, “there are no delicate adjustments to bemade. The distance between the disks is not a matter of microscopicaccuracy…Coupling these engines in series, one can do away with gearingin machinery…The motor is especially adapted to automobiles, for it willrun on gas explosions as well as on steam…“With a thousand horse power engine, weighing only one hundredpounds, imagine the possibilities. In the space now occupied by the enginesof the Lusitania twenty-five times her 80,000 horse power could bedeveloped, were it possible to provide boiler capacity sufficient to furnishthe necessary steam…Here is…an engine that will do things no otherengine ever has done.”12In January 1909, George Scherff, who was now working for a sulphurcompany, sent off a pleading letter for financial aid to Tesla. “My creditors arehounding me hard. Anything you can do for me will be much appreciated,”Scherff wrote.13Instead of sending him money, Tesla sent a check for Mrs. Schwarz, yetanother disgruntled investor. In need himself, Scherff tried to divert the funds,but Tesla, having been in Scherff’s position numerous times, wrote backlightheartedly, “I am sorry to note that you are losing your equanimity and poise.Mrs. Schwarz is weak and you are fully able to fight your own battles. You mustpull yourself together and banish the evil spirits.”14 Shortly thereafter, Scherffsent off another note informing Tesla that he had prepared the taxes forWardenclyffe. “A few nights ago,” Scherff added, “a burglar entered my houseand cleaned all the cash out of my pockets.” Tesla took the hint and beganrecompensing his former secretary, sending a check in November.November 11, 1909Dear Mr. Tesla,Thank you for the $200…What gives me more pleasure than themoney is the concrete evidence it furnishes of your progress towards thesuccess for which you have battled so long and hard.Sincerely,George Scherff15In March 1909, Tesla had formed the Tesla Propulsion Company withJoseph Hoadley and Walter H. Knight. With stock capitalized at $1 million, itwas announced in Electrical World that turbines were being sold to the AlabamaConsolidated Coal & Iron Company.16 Tesla also set up other firms: the TeslaOzone Company, capitalized at $400,000, which produced ozone, and the TeslaElectrotherapeutic Company, which marketed electrotherapeutic machines withColonel Ray.PRESENT-DAY OZONE THERAPYDuring a recent symposium marking the hundred years since Tesla’s arrivalin America, G. Freibott, a medical doctor who used Tesla’s ozoneproducingequipment, stated that by injecting pure ozone directly into the bloodstream of aman afflicted with colon cancer, “thirty tumors were released.” According toFreibott, this form of oxygen, which is naturally produced by the sun’s action onthe upper reaches of the atmosphere, contains “oxidizing, antiseptic andgermicidal power…bringing palliative and curative results to many individuals.”When questioned about the dangers of creating embolisms, Freibott noted that“air embolisms” are not caused by bubbles of oxygen in the bloodstream, as iscommonly believed, but rather by impurities carried by the oxygen. This work isnew and controversial, although verification of these findings has beenestablished by physicians.17Tesla, of course, did not inject ozone into people; however, he did constructan electrotherapeutic device for Scherff’s wife, who was suffering from anailment at that time. “I believe that it will do you and Mrs. Scherff a lot ofgood,” Tesla wrote, adding for the sally, “unless you have no electric supplycircuit in your home, in which case, it will be necessary to move into otherquarters.”18Throughout 1909 and 1910 the inventor shuffled back and forth betweenProvidence, Bridgeport, and New York City, where he had installed variousrenditions of his turbines. Most of the development work was at Bridgeport.“I am now at work on new ideas of an automobile, locomotive and lathe inwhich these inventions of mine are embodied and which cannot help [but] provea colossal success,” he wrote Scherff. “The only trouble is to get the cash, but itcannot last very long before my money will come in a torrent and then you cancall on me for anything you like.” He added optimistically in another letter,“Things are developing very favorably, and it seems that my wireless dream willbe realized before next summer.”19In March 1910, Owen’s wife gave birth to their first son, RobertUnderwood Johnson Jr., but in the spring a potential disaster of forebodinginvaded the Tesla circle when it was announced that John Jacob Astor and hisson Vincent were lost at sea. The inventor was one of the many who rejoicedwhen the news arrived that one of the ten richest men in the world (and his son)emerged unscathed. It is uncertain to what extent Astor contributed to Tesla’swork with the turbine, however, there is some evidence that the inventorinstalled a hydrofoil jet engine in a “mysterious craft” Astor had docked in theHarlem River. The New York Times reported that the vehicle “seemed to embodyan airship with a practical water craft.”20 If this was a radical flying machinewhich Tesla was working on, both he and Astor made sure that the reporterswere kept away. One of the advantages of such a prototype was that the dangerof death resulting from experimental flights could be minimized, since the craftwas theoretically set up to hover only above water.Feeling well on the way to success, Tesla wrote his friend Charles Scott atthe Westinghouse Corporation for an order of a million induction motors to drivehis turbines. “But as I have learned to go slow,” he added to the letter, “I shalltake only one at first.”21In November 1910, with his newfound tidal wave of momentum, he movedhis headquarters to the prestigious forty-eight-story Metropolitan Towers,located at 1 Madison Avenue, just across the way from the Garden. With anoffice suite on the twentieth floor, right beneath the skyscraper’s famous towerclock, the inventor could look out on the burgeoning metropolis from the tallestbuilding in the world to plan his next move for the recapture of his holy grail, hisworld-telegraphy scheme. 