27THOR’S EMISSARY (1899)Th[e] problem was rendered extremely difficult, owing to the immensedimensions of the planet…But by gradual and continuous improvements ofa generator of electrical oscillations…I finally succeeded in reaching ratesof delivery of electrical energy actually surpassing those of lightningdischarges…By use of such a generator of stationary waves and receivingapparatus properly placed and adjusted in any other locality, howeverremote, it is practicable to transmit intelligible signals, or to control oractuate at will any one apparatus for many other important and valuablepurposes.NIKOLA TESLA1Tesla went to Colorado in part for reasons of secrecy. His allimportanttransmitting oscillators and general design had already been pirated, and hewould shortly be involved in a variety of priority battles. Looking at theColorado project from the technical point of view, the inventor was in a virginfield and needed to experiment in order to determine a workable plan fordistributing light, information, and power by means of wireless. The measuringof standing waveforms from the electrical storms throughout July confirmedwhat he had suspected, namely, that the earth had a resonant frequency and couldtherefore be used as a carrier wave to transmit his signals.Letters between Scherff and Tesla continued on an almost daily basisthroughout the summer. In August, Tesla received an “invitation to attend thebanquet honoring the birthday of the Emperor Francis Joseph.”2 Correspondencealso came in from Austria, India, Australia, and Scandinavia. “The [last] one,”Scherff wrote, “is a proposition to become agent or manufacturer of your newlight for Sweden, Norway and Denmark.”3 To the numerous business inquiries,Tesla wrote, “[Tell them] that I am on a scientific expedition, and will return in afew weeks.”4 There was also correspondence with William Rankine, E. D.Adams, Mr. Coaney (a stockholder), and Alfred Brown.Bills were forwarded, and the inventor, in turn, would periodically mail offfunds to cover these expenses. Wages for the crew ran about ninety dollars a payperiod. The New York laboratory, in turn, prepared new equipment to be shippedwest, as Scherff continued to send details about their construction.September 6, 1899Dear Mr. Scherff,Can you write about something more interesting than thepump. There are many things happening in a great city…[Try]and make your correspondence more interesting…[such as in sending]press clippings.Sincerely,N. Tesla5As was his custom, the inventor lived in the future, writing to Scherff in lateAugust that he expected to return to New York in a few weeks. It would be morelike four months. At the same time, Lowenstein requested permission to takeleave, as he wanted to return to Germany for some family matter. Tesla fearedthat he might be an industrial spy, but he was only going home to get married.Koleman Czito was called on to replace him.“Czito has just arrived,” Tesla wrote, “and I [am] glad to see a familiar faceagain. He looks a little too fat for the work I expect of him.”6 He would comejust in time to take part in some of the most spectacular electrical experimentsever performed. A hearty and trustworthy companion, Czito would stay atTesla’s call until he was an old man. By that time, he had trained his son Julius totake over. Julius would eventually come to aid Tesla in some of his moreclandestine earth-lunar experiments as well as in dayto-day responsibilities.7Throughout September, Tesla designed a large number of electronic tubesfor his glassblower in New York to fashion, and for Scherff to ship, as hecontinued to document his work with a local photographer. Electrical energygenerated exceeded 3 million volts. Tesla reported, “I drew 1-inch sparksbetween my body and an iron pipe buried in the ground about 100 feet from thelaboratory.”8On the twenty-ninth, time-lapse pictures were mailed to John Jacob Astor,sugar refinery king, H. D. Havemeyer, his wife and their daughter, Mrs. E. F.Winslow, Stanford White, socialite Mary Mapes Dodge, and the Johnsons. Healso shipped copies to Lord Kelvin, Sir William Crookes, Sir James Dewar,William Roentgen, Philip Lenard, and Adolph Slaby.9 “Look them over carefullybefore delivery,” the inventor instructed his liaison, “and do not allow theworkers, other than yourself and Mr. Ulman to see them.”10Throughout the autumn, the inventor continued to change the height of theball at the top of the antenna to measure the change in capacity and relationshipto generated wavelengths in order to tune the equipment to the earth’s frequencyand “bring the oscillator into resonance with th[e] circuit.”11 Made out of wood,the ball was coated with metal. He also studied the strange phenomena offireballs, which, when created by natural means, can appear like tumbleweeds oflightning that can roll down a street and smash into a tree or house. They arerarely seen, though there are documented sightings. Although Tesla himself hadnot witnessed any natural fireballs, he was able to create smaller ones in his lab.“Sometimes it apeared [sic] as if a ball would form above the coil, but this mayhave been only an optical effect caused by many streamers passing from variouspoints in different directions…At [other] times, a big cluster of them would formand spatter irregularly in all directions.”12 “He produced them quite by accidentand saw them, more than once, explode and shatter his tall mast and also destroyapparatus within his laboratory. The destructive action accompanying thedisintegration of a fire ball, he declared, takes place with inconceivableviolence.”13In one instance, he pushed the experiments too far, and a fire started.Trapped by streamers that could maim or kill, the inventor had to roll to safety tosave his life. To Johnson he wrote, “I have had wonderful experiences here,among other things, tamed a wild cat and am nothing but a mass of bleedingscratches. But in the scratches, Luka, there lies a mind. MIND.”14A few weeks later, while a photographer was present, Tesla set the roof inflames but was able to extinguish it before much damage was done. “The displaywas wonderful in spite of this,” he wrote in his diary.15Having studied the phenomena, Tesla attributed the generation of fireballsto “the interaction of two frequencies, a stray higher frequency wave imposed onthe lower frequency free oscillation of the main circuit.” They could also beproduced when “stray high frequency charges from random earth currents”interacted with charges from his oscillator.16The following week, he extended the ball to a height of 142 feet and began“propagating waves through the ground.”17Referring to electrical or radio wave action at a distance, I know fromexperience that if proper precautions are not taken, fires of all kinds andexplosions can be produced by wireless transmitters. In my experiments inColorado, when the plant was powerfully excited, the lightning arresters fortwelve miles around were bridged with continuous arcs, much stronger andmore persistent than those which ordinarily took place during an electricstorm. I have excited loops (coil aerials) and lighted incandescent lamps atconsiderable distance from the laboratory without even using more thanfive or ten per cent of the capacity of the transmitter. When the oscillatorwas excited to about 4,000,000 volts and an incandescent lamp was held inthe hand about fifty or sixty feet from the laboratory, [emphasis added] thefilament was often broken by the vibration set up, giving some idea of themagnitude of the electromotive forces generated in the space.18Tesla had calculated that the earth pulsated at varying frequencies,especially twelve cycles per second.19 With his coils wound with lengths of wirein harmonic relationships to the required wavelengths needed to “girdle theglobe,” he wrote in his diary, the length of the coil was calculated based on theequation:wavelength/4 = harmonic of total wavelength (or) required length of coilTaking into account the speed of light, 186,000 miles per second and thecircumference of the earth, it was determined that coils would have to be“roughly” a mile in length, or some harmonic of this figure, to be in a resonantterrestrial frequency.20 Other components included the thickness of the wireitself and horsepower generated. By increasing the frequency betweenpulsations, the inventor claimed to be able to boost horsepower to a few hundredthousand, although this amount of produced energy would last only a fraction ofa second.21Czito arrived for work one day in mid-autumn to find the inventorvigorously watering the ground around the metal plate which he had buried nearthe lab. “If I could only insulate these wires with liquid oxygen, I could reducelosses another magnitude,” the inventor said. “Here, put these on.” He gaveCzito a pair of rubber-soled shoes as he laced up a pair for himself.“All the way today, sir?” Czito inquired.“To the limit, my friend. Now remember,” the inventor cautioned, “keepone hand behind your back at all times.”Czito responded with a nod of his head. He had no plans to riskelectrocution by creating a circuit through his heart.“Throw the switch when you see my signal.”“We had better use these, sir.” Czito handed his boss two cotton balls andtook two for himself, and they plugged them into their ears.The lanky Serb lumbered from his lab in his high shoes, past the mud, toplace testing equipment and cold lamps at various locations in the earth, andpositioned himself on a knoll about a mile away, near Prospect Lake. Eventhough insulated, sparks jumped from the ground to his feet as he crunchedalong the path.22The sun was low on the horizon as Colorado Springs began to turn onstreetlights and electric lamps in preparation for the night. “Now,” Tesla wavedas Czito fired up the equipment.The sound began as a low rumble and built to a “roar [that] was so strongthat it could be plainly heard ten miles away.” The ground trembled with thenoise as the inventor gazed over to a nearby corral to watch a half-dozen horsesrear on their hind legs and gallop frantically away. “Butterflies were carriedaround in…circle[s] as in a [whirlpool] and could not get out, no matter howhard they tried,”23 as the flume of streamers stormed up the shaft high above theroof of the lab and blustered out from the apex, splitting lightning bolts fully 135feet in length. Kaboom! Zip! Zap! Kaboom! Looking to the sky, the wizard heldhis wireless torches up in triumph as they flickered in his thunder.The end came abruptly, the Springs plunged into darkness. He had shortedout the town.Fortunately “the powerhouse had a second, standby generator which wasstarted up soon after. Tesla was insistent that he be supplied with current fromthis reserve machine as soon as it was running, but his demand was refused.”Forced by El Paso Electric to fix the damaged generator himself, the inventorwas back on line in a day or two. “In the future, he was told, he would besupplied with current from a dynamo operated independently from the onesupplying the [El Paso Electric] company’s regular customers.”24By the end of 1899, Tesla was ready to return to New York. He wanted toget home for the holidays, to spend them with the Johnsons, but it would takehim a little longer to wind things down. In December, he sent for hisphotographer, Dickenson Alley, to capture his work in the best possible light. Byusing multiple exposures, Alley would create what is perhaps Tesla’s mostfamous photograph: that of the inventor sitting calmly reading a book, dwarfedby myriad tongues of explosive lightning. (This picture is a multiple exposure.Tesla, of course, was not sitting there at the time the oscillator was fired up; theelectricity would have killed him.)December 22, 1899Dear Mr. Tesla,We will keep your memory green Christmas day…How lovely itwould be if you should suddenly appear in our midst…to spend it with us…I sometimes wonder if you could make me glad again, just to see you,it is so long since gladness has been in my days. Everything that once washas disappeared. It is as if one had gone to sleep in soft moonlight and hadanchored out of place and out of time to find himself in the stone age,himself a stone.What does it all mean?…Sometimes I have a little sign of you through Robert by way of theoffice. I am hoping the New Year may bring you what you most desire andthat it may bring to us my dear friend.Faithfully yours,Katharine Johnson25 