46LOOSE ENDS (1931-43)Then there appeared the vision of a man from a strange, new world. A tall,thin man, whose eyes blazed with an unearthly light, entered the room soquietly that one was hardly aware of his presence. He bowed himself to hisseat…He beamed upon [Viereck and his wife] paternally. He greeted theguests with a kindly nod. Before he could be introduced, Tewson blurtedout, “Nikola Tesla!”ELMER GERTZ1The first-time ambassador Stanko Stoilkovic saw the celebrated Serb he wasstanding in front of the library with “two white pigeons on his arm…peckingseeds from his palm.” That was in 1918, and they met only briefly. A decadelater, Stoilkovic returned to America as an emissary of the Yugoslavianconsulate, and they became close friends for the next ten years. At the age ofninety, Stoilkovic would recall their visits.As with many other Serbs, Stoilkovic was unhappy about the split betweenTesla and Pupin, and like others before him, he tried to bring the two mentogether. Perceiving Pupin as ungrateful and deeply hurt by his association with“that donkey” Marconi, Tesla wanted nothing to do with his fellow Serb. Thefeeling, of course, was mutual.May 29, 1931My dear Mr. Swezey:I have not seen Mr. Tesla for nearly 20 years. In the beginning of theWorld War a difference of opinion created a split between Mr. Tesla andmyself. Neither he nor I have ever had, since that time, an opportunity tocure that split. In 1915 I offered through a mutual friend, to forgive andforget, but somehow the offer was not accepted. I regret, therefore, that…Icould not transmit to Mr. Tesla a letter of greeting or congratulation on hisseventy fifth birthday.Yours very sincerely,M. J. Pupin2In Dunlap’s classic text Radio’s 100 Men of Science, the author writes,“Pupin was a man of complete intellectual honesty; if he made an error in anequation on the blackboard, he would quickly admit the mistake, rub out theblunder and begin again.”3We have discussed in the past Pupin’s insistence that many of Tesla’sinventions were his own and how Pupin removed Tesla’s name from thediscussion of the history of the AC polyphase system and of the wireless in hisfour-hundred-page Pulitzer Prize-winning autobiography, which he haddedicated to “the rise of idealism as a qualified witness whose testimony hadcompetence and weight.”4 This tack also carried over to his legendary courses atColumbia University in which he camouflaged Tesla’s role in the etiology of avariety of inventions. “When Marconi came to New York, in 1927 to lecture…Dr. Pupin presided at the Institute of Radio Engineers…‘Marconi, we love you,’said Dr. Pupin; ‘we have come not so much to hear what you have to say, but tosee your boyish smile.’”5When Pupin became ill in 1935, he asked his secretary to go see Stoilkovicand “plead with him to get Tesla to visit Pupin in the hospital. He wanted tomake peace before he passed on.”Greeting Stoilkovic at the door in his favorite lounging outfit, a red robewith blue slippers, Tesla was taken aback by the request. He said he needed tosleep on the matter. The following day, he called his friend and said he would goif Stoilkovic would accompany him.In Pupin’s room there were a few doctors alongside his bed. The meetingwas most touching. Tesla approached the sick man and held his hand outand said, “How are you, my old friend?”Pupin was speechless from emotion. He cried and tears were comingdown his face. We all went out of the room and left the two men alone.Tesla was able to talk with Pupin eye to eye…In parting Tesla hadmentioned that they would meet again in the Science Clubrooms andconverse as before…Immediately after Tesla’s visit, Pupin passed away.Tesla attended the funeral.6Four years Tesla’s senior, Robert Underwood Johnson left for a tour ofEngland as a widower in 1927 and went again to France and Italy in 1928. Teslalent his friend $500 for the trip and $800 for the mortgage on his home. Upon hisreturn in 1929, Johnson joined Tesla and Richmond P. Hobson for a movie andan evening out on the town. Hobson, who was living with his wife, Grizelda, atthe Hotel Weylin on Fifty-fourth Street, also had a residence in the nation’scapital. Tesla was seeing his friends on a daily basis at this time; Johnson wasparticularly lonely, even though he had children and grandchildren whofrequently came to visit. The following year, now an octogenarian, the old poetset off again for Europe. On this trip he was hoping to interview Madame MarieCurie.Although Tesla was able to spend much of the 1930s with Johnson, Hobsonleft the city after only a short stay to purchase a cattle ranch with his son inVancouver. In April 1937, Tesla forwarded a new biography of his life that hadbeen translated from Serbo-Croatian into English to Johnson, who passed it on tothe editor in chief of the New York Times. At eighty-five years of age, Johnsonwas too weak to write a thank-you letter in his own hand, but he was able to signit “R. U. Johnson—Luka Filipov.” Both Johnson and Hobson died shortlythereafter; the famous lieutenant, barely sixty years old, was buried in ArlingtonCemetery. With the help of Agnes Holden, Robert’s daughter, Tesla sent a“gorgeous flowering azalea” to Grizelda, who appreciated greatly the kindthoughts of this dear friend.7Another character who stayed friendly with Tesla in the later years wasGeorge Sylvester Viereck, wunderkind poet. Viereck was a sensualist, cynic, andGerman propagandist during World War I and Nazi spokesman during the 1930sand World War II. Tesla’s link to Viereck extended back thirty years, to whenGilder and Johnson introduced such provocative Viereck poems as “TheHaunted House” in the Century in 1906, which was a poem about an enchantingpartner whose body was, alas, “a haunted place…When I did yield to passion’sswift demand,” Viereck penned, “one of your lovers touched me with his hand.And in the pang of amorous delight, I hear strange voices calling through thenight.”8Viereck, who was probably an illegitimate grandson of Wilhelm II,abdicated kaiser of Germany, was a multifaceted character and self-proclaimedgenius. Having interviewed many of the greatest minds of the epoch, theGerman-American intellectual had rattled the souls of such individuals asTheodore Roosevelt, George Bernard Shaw, occultist Aleister Crowley, H. G.Wells, Sigmund Freud, Albert Einstein, Kaiser Wilhelm, and Adolf Hitler. Aman in intimate contact with his irrational side, Viereck had passed many a daywith Sigmund Freud, explicating the great theoretician’s libido theory,influencing Freud’s writings, and applying the master’s psychology to modernlife. Freud, Viereck wrote, was “motivated not only by a desire to complete hisown world view, but by a belief that each individual represented a specialexpression of the world spirit.”9Not an anti-Semite, having, for instance, cowritten a series of books with aJewish professor, Viereck, a lifelong German apologist, was neverthelesssomehow able to rationalize the Nazi spiel, and he became an Americanspokesman for Adolf Hitler. Although Freud saw in this journalistic “lionhunter” a great mind, he said that Viereck suffered from “narcissism, haddelusions of persecution and a fixation on the Fatherland.” Once Viereck beganto rationalize Hitler’s rhetoric, Freud saw the journalist as “debasing himself”and would not correspond with him anymore.10During one of a series of interviews Viereck conducted with Tesla, herevealed that Tesla “was not a believer [in God] in the orthodox sense…To me,the universe is simply a great machine which never came into being and neverwill end. The human being is no exception to the natural order…What we callthe ‘soul’ or ‘spirit’ is nothing more than the sum of the functionings of the body.When this function ceases, the ‘soul’ or ‘spirit’ ceases likewise.” According toJohn O’Neill, this “meat machine” theory was really a ruse used to hide thenumerous mystical experiences that Tesla had.On his vision of the twenty-first century, Tesla foresaw a world in whicheugenics would be “universally established.” Perhaps spurred by Viereck’sdiscussion of the Aryan vision or the iniquitous American practice of sterilizingcriminals and some mentally retarded individuals, Tesla supported the idea of“sterilizing the unfit and deliberately guiding the mating instinct. A century fromnow,” the celibate concluded, “it will no more occur to a normal person to matewith a person eugenically unfit than to marry a habitual criminal.”On diet, the slim epicurean revealed that he had given up meat altogether.Tesla believed that in the future inexpensive and healthy food would be derivedfrom milk, honey, and wheat. As the 1930s progressed, the inventor wouldcontinue to live on an ever-receding subsistence diet, moving from meat to fishto vegetables and finally to warm milk, bread, and something he called “factoractus.” Eliminating solid food altogether, the thinning wizard had concocted ahealth potion made up of a dozen vegetables, including white leeks, cabbagehearts, flower of cauliflower, white turnips, and lettuce hearts.11 Although hestill maintained that he might live to 140, a psychoanalytic view of this regimenof meager victuals could only construe it as an anorexic, unconscious plan forselfextinguishment.“Long before the next century dawns,” the oracle predicted, “systematicreforestation and the scientific management of natural resources will have madean end of all devastating droughts, forest fires and floods. Long distancetransmission of electrical power by harnessing waterfalls will dispense with thenecessity of burning fuel; robots and thinking machines will replace humans, andthe trend of spending more on war and less on education will be reversed.” Amajor reason for this would be Tesla’s latest discovery of his defensive shieldbetween nations.“If no country can be attacked successfully, there can be no purpose in war.My discovery ends the menace of [war]. I do not say that there may not beseveral destructive wars before the world accepts my gift. I may not live to seeits acceptance.”12In the habit of meeting with Viereck and his family at their home onRiverside Drive on a somewhat regular basis, Tesla accepted an invitation toattend a dinner party. Present was Viereck’s son Peter. Today, as a Pulitzer Prize-winning poet and English professor, Peter remembers Tesla as almost an uncle.13Also present was the youthful Elmer Gertz, who, at the time, was preparing abiography of Viereck. A friend of Carl Sandburg and also biographer ofvoluptuary Frank Harris, Gertz would later come to defend such illustriousindividuals as Nathan Leopold (and Loeb), pornographic writer Henry Miller,and assassin Jack Ruby (in an appeal of the death sentence). At a spry eighty-five years of age, Gertz remembered the meeting, which took place fifty-sevenyears before, when he was twenty-nine.“In a communicative mood, [at the dinner party] Tesla told his life storyunostentatiously, simply, with quiet eloquence. He told of his platonic affairs ofthe heart…explained the inventions that have made the world his debtor…[and]told of his plans, of his credo, of his foibles. It was a tale of wonders, told withguileless simplicity.”Struck by the fact that they were in “the same house that had seen Einstein,Sinclair Lewis, and countless others,” Gertz noted that “Viereck wascomparatively silent much of the night, but he was subtly responsible for theintellectual thrills of the evening.”14Pressed for other details, Gertz revealed that “Tesla knew all of Viereck’spoems by heart.” Tesla also discussed his platonic affair with Sarah Bernhardt,whom he had met while in Paris at the 1889 exposition. Differing with O’Neill’soft-quoted suggestion that Tesla avoided her eyes when he picked up herhandkerchief, Gertz said that Tesla had met with her on several occasions,perhaps also in New York. So taken with her was he that “Tesla had saved andpreserved her scarf without ever washing it” and still had it to that day.15Viereck provides a fascinating link between Tesla and Sigmund Freud: self-denial and eros. Stoilkovic told a story of how he was invited to Tesla’s NewYorker apartment and a valet “brought in a bottle of wine in a dish of ice,” butTesla never allowed it to be opened. When this event was replayed anotherevening, Tesla revealed that he kept the bottle there to prove that he couldprevent himself from drinking it. A man of rigid habits, Tesla denied himselfcertain pleasures as a way to supposedly establish total control over himself.And yet Tesla was a complete slave to his idiosyncrasies and to a cauldron ofphobias.Going out of his way to avoid handshakes, displacing his amorousaffections onto birds, keeping hotel servants at a distance of at least three feet,throwing out collars and gloves after one use, Tesla had other rigid requirementsas well. The hotel was requested to keep one table permanently reserved forhimself. No one else was allowed to eat there. If a fly landed on the table, it hadto be reset and a new plate of food brought forth. When it came to moneymatters, Tesla also showed little ability to restrain himself, and as we have seen,he habitually refused to honor rent payments. From the Freudian point of view,Tesla was an anal-compulsive personality, fixated in the latent stage of sexualrepression, with a displacement of his energies into scientific endeavors. Bydenying his libido, his censor had converted his primal sexual energy into an oddmixture of prelogical behavior patterns that tended to diffuse, redirect, andsublimate the highly cathected complexes the inventor wished to deny. It appearsquite possible that Viereck strove to psychoanalyze Tesla, to have the inventordig deep into his childhood in an effort to release submerged events that mayhave blocked or redirected his life in neurotic fashion. Viereck, who was knownto partake of “opium tincture,” probably entered an altered state whenconversing with the ethereal prophet.16 Nearly eighty years old at the time,exceedingly frail and thin, Tesla wrote Viereck a long letter reviewing thetraumas of his childhood.It was a dismal night with rain falling in torrents. My brother, a youth ofeighteen and intellectual giant, had died. My mother came to my room, tookme in her arms and whispered, almost inaudibly, “Come and kiss [Dane].” Ipressed my mouth against the ice cold lips of my brother knowing only thatsomething dreadful had happened. My mother put me again to bed andlingering a little said with tears streaming, “God gave me one at midnightand at midnight took away the other one.”17Viereck not only wanted Tesla to reactivate the hidden complexesassociated with the death of Dane but also to reflect on the very process of howhis fertile mind gave birth to ideas. One can only guess as to whether or notViereck trod into the realm of Oedipus and Narcissus, dead-brother kissingrituals, and Tesla’s monastic life of quirks, self-denial, and affection displacedonto feathered friends.In 1937, on his eighty-first birthday, at a luncheon in his honor, Tesla was“bestowed” both the Order of the White Lion from the minister ofCzechoslovakia and the Grand Cordon of the White Eagle, the highest order ofYugoslavia, from Regent Prince Paul by order of King Peter. Belgrade also setup an endowment of $600 per month, which they paid to him for the rest of hisdays. Looking much like an eagle himself, with his long, hawk-shaped proboscisaccentuated by his extreme leanness, the skeletal inventor “followed his annualcustom [after the award ceremony] by playing host to a group of newspaper menat his Hotel New Yorker suite.” There, dressed in his finest tuxedo, the wizardread a prepared treatise outlining his latest inventions and plans for contactingnearby planets.18Just a few months later, in late autumn, while negotiating with emissariesfrom the war departments of Yugoslavia, Czechoslovakia, England, the SovietUnion, and the United States, Tesla was run down by a taxicab. Refusing to see adoctor, the inventor managed to limp home. He stayed in bed on and off for sixmonths. He had cracked three ribs. Thus, in May 1938, still in the process ofrecuperation, he declined an invitation to attend another award ceremony at theNational Institute of Immigrant Welfare in honor of him, Felix Frankfurter, ofHarvard Law School, and Giovanni Martinelli, of the Metropolitan Opera.Accepting the award in Tesla’s honor was Dr. Paul Radosavljevich,professor of pedagogy at New York University. Rado read a statement fromTesla which apparently verified the famous 1885 Edison story that Edison hadlaughed off the promised debt to Tesla of $50,000 for redesigning machinery.19In 1939, just as World War II was about to start, George Sylvester Viereckset off on a surreptitious journey to the Fatherland. There, amid the pageantry ofswastikas and the Gestapo, he met yet again with Adolf Hitler and received acommuniqué signed by the Führer in his own hand. The date was February 26,1939. Upon his return, Viereck continued his practice of preaching the Nazi linein a variety of publications, writing some articles under an assumed name,interpreting FDR as having a “messianic complex” and Hitler as “a dynamicgenius, and a poet of passion…first in war, first in peace, first in the hearts of hiscountry-men.” Viereck was arrested and indicted on two counts of seditiousconspiracy. It was quickly established that he was on the German payrollsupposedly as a journalist but obviously as a paid propagandist. Conceited andselfdeluded, the bewildered and obtuse philosopher was sent to jail, where hewrote poetry for the next few years.20 Just as references to Tesla were deletedfrom engineering texts, Viereck’s name was “dropped from many anthologies,and Who’s Who.”21 Thus, both individuals disappeared from history books butfor totally different reasons.As World War II began, Tesla was becoming more feeble, lapsing in andout of states of coherence. During one of his more lucid moments, he wrote(with the help of his nephew Sava Kosanovic) the foreword to Vice PresidentHenry Wallace’s address on “The Future of the Common Man” for the Serbo-Croatian edition. The essay not only portrays a prophet who envisions a betterworld in the future; it also betrays the conflict and humiliation he himselfsuffered in his dealings with the greedy industrialists who capitalized on hisinventions with little regard for his well-being, let alone the welfare of mankindas a whole: “Out of this war, the greatest since the beginning of history, a newworld must be born that would justify the sacrifices offered by humanity, wherethere will be no humiliation of the poor by the violence of the rich; where theproducts of intellect, science and art will serve society for the betterment andbeautification of life, and not the individuals for achieving wealth. This newworld shall be a world of free men and free nations, equal in dignity andrespect.”22The old man gazed out the window as his nimble fingers unconsciouslypreened the ruffled feathers of his beloved white pigeon with the brown-tippedwings. Although it was January, a lightning storm rumbled in the distance. “I’vedone better than that,” the wizard mumbled as the sun peeked through the cloudsto reveal the iridescent purples, violets, greens, and reds of the neck feathers ofanother of the more hearty birds that came to visit. Tesla thought backaffectionately to his days as a boy on the farm, rolling down the hill carefreewith Mačak, his pet cat. And then his mind swirled with thoughts of violentarguments with Morgan, his unfinished fifteen-story transmission tower, and hisfriend Mark Twain, who was now in financial trouble. Requesting funds fromKosanovic, Tesla handed the money to a messenger to deliver to Twain, givingas the address his old laboratory on South Fifth Avenue, a street that no longerexisted. Unable to locate the deceased writer, the boy returned to Tesla, but hisexplanation was ignored. The old man told the boy to keep the money if he couldnot deliver it.23Having neglected to pay the rent on his belongings held at ManhattanStorage, the wizard had managed somehow to mail out a check for $500 to aSerbian church fund-raising event held in Gary, Indiana.24 G. J. Weilage,manager of Manhattan Storage, threatened to put the lot up for auction. Theoutstanding bill was $297. Perhaps too disillusioned to care, Tesla ignored thelast warning, and Weilage made good on his promise, placing an announcementin the local papers. Noticing the advertisement, Jack O’Neill rushed to contactTesla’s nephew Sava Kasanovic, who was now the Yugoslavian ambassadorstationed in New York. Kasanovic covered the debt and continued to make thecarrying charge (fifteen dollars per month), saving this invaluable legacy fromtragic dismantlement.“One night,” Tesla wrote, “as I was lying in bed in the dark, solvingproblems as usual, [my beloved pigeon] flew through the open window andstood on my desk. As I looked at her I knew she wanted to tell me—she wasdying. And then, as I got her message, there came a light from her eyes—powerful beams of light. When that pigeon died, something went out of my life.I knew that my life’s work was finished.”25Lingering at the abyss throughout the beginning years of World War II,Tesla continued to lead his dual life, meeting with friends and dignitarieswhenever possible and lending out his secret papers to mysterious men. A fewmonths later, he was dead. The date was January 7, 1943; he was eighty-sixyears old.2000 Are Present at Tesla’s FuneralGreat in Science AttendThe President and I are deeply sorry to hear of the death of Mr. NikolaTesla. We are grateful for his contribution to science and industry and tothis country.Eleanor RooseveltThe funeral service was held in Serbian in the Cathedral of St. John theDivine. With the coffin open, the Sermon for the Dead was conducted by thevenerable Reverend Dushan Shoukletovich, rector of the Serb Orthodox Churchof St. Sava. Over the radio, New York mayor Fiorello La Guardia read a movingeulogy written by Croatian author Louis Adamić, as a long line of mourners filedpast. The list of honorary pallbearers included Dr. Ernest Alexanderson of GE,who gained his wealth and fame from inventing a powerful high-frequencytransmitter; Dr. Harvey Rentschler, director of the research laboratories ofWestinghouse; Edwin Armstrong, father of FM radio; Consul General D. M.Stanoyevitch of Yugoslavia; William Barton, curator of the Hayden Planetarium,where Tesla often went to meditate; and Gano Dunn, president of J. G. WhiteEngineering and Tesla’s assistant a half century before, during his paradigm-shifting experiments delivered just a few blocks away at Columbia University.26“We cannot know, but it may be that a long time from now, when patternsare changed, the critics will take a view of history,” Hugo Gernsback wrotepropitiously in his magazine. “They will bracket Tesla with Da Vinci, or with ourown Mr. Franklin…One thing is sure,” Gernsback concluded. “The world, as werun it today, did not appreciate his peculiar greatness.”Col. David Sarnoff, president of RCA, also took the soapbox in Tesla’sbehalf: “Nikola Tesla’s achievements in electrical science are monuments thatsymbolize America as a land of freedom and opportunity…His novel ideas ofgetting the ether in vibration put him on the frontier of wireless. Tesla’s mindwas a human dynamo that whirled to benefit mankind.”Edwin Armstrong, who was about to sue Sarnoff and RCA for infringinghis FM patents, helped place Tesla in the proper historical perspective when hesaid, “Who today can read a copy of The Inventions, Researches and Writings ofNikola Tesla, published before the turn-of-the-century, without being fascinatedby the beauty of the experiments described and struck with admiration forTesla’s extraordinary insight into the nature of the phenomena with which hewas dealing? Who now can realize the difficulties he must have had to overcomein those early days? But one can imagine the inspirational effect of the bookforty years ago on a boy about to decide to study the electrical art. Its effect wasboth profound and decisive.”27On September 25, 1943, just nine months after Tesla’s death, the BethlehemFairfield Shipyards near Baltimore launched the USS Nikola Tesla, a ten-thousand-ton Liberty ship. Sponsors at the ceremony included a number ofCroats, such as Louis Adamić and violinist Zlatko Balokovic, and also Serbs,such as Tesla’s nephews Sava Kosonavic and Nicholas Trbojevich.28The New York Sun editorialized:Mr. Tesla was eighty-six years old when he died. He died alone. He was aneccentric, whatever that means. A nonconformist, possibly. At any rate, hewould leave his experiments and go for a time to feed the silly andinconsequential pigeons in Herald Square. He delighted in talkingnonsense; or was it? Granting that he was a difficult man to deal with, andthat sometimes his predictions would affront the ordinary human’sintelligence, here, still, was an extraordinary man of genius. He must havebeen. He was seeing a glimpse into that confused and mysterious frontierwhich divides the known and the unknown…But today we do know thatTesla, the ostensibly foolish old gentleman at times was trying with superbintelligence to find the answers. His guesses were right so often that hewould be frightening. Probably we shall appreciate him better a few millionyears from now.29 