16FIRE AT THE LAB (1895)The destruction of Nikola Tesla’s workshop, with its wonderful contents, issomething more than a private calamity. It is a misfortune to the wholeworld. It is not any degree an exaggeration to say that the men living at thistime who are more important to the human race than this young gentlemancan be counted on the fingers of one hand; perhaps on the thumb of onehand.CHARLES DANA1It was “one fine Sunday afternoon in 1894,” as Tesla was strolling up FifthAvenue with twenty-five-year-old D. McFarlan Moore, a colleague of greatpromise in the field of fluorescent lighting, when the Serbian savant“deliberately stopped” and pensively proclaimed, “Moore, after we havesignalled from any point to any point on the earth, the next step will besignalling to other planets.”2Before the inventor could undertake such an enormous task, he first had toperfect wireless effects over long distances on the earth. One of his plans was tosend messages from his laboratory to receiving equipment which he was goingto place on a Hudson River steamboat.3 Unfortunately, on March 13, 1895,Tesla’s laboratory burned to the ground. The “whole floor collapsed andequipment dropped to [the] second floor.”4For one fleeting moment, the civilized world was in shock, for thedemolition of the maestro’s atelier was a tragedy of incalculable proportions.Fortunately, Tesla was not injured, for he was asleep in his hotel at the time.“Two tottering brick walls and the yawning jaws of a somber cavity aswim withblack water and oil were all that could be seen [that fateful] morning…of alaboratory which to all who had visited it was one of the most interesting spotson earth.”5This “coming great man,” Current Literature noted, “[who] lives his life, asin a dream, forgetful of the lapse of time, and living only for the future…[wasabout to] revolutionize the cost and economies of electric lighting, and place itwithin the reach of the humblest and poorest of people…To have all of…hisinnumerable marvels…swept away at one stroke is a calamity to the wholeworld as well as to himself.”6 Perhaps in part to help cheer Tesla up and “inhonor of the Serbian-American pioneer of electric communication, the Postal-Telegraph Union of Serbia caused a sensation by connecting a simultaneousconcert in Belgrade and Nis by telephone so that both audiences could hear it.”7“The Tesla laboratory was, in a sense, a private museum,” T. C. Martinwrote. “The owner kept in it many souvenirs of bygone toil and experiment.”After describing in detail its contents, Martin concluded: “Perhaps the mostpainful loss of all is the destruction of Mr. Tesla’s notes and papers. His memoryis all right, and flashes on any experiment of the past with the revealing power ofa search-light, but the time it will take for the inventor to recreate his ongoinginvestigations will also cost other experimenters years of sweat and pain…[Nevertheless,] while the ashes of his hopes lay hot…Tesla was at work againwith clenched determination.”8The strain was enormous, and Tesla steeled himself to fight off depression.One paper reported that he suffered a “physical collapse.”9To help keep his spirits up, Martin met with the inventor at a local cafe togive him more free copies of their book; he may have also given him money.10“Ere, it please your majesty,” the editor said with a bow, “your experiments havebeen repeated in Berlin under your name with the Emperor’s brother, PrinceHenry, assisting. If you did not get a daily bolster from me you would have arelapse into dullness as you do when you miss your daily dose of electricity.”The duo sat down to review Martin’s article on the burning of the lab so that amore accurate description of its lost contents could be enumerated.”Westinghouse was still in the midst of battling William Stanley of theWilliam Stanley Company and Elihu Thomson of GE in patent litigation, as eachwas continuing to produce AC induction motors illegally while at the same timeimplying that the invention was of their own design. Together, these twoconcerns outsold Westinghouse by 10,000 kilowatts for the period 1893-97.12According to some, their motors and generators were more efficient. Stanley,who continued to brazenly promulgate the sale of his polyphase system inadvertisements in the electrical journals, had by this time increased his operationfrom fifteen men to a few hundred, and GE was more than twice that size.Embroiled in the numerous patent disputes, the Westinghouse Companydecided to take out a full-page advertisement which proclaimed:Westinghouse Electric & Manufacturing Companysole owners of theTesla Polyphase SystemThe display continued: “The novelty of Mr. Tesla’s inventions wasrecognized by Prof. Elihu Thomson, who said in discussing the Tesla inventionsbefore the American Institute of Electrical Engineers in 1888: ‘I have certainlybeen very much interested in the description given by Mr. Tesla of his new andadmirable little motor. I have, as probably you may be aware, worked insomewhat similar directions and towards similar ends. The trials which I havemade have been by the use of a single alternating current circuit, not a doublealternating circuit.’”13Although GE intimated that the Tesla motor was dangerous because it gaveoff too many sparks, there is no evidence that the fire in Tesla’s lab was causedby his equipment. It had started in the floor below, in a dry-cleaningestablishment. Some investigators intimated that a careless night watchman mayhave been responsible, perhaps by smoking near oily rags.14Estimates of the uninsured loss ranged as high as a million dollars, but theactual damage was probably closer to $250,000. O’Neill suggests that Adamscame to the rescue by advancing $40,000 in return for a piece of the company.15However, Adams was already a partner, and thus, he, Tesla, and the otherpartners all suffered losses. Still, there is some evidence that Adams did providefurther assistance at this time.16 Royalties from Europe and continuing modestannual payments from the Westinghouse Company helped offset the misfortune,but clearly Tesla now needed to raise additional revenue in order to open up anew place.In particular, Tesla received a number of letters from friendly members ofthe Westinghouse Company. Ernest Heinreich, an engineer and author, wrote, “Ihasten to offer you my sincere regret,” Not knowing the situation, he continued,“I trust that you were well insured and will be able very soon to find anothersuitable location to carry on your work.”17Tesla was uninsured, but he had generated too much momentum to slow hisprogress. Within a few days, he was out scouting new locations. In the interim,he turned to the one lab where he knew vital equipment would be on hand. Forthe next few weeks, Nikola Tesla rolled up his sleeves at Tom Edison’sworkshop at Llewellyn Park, New Jersey, a laboratory that “shuts out everybodywho has not been given a pass by Mr. Edison himself, or one of his assistants.”18Simultaneously, he contacted Albert Schmid for more equipment, scoffing, aswas his nature, at any expense which might be incurred. “I shall rely, as to theprice, entirely on the fairness of the Westinghouse Co.,” Tesla said, concluding:“I believe that there are gentleman in that company who believe in ahereafter.”19Vice president and general manager Samuel Bannister shipped, as a gift,some early Tesla models which had been saved from the World’s Fair and wroteof his regret concerning “your misfortune…I am glad to know that you took offyour coat to work to get everything back into shape as soon as possible.”20However, this was little consolation, as the Westinghouse Company would beginto bill Tesla for the cost of machinery lost in the fire which was on loan; theyalso charged him for new equipment.In April, partly in response to Brisbane’s announcement that Tesla was“greater even than Edison,”21 the rivalry between the two men, at least in thepress, intensified. “Who Is King, Edison or Tesla?” the Troy Press of New Yorkinquired.22 Joseph Jefferson, speaking in Boston, left no doubt about hisposition. “Edison has been deposed,” the thespian proclaimed, “and Tesla hasbeen coronated [new potentate].”23The “Twin Wizards of Electricity” met in May in Philadelphia, along withAlexander Graham Bell, at the National Electrical Exposition. For the first timeever, Tesla’s AC was transmitted the grand distance of five hundred miles. Teslawas disappointed that no appreciable amount of power was transported along theexisting telephone lines for fear, by the underwriters, that damage or a fire couldresult. Nevertheless, the experiment was a complete success and dwarfed theachievements of the old hundred-mile Lauffen-Frankfurt record.“The most amazing thing at this exposition,” Edison remarked, “is thedemonstration of the ability to deliver here an electric current generated atNiagara Falls. To my mind it solves one of the most important questionsassociated with electrical development.” Bell concurred, stating, “This longdistance transmission of electric power was the most important discovery ofelectric science that had been made for many years.”“[Bell] with Edison, looking into the future, realized that by means of thisdiscovery cities and towns remote from the places of electrical generation wouldbe able to obtain the services of this agent…with great economy…[and with] apractical convenience far superior than is now possible.”Tesla, “who solved the problem,” stated, “I am now convinced beyond anyquestion that it is possible to transmit electricity…by water power…tocommercial advantage over a distance of 500 miles at half the cost of generationby steam [or coal]…I am willing to stake my reputation and my life upon thisdeclaration.”24No record exists of what was said between Tesla and Edison on thisoccasion, but it seems likely that each was privately amused by the rivalryplayed out in the press, that Tesla thanked Edison for the temporary use of hislaboratory, and that Edison expressed his condolences for the loss of Tesla’sworkplace.GE was now losing the propaganda campaign on all fronts. Even Edisonwas admitting Tesla’s accomplishment. Rumors began to circulate that anagreement with Westinghouse was reached on the pooling of patents, but a totalsolution was a number of years away, partly because GE had so many divisionsthat were pirating the apparatus, and partly because Westinghouse saw noimmediate advantage in making a deal.25 After one significant loss in the courts,the headquarters of GE was forced to abandon its position; but they wouldcontinue to bargain because their financiers controlled the Niagara enterprise.Moreover, the size of that venture prevented Westinghouse from tackling italone. T. C. Martin, however, naively thought that a complete reconciliation andvindication for Tesla was at hand. “This would [now] mean theacknowledgement of supremacy of your polyphase patents,” he wrote. “Isuppose each will license the other.”26It does not appear that Tesla enlightened him on the finality of the deal hehad signed, because one full year later, the editor discussed the subject again. “Icannot tell you how pleased I am about the news of the recognition of yourpatents by G.E. Company, and I hasten to congratulate you…[This] ought to fillyour pockets with your own money,” Martin concluded.27At least from a historical perspective, vindication was at hand, for now itwas accepted even by the opposition that Tesla’s work alone was makingpossible the “yoking into service of old Niagara herself”;28 but the inventorwould never reap any financial gains other than those he had already settled for.“This discovery forms the basis,” Review of Reviews announced, “of theNiagara Company’s attempt to utilize that enormous power which for centurieshas been running to waste, and thus to turn machinery in towns and cities so faraway as Buffalo, 20 miles distant, and perhaps New York and Chicago.” Andthen the magazine dropped the bombshell. “And it underlies the hardly less boldventure of the Westinghouse and Baldwin companies to drive a through railwayexpress by electricity. It is not too much to say that the Tesla motor is behind allthe large attempts at power transmission by electricity which are being madethroughout the country, not only in the fields of manufacture and transportation,but also in mining, irrigation and farming.”29August, 7, 1895My dear Mr. Westinghouse,I learn from the journals of your friendly agreement with the BaldwinLocomotive works…The news of your consolidation has been an agreeablesurprise. Such a splendid union of means and abilities cannot fail to be ofinterest to both parties concerned.Yours very truly,N. TeslaTesla was in need of new capital. The Westinghouse Corporation wasbilling him for lost equipment and for new machines ordered, and yet they hadjust gained two gargantuan contracts in two entirely separate fields, both basedon his creation. Surely the corporation would overlook a few thousand dollarsowed, especially when it was Tesla’s personality that played a key role ingathering such principals of the Niagara Company as Edward Dean Adams, JohnJacob Astor, and William Birch Rankine into the fold.It also occurred to the inventor that use of his induction motor in an entirelynovel field such as railway transportation was, in a sense, outside the originalintent of their contract. Should not he also benefit from such a fortuitous turn ofevents? Tesla would continue, somewhat naively, to bring new potential clientsto Pittsburgh, almost as if he were their private ambassador, but he would neverreceive additional compensation for the service. 