6INDUCTION AT PITTSBURGH (1889)[My] first impression [was that of a man with] tremendous potential energyof [which]…only part had taken kinetic form. But even to a superficialobserver, the latent force was manifest. A powerful frame, wellproportioned, with every joint in working order, an eye as clear as crystal, aquick and springy step—he presented a rare example of health and strength.Like a lion in a forest, he breathed deep and with delight the smoky air ofhis factories.NIKOLA TESLA ON GEORGE WESTINGHOUSE1Although George Westinghouse had made his fortune with the invention of airbrakes for trains, he was not just a railroad man. He was a descendant of thearistocratic Russian von Wistinghousen family; his father was also an inventor,with six fundamental patents of farming machinery. With his brother Henry (wholater became his partner), George early on was introduced to such devices as thebattery and the sparking leyden jar (a glass jar lined with foil and used forstoring an electric charge). Having been a cavalry boy and, later, a navy engineerduring the Civil War, George Westinghouse had experience and vision; he knewthat the future was in electricity.In late July 1888, Tesla took a train to Pittsburgh to meet with GeorgeWestinghouse and finalize the sale of his patents. It may have been the middle ofsummer, but oddly, the inventor welcomed the intense heat. He looked forwardto the meeting.Considerable in stature, with a walrus-sized mustache, Chester A. Arthursideburns, and a remarkable wife of equal proportion who wore a bustle thatjutted three feet to the rear, Westinghouse greeted the lanky inventor. A garrulousman, George Westinghouse subsumed those around him with his geniality andunbounded confidence. He took Tesla to his home and then on a tour of theplant. With nearly four hundred employees, Westinghouse’s electric companywas mainly producing “alternators, transformers and accessories for equippingcentral stations for supplying incandescent lighting.”2 Barrel-chested andphysically expansive, Westinghouse counterbalanced in appearance the spindle-legged foreigner, who walked as “straight as an arrow, [with his] head erect…butwith a preoccupied air as if new combinations were crystallizing in his brain.”3Tesla said:Though past forty then, [Westinghouse] still had the enthusiasm of youth.Always smiling, affable and polite, he stood in marked contrast to the roughand ready men I met. Not one word which would have been objectionable,not a gesture which might have offended—one could imagine him asmoving in the atmosphere of a court, so perfect was his bearing in mannerand speech. And yet no fiercer adversary than Westinghouse could havebeen found when he was aroused. An athlete in ordinary life, he wastransformed into a giant when confronted with difficulties which seemedunsurmountable. He enjoyed the struggle and never lost confidence. Whenothers would give up in despair he triumphed.4Known for his foresight and courage, Westinghouse had alreadyquadrupled the sales of his electric company, from $800,000 in 1887 to over $3million in 1888, even though he was in the midst of expensive legal andpropaganda battles with Edison.5 Extraordinary in his ability to generateenthusiasm in his workers and a decisive man of action, he immediately gainedthe respect of those he met, particularly Nikola Tesla.Westinghouse offered Tesla $5,000 in cash for a sixty-day option, $10,000at the end of the option if they elected to purchase the patents, three notes of$20,000 at six-month intervals, $2.50 per watt in royalties, and two hundredshares of stock in the Westinghouse Company. Minimum payment on theroyalties was calculated at “$5,000 for the first year, $10,000 for the second year,and $15,000 for each succeeding year thereafter during the life of the patents.”6Westinghouse also agreed to pay for any legal expenses in litigation on priorityissues, but a clause for lowering payments was added should any suits be lost.Calculated out, for fifteen years, this figure, minus the stock, came to $75,000 ininitial outlays and $180,000 in royalty payments, or approximately $255,000.7Tesla owned four-ninths of his company, the balance shared by Peck andBrown, presumably three-ninths to the former partner and two ninths to thelatter.8 Concerning total amounts paid out by Westinghouse, Tesla also referredto European patents, especially in England and Germany.9 Thus, it is hard todetermine exactly how much Tesla received for his forty patents. Westinghousewas not only getting a simple induction motor but also a variety of synchronousand load-dependent motors as well as armatures, turbines, regulators, anddynamos. Tesla may have sold additional inventions later on in separateagreements; the value of his stock holding is also unclear.A decade later, Tesla wrote to another financier, John Jacob Astor, that “Mr.Westinghouse agreed to pay for my rotating field patents about $500,000, and,despite…hard times, he has lived up to every cent of his obligation.”10 SinceTesla was trying to raise money from Astor, he may have exaggerated the sum.Two years earlier, Electrical Review noted that the Westinghouse annual reportlisted the purchase of the patents at $216,000,11 which is a figure thatcorresponds roughly to the Byllesby memorandum above, minus a few years’worth of royalty payments. If this was the case, then Tesla probably received forhimself about half that figure, or $100,000, the entire amount paid ininstallments during the years 1888-97.12During the negotiations, Tesla agreed to move to Pittsburgh to help develophis motor. It is quite possible that he received no salary for his stay there, for hehad a peculiar “principle, ever since I devoted myself to scientific laboratoryresearch, never to accept fees or compensations for professional services.”13Tesla had been paid for his patents and was receiving royalties (or paymentsagainst royalties), so there was an income. Further evidence that no additionaldaily or weekly compensation was received is implied in a signed agreement byGeorge Westinghouse, dated July 27, 1889, substantiating that Tesla worked inPittsburgh for one year and that during that time he was paid with “one hundredand fifty (150) shares of Capital Stock.” In return, Tesla promised to assign anypatents to the Westinghouse Company which were directly related to thedevelopment of his induction motor patents. Other compensation was receivedfrom Westinghouse, however, for other contributions. For instance, when Tesladiscovered that Bessemer steel created a vastly superior transformer than onesmade out of soft iron, Tesla was paid approximately $10,000 for the idea.14Tesla gave up his garden apartment in New York and moved into one ofseveral hotels in Pittsburgh, including the Metropolitan, the Duquesne, and theAnderson.15 Hotel living would become a lifestyle which he never departedfrom.His talk, just two months old, had already catapulted him to fame. “Aboutthe middle of August 1888 in the Westinghouse testing room at Pittsburgh,”Charles Scott, his assistant to be, remembered: “I had just come with thecompany and was assistant to E. Spooner who was running the dynamos testingroom at night. He called me and said, ‘There comes Tesla.’“I had heard of Tesla,” Scott continued, having “read [Tesla’s] paper on thepolyphase induction motor which my former college professor had pronouncedas a complete solution of the motor problem. And now I was to see Teslahimself.”Fair-haired, with round, rimless glasses, Scott had only learned “that therewas such a thing as alternating current” the summer before, in 1887. “I had…graduated from college two years earlier, and I wondered why I had not heard ofsuch things from my professors.” His only introduction was an Electrical Worldarticle by William Stanley, which was “a fascinating…key to many mysteries.”16Now, a year later, he was to meet Nikola Tesla, the man who so elegantly solvedall the puzzles proposed by Stanley. “There he came, marching down the aislewith head and shoulders erect and with a twinkle in his eye. It was a greatmoment for me.”17Scott, who later became an engineering professor at Yale University, was“Tesla’s wireman…in preparing and making tests. It was a splendid opportunityfor a beginner, this coming in contact with a man of such eminence, rich in ideas,kindly and friendly in disposition. Tesla’s fertile imagination often constructedair castles which seemed prodigious. But, I doubt whether ever his extravagantexpectations for the toy motor of those days measured up to actual realization…for the polyphase system which it inaugurated…exceed[ed] the wildest dreamsof the early day[s].”18Scott was not only Tesla’s assistant, as time went on and against the opinionof many colleagues, he became a champion of Tesla’s cause, a bearer of thetruth, that is, that Tesla was the inventor of the induction motor. Another staunchsupporter was Swiss immigrant Albert Schmid, coauthor of two AC patents withTesla. Even though Westinghouse himself was also an ally, there was a bevy ofother workers who tried seriously to strip Tesla of the crown. Major adversariesof the early period included Oliver Shallenberger, inventor of the AC meter, andhis helpmate Lewis B. Stillwell, inventor of the Stillwell booster, which operatedsomewhat like the Tesla coil. At a later period, the key antagonist was AndrewW. Robertson, Westinghouse’s chief executive officer.Yet another opponent was William Stanley, the first American to have eversuccessfully instituted an AC system in the country. Stanley had split off fromthe Westinghouse Corporation (circa 1892-93) in order to sell his own polyphasemotors, which were clear patent infringements on the Tesla system. This positionwas supported by the courts a few years later, and Stanley was forced topurchase the Tesla motors from Westinghouse.19To fathom the depth of hostility that existed within the Westinghouse campagainst Tesla, one need only read Lewis B. Stillwell’s chapter on the history ofalternating current, written forty years after the fact in a text entitled GeorgeWestinghouse Commemoration. Edited by Charles Scott, the book was widelydistributed by the corporation and reissued in 1985. In the introduction toStillwell’s chapter it is recountedhow Westinghouse brought the Gaulard-Gibbs system to America, how itwas modified, and then given practical demonstrations by Stanley…andwhat has happened since.In 1888 came Shallenberger’s brilliant invention of the inductionmeter. In the same year Nikola Tesla was granted his United States patentscovering the polyphase motor and system. Westinghouse promptly securedthe American rights. Tesla came to Pittsburgh to develop his motor. Hemade vain attempts to adapt it to the existing single phase, 133-cyclecircuits…The obvious advantages [emphasis added] of direct connection ofengines and generators called for a lower frequency…Two were selected asstandard, namely 60 cycles for general use and 30 cycles for conversioninto direct current.20If we analyze the structure of this Stillwell quote, we note that although thetopic sentence refers to Shallenberger, the entire paragraph is about Tesla. Theword brilliant is used to describe an accidental discovery that a spring reacted toalternating currents21 when no adjective is used to describe the inventor of anentire power system!Tesla refers to the same situation in his autobiography: “My system wasbased on the use of low frequency currents and the Westinghouse experts hadadopted 133 cycles with the object of securing advantages in transformation[because their Gaulard-Gibbs system operated at that frequency]. They did notwant to depart from the standard form of apparatus and my efforts had to beconcentrated upon adapting the motor to their conditions.”22With 120 power plants set up at 133 cycles per second, one can understandthe predicament Tesla was placed in. Since Shallenberger’s meter wascompatible with the prevailing 133-cycle single circuit, it appeared logical thatTesla’s polyphase motor could be made compatible as well.In December 1888, Edison’s propaganda battle against Westinghousepeaked when Edison began to allow H. P. Brown (who was not an Edisonemployee) to come to his Menlo Park laboratory in order to electrocute variousanimals with AC. A few months earlier, Brown had experimented inelectrocuting animals at the School of Mines, a division of Columbia University,in New York City. Brown, an electrical engineer who lived on Fifty-fourthStreet, had become upset over the many accidental deaths of his colleagues. Hehad collected a list of over eighty casualties, and although many of the men diedbecause of DC, Brown decided that AC was the real culprit. Within two years,Brown began to manufacture electric chairs for various prisons which he sold for$1,600. He also planned to get paid to be the executioner. During the summer of1888 the New York Times reported that he “tortured and electrocuted a dog…First try[ing] continuous currents at a force of 300 volts…when the shock camethe dog yelped…At 700 volts he broke his muzzle and nearly freed himself. Hewas tied again. At 1,000 his body contorted in pain…‘We will have less troublewhen we try alternating current,’ Mr. Brown said. It was proposed that he put thedog out of its misery at once. This was done on an alternating current of 300volts killing the beast.”23A number of cities had adopted electrocution to rid the streets of unwantedcanines, but the state of New York went a step further and set up a commissionin 1886 “to report…on the most humane method of capital punishment.”24Under the auspices of the Medico-Legal Society of New York, Brown arose aschief spokesman.William Kemmler, a hooligan who had axed his mistress to death, becamethe test case for the use of electricity as a means of capital punishment.Ostensibly, because the Westinghouse motors could produce the moredeadly frequency, Brown surreptitiously purchased some working models inorder to continue his gruesome experiments. Naturally, Westinghouse was upsetover the devastating publicity. He and Tesla faced the possibility that the newAC polyphase system might never succeed in competition with existing AC andDC technologies, as both former systems required much lower voltages.As Brown prepared to experiment with larger animals in order to assure thecommission that electricity could kill criminals in a “humane” way, the Kemmlertrial proceeded to question various electrical experts on the use of theWestinghouse currents for the electric chair.Edison saw the controversy as a slick way to capitalize on the campaignagainst Westinghouse and the new Tesla technology. “Edison’s scheme forelectrical execution of criminals is the best so far presented. He proposes tomanacle the wrists, with chain connections, place…the culprit’s hands in a jar ofwater diluted with caustic potash and connected therein…to a thousand volts ofalternating current…place the black cap on the condemned, and at a proper timeclose the circuit. The shock passes through both arms, the heart and the base ofthe brain, and death is instantaneous and painless.”25Able to fuel his vendetta, Edison provided access to his famous laboratoryfor Brown to “Westinghouse” twenty-four dogs, which he purchased from thelocal children at twenty-five cents apiece. Edison also “Westinghoused” twocalves and a horse!26Perturbed, George Westinghouse wrote a letter of appeal to the New YorkTimes which stated that AC was no more dangerous than DC, since people havebeen shocked and injured by DC as well.27 Westinghouse assured the public ofthe safety of his system; so Brown, also in the Times, challenged Westinghouse afew days later “to meet me in the presence of the competent electrical expertsand take through his body the alternating current while I take through mine acontinuous current. The A.C. must have not less than 300 alternations persecond.”28On July 23, 1889, Edison was questioned under oath by Kemmler’sattorney, W. Bourke Cockran, an Irish immigrant schooled in France, in hissecond term in the House of Representatives. Having gained a reputation locallyfor fighting Tammany Hall, Cockran had also achieved national recognition asthe “Boy Orator” for taking on William Jennings Bryan’s presidential opponent,William McKinley in well-covered debates. Now he set his sights on tackling theWizard of Menlo Park.29QUESTION: Has Harold P. Brown any connection with yourself or theEdison Company?EDISON: Not that I know of…QUESTION: What would happen in case Kemmler should be kept on thechair several minutes with the current working on him?…Would he becarbonized?EDISON: No. He would be mummyized…QUESTION: This is your belief, not from knowledge?EDISON: From belief. I never killed anybody…“Finally, Mr. Cockran alluded to the rivalry between the Edison and theWestinghouse Companies and asked Mr. Edison if he loved Mr. Westinghouse asa brother. There was more than usual stillness, followed by Edison’s answer: ‘Ithink Mr. Westinghouse is a very able man.’…Mr. Cockran gave the ‘wizard’ alight from his cigar stump he had been chewing and dismissed him.”30It would be another full year before the actual execution took place, butpublic opinion continued to run against the dangerous Westinghouse current.Although Edison did not author the electric-chair ideas, he did everything hecould to help the cause, providing his staff, especially the ingenious A. E.Kennelly, later a professor at Harvard, to aid Brown; in addition, he lent hisname.Outcries began to appear in various periodicals concerning the “electricalexecutioners.” For example, the following editorial was published in a numberof the papers and journals: “It is hard to conceive of a more horrible experimentthan that which will be made on Kemmler…In a secret place, he will becompelled to go through a process of mental and moral, if not also, bodilytorture and nobody can tell how long it will last.”31This ominous passage actually was not severe enough, for the execution ofKemmler became a nightmare. The job was completely bungled when, afterelectrocution, “to the horror of all present, the chest began to heave, foam issuedfrom the mouth, and the man gave every evidence of reviving.”32The execution was likened to the work of barbarians and torturers and toscenes “worthy of the darkest chambers of the Inquisition of the 16th Century.”One eyewitness who was completely disgusted was Dr. Jenkins, who told theNew York Times, “I would rather see ten hangings than one such execution asthis.” Top electricians were also interviewed.“I do not care to talk about it,” Westinghouse said. “It was a brutal affair.They could have done better with an axe.”Even Edison was affected. “I have merely glanced over an account ofKemmler’s death,” he said, “and it is not pleasant reading…One mistake in myopinion was in leaving everything to the doctors…In the first place the hair onKemmler’s head was non-conductive. Then the top of the head I do not believe agood place to give a shock…The better way is to place the hands in ajar ofwater…and to let the current be turned on there…I think when the next man isplaced in the chair to suffer the death penalty that death will be accomplishedinstantly and without the scenes at Auburn today.”33Although Westinghouse tried to distance himself from the nefarious deeds,his company still suffered greater damage than Edison’s from a publicitystandpoint because it was AC that was used to electrocute Kemmler. Masshysteria threatened to overpower the attempt to institute the new Tesla ACinvention, let alone the prevailing Gaulard-Gibbs AC system.Tesla realized that eventually the company would have to come around tothe lower frequencies if they wanted to use his creation, but to his shock, “in1890, the induction motor work was abandoned.”34Westinghouse let it be known that his hands were tied, that his backerswould not continue throwing tens of thousands of dollars away on futileresearch. They had given Tesla a fair chance to alter his equipment to satisfy theneeds of the company. It seemed folly to destroy all prevailing equipment tosatisfy the untried requirements of this new technology. Furthermore, they wereagainst the idea of paying royalties should the motor eventually prove profitable.Enough was enough.In a quandary, Tesla negotiated with Westinghouse a compromise solution.He would abandon the royalty clause of the contract if Westinghouse promisedto commit his workers once again to the invention.Westinghouse was in a corner. He knew that he had to curtail all work onthe motor at this time to satisfy the tide of hostility that was rising against Tesla.He also realized that the invention was too important, and he believed thateventually a solution would be found. No one knows for sure exactly whathappened, but it appears that Westinghouse made a tacit commitment to Teslathat he would get the company to resume work on the motor if Tesla removedthe $2.50-per-watt royalty clause in the contract. If the motor came on themarket and the polyphase system was adopted, the yearly figures cited above, aspayments against royalties (worth approximately $255,000), would be honoredinstead.Tesla was aware of the historical importance of his invention. He realizedthat it would alter the world beneficially in measurable ways. His motor, forinstance, would provide an inexpensive replacement for potentially hundreds ofthousands of hours of manual labor. At the same time, his creation would carvehis name deep into the history books, alongside such heroes as Archimedes andFaraday. Moreover, he knew that his system was the most efficient, that it wasfundamental, and that, if adopted, it would prevail. He also wanted very much toresume his preferred path of pioneer inventor.Tesla was not counting out debits and credits on a balance sheet; rather, heviewed his partnership with Westinghouse in a more flexible way. He was alsonegotiating in good faith and assumed that if he lightened the potential financialburden, the company would somehow reciprocate. By offering goodwill, he washoping to reap what he had sown. Speaking of Westinghouse many years later,Tesla said: “George Westinghouse was, in my opinion, the only man on theglobe who could take my alternating current system under the circumstancesthen existing and win the battle against prejudice and money power. He was apioneer of imposing stature and one of the world’s noblemen.”35This, however, was a public statement; his private feelings were morecomplex. It is clear from reading through decades of letters to the corporationthat Tesla maintained a close relationship with Westinghouse. Yet often therewere undercurrents of resentment due mainly to lack of appreciation by theWestinghouse concern of Tesla’s sacrifice and continuing contribution to thecompany. Tesla was also upset because the full scope of his patents becamesimplified and implications arose to suggest that he merely invented an inductionmotor and not an entire power system.Finally, after nearly two years of inactivity, the Westinghouse peopleresumed their efforts to make the Tesla motor practicable. In 1891, BenjaminLamme, a portly, easygoing, but studious youngster, began to reexamine Tesla’spatents and Tesla and Scott’s experimental motors. After conversing with Teslain New York and talking over the matter with Scott, Lamme approached hisoverseers with a plan to resume work on the motor.Lamme realized that Tesla had “exhausted all the possibilities” of trying toadapt his motor to the higher frequencies and that he was forced to “return to[the] low frequencies…insist[ing] on the superiority of his polyphase system.”36This idea, as stated above, was rejected—most likely by Shallenberger andStillwell. Lamme, as the junior engineer, had to proceed carefully. With Scott’said, he “finally obtained permission” to take up the work on his own, althoughthere is little doubt that a number of officials opposed the idea. “By this time, the60-cycle system was coming in quite rapidly,” Lamme said, so he suggested thisfrequency to the staff. Shallenberger “lost his temper and talked some plain-language to me.” No doubt he said that there would be no possible way that theywould utilize the lower frequencies. “This looked pretty serious to me, who as amere boy in the test room, had got into a row with a chief technical authority ofthe company. I explained my situation to Mr. Schmid who simply laughed aboutit…However, somewhat to my surprise, Mr. Shallenberger always took my part,thereafter…This, of course, gave me a larger idea of the man himself; and I havealways looked back with the greatest pleasure to my acquaintanceship with sucha man.”What happened, most likely, is that Schmid, along with Scott, went behindthe scenes and explained to Shallenberger that here was their opportunity tofinally make use of the motor without giving any more credit to Tesla. Theywould simply let it be known that a new and brilliant engineer working at thecompany had “discovered” the efficiencies of lower frequencies, and so thecredit would go to Lamme. No wonder Schmid laughed about it. With a way out,Shallenberger reversed himself and patted Lamme on the back, Lammesomewhat naively concluding that he built “the first induction motor…whichbears any close example to the modern type…I [also]…designed the greatgenerators for Niagara which were without precedent. They were marvels ofengineering achievement.”37 Having rediscovered what Tesla had suggested allalong, Lamme often made it seem as though he were the originator of the idea.Uneducated readers, left with incomplete source materials, of which thereare many, were forced to conclude that when it comes to the AC polyphasesystem, it was “that versatile genius B. G. Lamme, [who was the]…pillar of theWestinghouse company” who made it possible.38 But people who read Scottcarefully knew the truth: “Strenuous efforts to adapt the Tesla motor to [theprevailing] circuit were in vain. The little motor insisted in getting what itwanted, and the mountain came to Mohamet.”39 