10THE ROYAL SOCIETY (1892)The lecture given by Mr. Tesla…will live long in the imagination of everyperson…that heard him, opening as it did, to many of them, for the firsttime, apparently limitless possibilities in the applications and control ofelectricity. Seldom has there been such a gathering of all the foremostelectrical authorities of the day, on the tiptoe of expectation.ELECTRICAL REVIEW1The rapid progress in the field of electromagnetic radiation, opened up by thefindings of Sir William Crookes, Sir Oliver Lodge, and especially Hertz, inducedin Tesla a mania to complete as many patents as he could. Summoning hisprodigious powers of self-denial, depriving himself of sleep, and exerting thefull potential of his will, Tesla unfurled his creations as fast as he could. It was atthis time that the grand vision arose of wireless transmission of electrical power,and he simply abhorred the thought that someone else should invent it before hecould. Thus, he began to build ever more powerful coils while at the same timecontinuing his numerous experiments in high-intensity lighting, ozoneproduction, converting AC to DC, and wireless communication.In February 1891, Tesla applied for the first of three portentous patents forthe conversion and distribution of electrical energy.2 This invention, which wasfinalized after his return from Europe, was the mechanical oscillator, acompletely unique, multipurpose device. Unlike the Hertz spark-gap apparatus,which produced slow, rhythmic discharges, the Tesla oscillator supplied asmooth, continuous current which could not only generate hundreds ofthousands, or even millions, of volts but could also be tuned to specificfrequencies. Over his lifetime, Tesla said, “I developed not less than fifty typesof these transformers…each complete in every detail.”3The device was, in essence, a small engine, with almost no moving parts.The “work-performing piston was not connected with anything else but wasperfectly free to vibrate at an enormous rate. In this machine,” Tesla proclaimed,“I succeeded in doing away with all packings, valves and lubrication [althoughthe utilization of oil was intrinsic to its design.]…By combining this engine witha dynamo…I produced a highly efficient generator…[which propagated] anunvarying rate of oscillation.”4 Since the current was so “absolutely steady anduniform…one could keep the time of day with the machine.”5 In fact, theinventor also used the oscillator as a clock.In June 1891, Tesla came upon an article by Prof. J. J. Thomson. ThisBritish scientist, whose work would lead him to a Nobel Prize as the discovererof the electron, was in the process of directing electrical beams from cathode-raytubes so as to study the structure of electromagnetic energy. These investigationsprompted a vigorous exchange in the electrical journals between these two men6and inspired Tesla to “return with renewed zeal to my own experiments. Soonmy efforts were centered upon producing in a small space the most intenseinductive action.”7 Tesla would describe these exciting results to Thomson inperson, six months later, during the lectures he gave in London.That same year, Tesla took out two more patents on AC motors which heowed Westinghouse; he also took out a patent on an electrical meter and acondenser, and two on incandescent lighting.On January 8, 1892, T. C. Martin, Josh Wetzler, and George Sheep sentTesla an invitation “to dine, and spend an evening…before your journey toEurope.”8 Tesla’s glass blower, David Hiergesell, provided all of the tubesnecessary for the trip. Sailing on the sixteenth, Tesla arrived in London on thetwenty-sixth. Sir William Preece provided a horse and carriage for the younginventor and invited Tesla to stay at his house.9 Tesla’s plan was to speak beforethe Institution of Electrical Engineers a week later “and leave immediately forParis” to lecture before the Société Française des Electriciens.It must have been gratifying that Preece took an interest, as he was part ofthe old guard. Twenty-two years Tesla’s senior and one of the patriarchs of theBritish scientific community, Preece was an amiable gentleman, with a full richbeard, high forehead, wire-rimmed glasses, and an air of self-assurance. As headof the government’s Postal Telegraph Office, Preece had worked with telegraphyas far back as 1860 and had brought Bell’s telephone, along with Bell himself, tothe British Isles in the mid-1870s. He had also been associated with Edison since1877, having coined the term “Edison effect” after visiting the wizard in 1884 tostudy his work with vacuum lamps and a peculiar “effect” whereby electronicparticles flowed through space from the negative pole to the positive. Using thisdevice as a voltage regulator Preece returned to England to show his colleagues,especialy Ambrose Fleming.10After a few days of enjoyable company and a tour of London, Tesla relaxed,and on Wednesday, February 3, his discourse, entitled Experiments withAlternate Currents of High Potential and High Frequency, was presented.“For a full two hours, Mr. Tesla kept his audience spellbound. Before suchcolleagues as J. J. Thomson, Oliver Heaviside, Silvanus P. Thompson, JosephSwan, Sir John Ambrose Fleming, Sir James Dewar, Sir William Preece, SirOliver Lodge, Sir William Crookes, and Lord Kelvin, Tesla proclaimed thedriving force of his motivation: ‘Is there, I ask, can there be, a more interestingstudy than that of alternating current?’…We observe how th[is] energy…tak[es]the many forms of heat, light, mechanical energy, and…even chemical affinity…All of these observations fascinate us…Each day we go to our work…in thehope that someone, no matter who, may find a solution [to] one of the pendingproblems,—and each succeeding day we return to our task with renewed ardor;and even if we are unsuccessful, our work has not been in vain, for in thesestrivings…we have found hours of untold pleasure, and we have directed ourenergies to the benefit of mankind.”11“Any feature of merit which this work may contain,” Tesla humbly stated,“was derived from the work of a number of scientists who are present today, nota few who can lay better claim than myself.” Looking about the room and, witha gleam in his eye, Tesla continued.12 “One at least I must mention…It is a nameassociated with the most beautiful invention ever made: it is Crookes!…I believethat the origin [of my advances]…was that fascinating little book [on radiantenergy] which I read many years ago.”13Firing up his great coil, amid erupting thunderbolts, Tesla spoke as if asorcerer; he announced that with his knowledge he had the ability to makeanimate that which was inert. “With wonder and delight…[we note] the effectsof strange forces which we bring into play, which allow us to transform, totransmit and direct energy at will…We see the mass of iron and wires behave asthough…endowed with life.”14Lamps suddenly burst forth in a variety of “magnificent colors ofphosphorescent light.” Tesla touched a wire, and sparks ejaculated from its end;he created sheets of luminescence, directed electrical “streams upon smallsurfaces,” lit wireless tubes simply by picking them up, and “erased” them by“holding a wire from a distant terminal” [i.e., grounding the effect] or bygrasping the tube with both hands, thereby “render[ing] dark” the area inbetween and pulling his hands apart in a steady stroke. And just as easily, hewould rotate the tube in the “direction of axis of the coil” and reignite theglow.15His theories on the relationship of wavelength to the structure andmanufacture of light and his displays of wireless fluorescent tubes prompted oneviewer to postulate that the future mode of lighting a dwelling might occur byactually “rendering the whole mass of the air in the room softly and beautifullyphosphorescent.”16Tesla unveiled the first true radio tube in this second month of 1892, in thepresence of all of the key forefathers of the invention of the wireless. In order toobtain the most perfect vacuum possible, the adept had extracted the air from abulb that was contained inside another vacuum tube. Within this inner chamber,Tesla generated a beam of light “devoid of any inertia.” By producing extremelyhigh frequencies, he created an electric “brush” that was so sensitive that itresponded even to the “stiffening of the muscles in a person’s arm!” This brushtended to “circle away” from an approaching person, but always in a clockwisedirection. Noting that the ray was extremely “susceptible to magneticinfluences,” Tesla speculated that its direction of rotation was probably affectedby the geomagnetic torque of the earth. He further expected that this brushwould rotate counterclockwise in the Southern Hemisphere. Only a magnetcould get the stream of light to reverse its direction of rotation. “I am firmlyconvinced,” Tesla stated, “that such a brush, when we learn how to produce itproperly, may be the means of transmitting intelligence to a distance withoutwires.”17“Of all these phenomena,” Tesla began, in the next phase, “the mostfascinating for an audience are certainly those which are noted in an electrostaticfield acting through a considerable distance. By properly constructing a coil,” hecontinued, “I have found that I could excite vacuum tubes no matter where theywere held in the room.”18Referring to the work of J. J. Thomson and J. A. Fleming on the creation ofa luminous thread within a vacuum tube, Tesla went on to discuss differentmethods of exciting vacuum tubes by altering the wavelength or the length of thetube.Setting up a fan as an analog and discussing the research of Preece, Hertz,and Lodge on the radiation of electromagnetic energy into the earth and space,Tesla then displayed “no wire” motors: “It is not necessary to have even a singleconnection between the motor and generator,” he announced, “except, perhaps,through the ground…[or] through the rarefied air…There is no doubt that withenormous potentials…luminous discharges might be passed through many milesof rarefied air, and that, by thus directing the energy of many hundreds of horsepower, motors or lamps might be operated at considerable distances fromstationary sources.”19Based on research conducted the year before, which had been prompted bythe work of J. J. Thomson in propagating streams of electrical energy, Teslaexpanded upon his high-intensity button lamp, a device that could dematerializeor “vaporize” matter. This arrangement, as we shall see, is precisely theconfiguration required to create laser beams. Most likely, Tesla displayed actuallaser beams at this time. However, neither he nor the other scientists present atthe time recognized the unique importance of the directed ray, as it was part of acombination of other lighting effects which resulted in the disintegration of thematerial that was being bombarded.There are two types of standard lasers which correspond to Tesla’s work:(1) a ruby laser, which reflects energy back to its source, which in turn stimulatesmore atoms into emitting special radiation, and (2) a gas laser, which consists ofa tube filled with helium and neon. High voltage is applied across two electrodesnear the ends of the tube, causing a discharge to take place. In both instances, theexcited atoms are contained in an enclosure and then reflected into one specificdirection. They differ from ordinary flashlights not only because they emit auniform wavelength of light but also because there is a pausing (metastable)state before the light is emitted.20Tesla worked with lamps constructed in exactly these ways. The first hecalled a button lamp; the second, an exhausted or phosphorescent tube. Theirprime function was as efficient illumination devices. Their secondary functionswere as laboratory apparatus for a variety of experiments. In one tube filled with“rarefied gas…once the glass fibre is heated, the discharge breaks through itsentire length instantaneously.”21 Another bulb “was painted on one side with aphosphorescent powder or mixture and threw a dazzling light, far beyond thatyielded by any ordinary phosphorescence.”22“A common experiment [of mine]…was to pass through a coil energy at arate of several thousand horsepower, put a piece of thick tinfoil on a stick, andapproach it to that coil. The tinfoil would…not only melt, but…it would beevaporated and the whole process took place in so small an interval of time thatit was like a cannon shot…That was a striking experiment.”23Tesla also constructed a type of button lamp which could disintegrate anymaterial, including zirconia and diamonds, the hardest substances known toexist. The lamp was, in essence, a globe coated inside with a reflective material(like the Leyden jar) and a “button” of any substance, most often carbon, whichwas highly polished and attached to a source of power. Once electrified, thebutton would radiate energy which would bounce off the interior of the globeand back onto itself, thereby intensifying a “bombardment” effect. In this waythe button would be “vaporized.”24Tesla next described precisely the invention of the ruby laser, over fivedecades before its reappearance in the middle of the twentieth century. Thedescription is quite explicit:In an exhausted bulb we can concentrate any amount of energy upon aminute button…[of] zirconia…[which] glowed with a most intense light,and the stream of particles projected out…was of a vivid white…Magnificent light effects were noted, of which it would be difficult to givean adequate idea…To illustrate the effect observed with a ruby drop…atfirst one may see a narrow funnel of white light projected against the top ofthe globe where it produces an irregularly outlined phosphorescent patch…In this manner, an intensely phosphorescent, sharply defined line [emphasisadded] corresponding to the outline of the drop [fused ruby] is produced,which spreads slowly over the globe as the drop gets larger…A moreperfect result used in some of these bulbs [involves]…the construction of azinc sheet, performing the double office of intensifier and reflector.25The inventor’s talk ended with the speculation that with improvements inthe construction of long-distance cables, per his suggestions, telephony acrossthe Atlantic would soon be possible. It is significant to note that at this momenthe did not yet envision wireless transmission of voice, but rather wirelesstransmission of intelligence (i.e., Morse code), light, and power. His discussionswith Preece, however, on the existence of earth currents was beginning to takehold, and shortly afterward, Tesla began to conceptualize the idea of transmittingvoice and even pictures by means of wireless.“It has been my chief aim in presenting these results to point outphenomena or features of novelty,” Tesla concluded, “and to advance ideaswhich I am hopeful will serve as starting points of new departures. It has beenmy chief desire this evening to entertain you with some novel experiments. Yourapplause, so frequently and generously accorded, has told me that I havesucceeded.”26At the end of the lecture “Mr. Tesla tantalizingly informed his listeners thathe had shown them but one-third of what he was prepared to do, and the wholeaudience…remained in their seats, unwilling to disperse, insisting upon more,and Mr. Tesla had to deliver a supplementary lecture…It may be stated, as Mr.Tesla mentioned but which hardly seems to be realized, that practically thewhole of the experiments shown were new, and had never been shown before,and were not merely a repetition of those given in…America.”27Having seen the inventor handle such enormous voltages “sounconcernedly,” many of the attendees mumbled surprise among themselves andgathered the courage to inquire how Tesla “dared to take the current through hisbody.”“It was the result of a long debate in my mind,” Tesla replied, “but thoughcalculation and reason, I concluded that such currents ought not to be dangerousto life any more than the vibrations of light are dangerous…Consider a thindiaphragm in a water-pipe with to and fro piston strikes of considerableamplitude, the diaphragm will be ruptured at once,” the inventor explained byanalogy. “With reduced strokes of the same total energy, the diaphragm will beless liable to rupture, until, with a vibratory impulse of many thousands persecond, no actual current flows, and the diaphragm is in no danger of rupture. Sowith the vibratory current.” In other words, Tesla had increased the frequency, oralterations per second, but reduced the amplitude or power greatly. The wizardthereupon fired up the coil once again, sending tens of thousands of voltsthrough (or around) his body and illuminated two fluorescent tubes which heheld dramatically in each hand. “As you can, see,” Tesla added, “I am very muchalive.”“That we can see,” one member responded, “but is there no pain?”“A spark, or course, passes through my hands, and may puncture the skin,and sometimes I receive an occasional burn, but that is all; and even this can beavoided if I hold a conductor of suitable size in my hand and then take hold ofthe current.”“In spite of your reasons,” another concluded with a shake of his head,“your speculation resembles to me the feelings that a man must have beforeplunging off the Brooklyn Bridge.”28In listening to Tesla’s statement that he had only shown part of what he hadprepared, the perspicacious Professor Dewar, inventor of the Dewar flask, oreveryday hot or cold thermos, took the inventor at face value and realized thatthere was more information to impart. The wizard had simply run out of time. Asa member of the board of the Royal Institution, also situated in London, Dewarknew that there were many dignitaries who missed the grand event, especiallyLord Rayleigh, so he set himself the task of persuading Tesla to present anencore the following evening.After the talk Dewar escorted Tesla on a tour of the Royal Institution, wherehe displayed the work of his predecessors, especially Michael Faraday’sapparatus. “Why not stay for one more performance?” Dewar inquired.“I must go to Paris,” Tesla insisted, keeping foremost in his mind his desireto limit the time of his visits at each stop so that he could return to the States asquickly as possible.“How often do you think you will have the chance to visit the laboratoriesof such men as Crookes or Kelvin?” Dewar asked in his Scottish brogue. At thesame time, he invited Tesla to visit his own lab, where he was creating extremelylow temperatures that approached absolute zero and conducting pioneer studiesof electromagnetic effects in such environments as liquid oxygen.29 “You’vealready lived in Paris. Now see London!”“I was a man of firm resolve,” Tesla admitted later, “but succumbed easilyto the forceful arguments of the great Scotchman. He pushed me into a chair andpoured out half a glass of wonderful brown fluid which sparkled in all sorts ofiridescent colors and tasted like nectar.”“Now,” Dewar declared with a twinkle in his eye and a grin that broughtone of reciprocation on the face of his captive, “you are sitting in Faraday’s chairand you are enjoying whiskey he used to drink.”“In both aspects,” Tesla recalled, “it was an enviable experience. The nextevening I gave a demonstration before the Royal Institution.”30At the culmination of the lecture, much of which, again, was new materialnot presented the previous evening (but integrated into the above discussion),Tesla presented Lord Kelvin with one of his Tesla coils,31 and Lord Rayleightook over the lectern for the conclusion. Tesla recalled, “He said that I possesseda particular gift of discovery and that I should concentrate upon one big idea.”32Coming from this “ideal man of science,” one who had worked outmathematical equations concerning the wavelength of light and who had alsocalculated the atomic weights of many of the elements, this suggestion made agreat impression. A new sense of destiny swirled through Tesla as he began torealize that he would have to figure out a way to surpass his earlier discoveriesin AC.The next day, Tesla received an invitation from Ambrose Fleming to visithis lab at University College on the weekend. Fleming had been successful insetting up “oscillatory discharges with a Spottiswoode Coil as the primary andLeyden jars as the secondary,” and he wanted to show Tesla his results.33 Havingbeen a consultant to Edison in connection with the lighting industry, Flemingwould four years hence work with Marconi in the development of the wirelessand a few years after that, come to invent the rectifier, a device for convertingthe incoming electromagnetic waves of AC into DC upon entering the receivingapparatus.34 Having attended both lectures, Fleming “congratulated [Tesla]heartily on your grand success. After th[is] no one can doubt your qualificationsas a magician of the first order.” The English aristocrat concluded by dubbingTesla a member of the new fictitious “Order of the Flaming Sword.”Tesla had sparked the imagination of his British colleagues, and rapidly anumber of them began to replicate his work and make their own advances. At SirWilliam Crookes’s lab, Tesla constructed a coil as a gift and taught Crookes howto build Tesla coils on his own, but Crookes complained: “The phosphorescencethrough my body when I hold one terminal is decidedly inferior to that givenwith the little one [that you made for me].”35As was his custom, Tesla toiled incessantly until the eclectic Crookesforced him to take a break, and at night, after dinner, the two scientists sat backand prognosticated. Topics ranged from discussions of the ramifications of theirown research and potential future of the field to religion, Tesla’s homeland, andmetaphysics.Twirling an elongated waxed mustache that fanned out like the tail feathersof a bird of paradise, the bearded mentor revealed that he had experimented inwireless communication before even Hertz began his investigations in 1889.Crookes discussed the possibility that electrical waves would be able topenetrate solid objects, such as walls, and he argued against Kelvin’s suggestionthat the life force and electricity were at some level identical. “Nevertheless,electricity has an important influence upon vital phenomena, and is in turn set inaction by the living being, animal or vegetable.” Here Crookes was referring tovarious species, such as electric eels, iridescent sea slugs, and lightning bugs.Further speculation caused the two men to discuss the possibility that electricitycould be utilized to purify water and treat “sewage and industrial waste.”“Perhaps,” Crookes suggested, “proper frequencies could be generated toelectrify gardens so as to stimulate growth and make crops unappealing todestructive insects.”Expanding on the work of Rayleigh, Crookes discussed with Tesla thepossibility of setting up millions of separate wavelengths so as to ensure secrecyin communication between two wireless operators. They also reviewed the workof Helmholtz on the structure of the physical eye, noting that receptors on theretina are “sensitive to one set of wavelengths [i.e., visible light], and silent toothers.” In the same way, a receiving device for accepting electromagneticsignals might also be so constructed to receive certain transmissions and notothers.“Another point at which the practical electrician should aim,” Crookes saidin response to one of Tesla’s more dauntless speculations, “is in the control ofweather.” Such goals as the elimination of fog or the ghastly “perennial drizzle”that plagued the island and creation of great amounts of rain scheduled forspecific days were also discussed.36And if this were not enough, Crookes also introduced Tesla to a vigorousdiscussion of his experiments in mental telepathy, spiritualism, and even humanlevitation. As a member of the Society of Psychical Research and later president,Crookes was in good company. Other scientists who would rise to the helm ofthe psychic society included Oliver Lodge, J. J. Thomson, and Lord Rayleigh.37Crookes straightforwardly presented a plethora of convincing evidence,including drawings by receivers that matched those created by senders,photographs from seances of ectoplasmic materializations generated by theclairvoyant Florence Cook, and eyewitness accounts of levitation by himself andhis wife.38Those statements were enough to raise the eyebrows of anyone, and theyserved to rattle Tesla’s worldview. As a staunch materialist, up to that time Teslahad absolutely no belief in any aspect of the field of psychic research, includingrelatively tame occurrences, such as thought transference. But with Crookes’sdocumentation and the support of other members of the cognoscenti, especiallyLodge, and with Tesla already exhausted from the strain of his severe schedule,the Serb’s mind began to spin. He would drop off in the middle of conversationsand subsequently frightened his host. The reality that he had constructed and theworld of superstition he thought he had left behind when he emigrated from theOld World swarmed through his brain like a hive of bumblebees and shatteredmightily his worldview.The pressure Tesla was under caused Crookes to offer some friendly advicein a letter. “I hope you will get away to the mountains of your native land assoon as you can. You are suffering from over work, and if you do not take careof yourself you will break down. Don’t answer this letter or see any one but takethe first train.” Ending the letter on a waggish note, Crookes added, “I amthinking of [going] myself, but I am only thinking of going as far as Hastings.”39Tesla wanted to take his advice, but he had to address the Paris society first.Tesla crossed the English Channel during the second week of February andbooked a room at the Hotel de la Paix. At his upcoming lecture “before a jointconference of the Société de Physique and the Société International desElectriciens,” which was held on February 19,40 the inventor sought out thewell-known French physician Dr. d’Arsenoval, a pioneer in the field ofdiathermy. Tesla said later:When…Dr. d’Arsenoval declared that he had made the same discovery[concerning the physical effects caused by sending extremely highfrequency through the body], a heated controversy relative to priority wasstarted. The French, eager to honor their countryman, made him a memberof the Academy, ignoring entirely my earlier publication. Resolved to takesteps for vindicating my claim, I…met [with] Dr. d’Arsenoval. His personalcharm disarmed me completely and I abandoned my intention, content torest on the record. It shows that my disclosure antedated his and also that heused my apparatus in his demonstrations. The final judgement is left toposterity.Since the beginning, the growth of the new art [of electrotherapy]…and industry has been phenomenal, some manufacturers turning out dailyhundreds of sets. Many millions are now in use throughout the world. Thecurrents furnished by them have proved an ideal tonic for the human nervesystem. They promote heart action and digestion, induce healthful sleep, ridthe skin of destructive exudations and cure colds and fever by the warmththey create. They vivify atrophied or paralyzed parts of the body, allay allkinds off suffering and save annually thousands of lives. Leaders in theprofession have assured me that I have done more for humanity by thismedical treatment than all my other discoveries and inventions.41(More recently, a number of researchers, particularly Dr. Robert O. Beckerof Syracuse University, have utilized electrical currents to help heal bones thathave difficulty knitting. Having studied regeneration capabilities of such reptilesas salamanders whose tails he amputated, Becker has discovered that theseanimals generate a particular electrical frequency which serves somehow as afield for promoting the total regrowth of the missing appendage. By “artificiallyduplicating” the signal, Becker reports, “we have been able to produce partiallimb regeneration in [mammals such as] rats by a similar technique, and someclinical applications are under study in human beings at this time.”42)The Paris lecture ignited “the French papers…[with Tesla’s] brilliantexperiments. No man in our age has achieved such a universal scientificreputation in a single stride as this gifted young electrical engineer,” theElectrical Review reported.43Tesla met with a number of dignitaries while in Paris, including PrinceAlbert of Belgium, who was interested in supplying his country with a moreeconomical means of distributing electric power; Monsieur Luka, of the HeliosCompany of Cologne, with whom Tesla sold his AC motor patents for use inGermany;44 and André Blondel, an important theoretician in advanced theorieswith alternating currents.Forty years later, Blondel recalled “with immense interest and admiration”the Paris conference and congratulated Tesla on the elegant simplicity withwhich he advanced his concepts in alternating current well beyond the work ofhis French colleague Deprez and his Italian neighbor Ferraris.45Shortly after the lecture and in a state of “oblivion” associated by “mypeculiar sleeping spells, which had been caused by prolonged exertion of thebrain,” Tesla received a dispatch at the hotel informing him that his mother wasdying. “I remembered how I made the long journey home without an hour ofrest.”46 Greeted in Gospić by his three sisters, all of whom were married toSerbian priests, and by his Uncle Petar, the regional bishop, Tesla was in aterrible state. Entering the bedroom, he found his mother in “agony.”During this time, Tesla suffered from a peculiar malady similar to amnesia;where he claimed to have lost all memory of his earlier life. He also said that heslowly regained this information before his return to the States. One aspect ofthis episode which is noteworthy is that it occurred over a long period of time,beginning at the close of 1891, and culminating with his mother’s death in April1892. Tesla said that although he could not remember historical occurrences, hehad no trouble thinking about the details of his research including “passages oftext” from his writings “and complex mathematical formulae.”47 Simultaneously,Tesla also experienced a psychic event which “momentarily impressed me assupernatural. I had become completely exhausted by pain and long vigilance,and one night was carried to a building about two blocks from our home. As Ilay helpless there, I thought that if my mother died while I was away from herbedside she would surely give me a sign.”48Having been influenced by “my…friend Sir William Crookes, whenspiritualism was discussed,” Tesla lay in anticipation. “During the whole nightevery fiber in my brain was strained in expectancy, but nothing happened untilearly in the morning. [Awakening in] a swoon, [I] saw a cloud carrying angelicfigures of marvelous beauty, one of whom gazed upon me lovingly andgradually assumed the features of my mother. The appearance slowly floatedacross the room and vanished, and I was awakened by an indescribably sweetsong of many voices. In that instant [or] certitude, [I knew] that my mother hadjust died. And that was true.”49Surprised and perhaps even frightened by the clairvoyant vision, Teslawrote to Crookes for advice. For months, and maybe even for years after, theinventor “sought…the external cause of this strange manifestation.” Note howTesla assumes a priori that the cause came from “outside” as opposed to“inside,” that is, from the unconscious. Although he readily accepted the conceptof wireless communication, in no way was Tesla capable of allowing for thepossibility that the human brain could also act as a receiver of mental vibrations.The idea of telepathy, or spiritualism, for that matter, was a true threat to theparadigm he was operating from, and so Tesla manufactured a physicalmechanism as the cause of his noetic experience:“To my great relief,” Tesla wrote, “I succeeded after many months offruitless effort” in solving the conundrum. The vision of the angels rising up,Tesla attributed to the memory of an ethereal painting of the same subject whichhe had gazed on prior to the experience, and the sound of the serenading voices,he linked to a nearby church choir that was singing for an Easter mass.50Whether or not Tesla’s mother died on a Sunday morning is not known. But whatis clear is that this analysis greatly relieved the tension Tesla was under, for itsupported, once again, a materialistic viewpoint.A question which remains, however, is whether or not Tesla’s excesses inwork-related endeavors is enough to explain his onset of amnesia? Onetheoretician speculated that the enormous voltages that Tesla passed through hisbody may have contributed to the problem.51 From a psychoanalytic point ofview, one could speculate that Tesla was repressing, that is, unconsciously, butpurposefully forgetting events that he did not want to remember. Possibleunwanted memories included the way he felt as a child after his exalted brotherdied and the recent eradication of the royalty clause with the WestinghouseCorporation.After the death of his mother, Tesla stayed on in Gospić for six weeks torecuperate. On the positive side, it enabled the lone son to reconfirm emotionalties to his family; it also provided Tesla with probably the only extendedvacation he would ever take.He traveled to Plaski to visit his sister Marica, to Varazdin to see his unclePajo, and to Zagreb to lecture at the university. He sojourned to Budapest toconfer with Ganz & Company, as they were in the midst of constructing asubstantial 1,000-horsepower alternator. He also met with a delegation ofSerbian scientists who accompanied him down to Belgrade, where an audiencewas arranged with the king. Young Alexander I conferred upon Tesla a specialtitle of Grand Officer of the Order of St. Sava, and the official plaque wasshipped to him a few months later after his return to the States.52 Tesla alsovisited the great Serbian poet Jovan Zmaj Jovanovich,53 and he attended anassembly where he was honored by the mayor.In front of a welcoming committee, Zmaj read his poem “Pozdrav NikoliTesli,” and then Tesla took the podium. “There is something in me which is onlyperhaps illusory,” Tesla began, “[It is] like that which often comes to young,enthusiastic persons; but if I were to be sufficiently fortunate to bring about atleast some of my ideas it would be for the benefit of all humanity.” Referringback to Zmaj’s poem, Tesla concluded with a message that would deeply touchthe hearts of his people. “If these hopes become one day a reality, my greatestjoy would spring from the fact that this work would be the work of a Serb.”54On his return leg, Tesla made a special trip through Prussia to see theeminent patriarch Hermann Ludwig von Helmholtz, in Berlin, and his mostfamous student, Heinrich Hertz, in Bonn. A bearded, youthful man with softfeatures, a high forehead, and elongated face, Hertz had gained the world’sattention by performing the first significant experiments in wireless, many ofwhich Tesla replicated or expanded upon.In attempts to clarify the findings of James Clerk Maxwell on the nature ofelectromagnetic phenomena and its relationship to light and the structure of theether, in 1886, Hertz constructed “flat double-wound spiral coils” which he usedin induction experiments in attempts to measure the propagation ofelectromagnetic waves. Hertz, like Tesla shortly after him, displayed resonanceeffects between primary and secondary circuits and “established the existence ofstanding waves with their characteristic nodes and troughs in a long straightwire.” He was also able to measure the wavelength of the waves in the wire.55Hertz, however, differed markedly with Tesla in terms of his interpretation of themeaning of Maxwell’s equations and his subsequent conceptualization of thestructure of the ether.Deriving his clarifications more from theory than from actualexperimentation, Hertz had created an elegant mathematical interpretation ofMaxwell’s equations, but at the expense of some aspects of Maxwell’s theory,most notably vector (a quantity that has magnitude and direction) and scalar (aquantity that has magnitude, but no direction, such as a point or field) potentials.In duplicating Hertz’s work, Tesla postulated that these components should nothave been eliminated.56 What he tried to tell Hertz, and what he wrote a fewmonths later, was that electromagnetic waves might “more appropriately [be]called electric sound-waves or sound-waves of electrified air.”57“When Dr. Heinrich Hertz undertook his experiments from 1887 to 1889,”Tesla told an interviewer, “his object was to demonstrate a theory postulating amedium filling all space called the ether, which was structureless, ofinconceivable tenuity…and yet possessed of [great] rigidity. He obtained certainresults and the whole world acclaimed them as an experimental verification ofthat cherished theory, but in reality what he observed tended to prove just itsfallacy.“I had maintained for many years before that such a medium as supposedcould not exist, and that we must rather accept the view that all space is filledwith a gaseous substance. On repeating the Hertz experiments with muchimproved and very powerful apparatus, I satisfied myself that what he hadobserved was nothing else but effects of longitudinal waves in a gaseousmedium, that is to say, waves propagated by alternating compression andexpansion [emphasis added]. He had observed waves in much of the nature ofsound waves in the air,” not transverse electromagnetic waves, as generallysupposed.58Tesla tried to open a dialogue by noting that his experiments tended tocontradict the polished mathematical results Hertz had achieved, but Hertzrebuked him. “He seemed disappointed to such a degree,” Tesla recalled, “that Iregretted my trip and parted from him sorrowfully.”59Having replicated Hertz’s experiments, Tesla tried to show the Germanprofessor that his own oscillator could produce a much more efficient frequencyfor transmitting wireless impulses. Tesla already had his eye on the idea oftransmitting power through the ambient medium, and the Hertzian paradigmvirtually disallowed this possibility. But egos clashed, as one Weltanschauungthreatened the other, and Hertz would never come to realize that his device wasobsolete. Perhaps this was to Hertz’s advantage, for even to this day wirelessfrequencies are referred to as Hertzian waves, when, in fact, they are reallyTesla’s, as they are produced by high-frequency continuous-wave oscillators, notby the primitive Hertzian interrupted spark-gap apparatus.60During the voyage home, Tesla walked the deck of the ship and ponderedan incident that occurred to him during a hike he had taken in the mountainsduring the trip. Having witnessed an oncoming thunderstorm, he had noted thatthe rain was delayed until a flash of lightning was perceived. This “observation”confirmed Tesla’s speculations, with Martin and Crookes, that weather controlwas possible because it was the production of large amounts of electricity, inTesla’s eyes, that caused the downpour.Revealing a megalomaniacal streak, Tesla recalled his thoughts that day inthe Alps:Here was a stupendous possibility of achievement. If we could produceelectric effects of the required quality, this whole planet and the conditionsof existence on it could be transformed. The sun raises the water of theoceans and the winds drive it to distant regions where it remains in a stateof most delicate balance. If it were in our power to upset it when andwherever desired, this mighty life-sustaining stream could be at willcontrolled. We could irrigate arid deserts, create lakes and rivers andprovide motive power in unlimited amounts…It seemed a hopelessundertaking, but I made up my mind to try it, and immediately upon myreturn to the United States in the summer of 1892, work was begun…for thesuccessful transmission of energy without wires.61 