32THE PASSING OF THE TORCH(1902)December 1901: Signor Marconi has scored a shrewd coup. Whether or notthe 3 dots he heard came from England or, like those Tesla heard, fromMars, if I am aught a prophet, we will hear no more of transAtlanticmessages for some time.LEE DE FOREST1Embittered, Tesla knew that Marconi’s achievement was predicated on the useof his coil, oscillators, and general design which he had spelled out in lecturesyears earlier. Preece assumed partial culpability, as he had requested from Teslathe use of this equipment for the work, but Marconi had announced that the Teslaapparatus was unnecessary and ineffectual,2 and this had caused a rift in theItalian’s relationship with Preece. Fleming, on the other hand, having studiedTesla’s work in earnest ever since he had received the inventor at his home inLondon in 1892, saw no such conflict; for it was he who “arranged for Marconithe transmitting plant at Poldhu.”3 Tesla revealed many years later: “[Marconihad] declared that wireless communication across the Atlantic was impossiblebecause there was a wall of water several miles high between the two continentswhich the rays could not traverse. But subsequent developments showed that hehad used my system in secret all the time, received the plaudits of the world andaccepted stolidly even my own congratulations, and it was only a long time afterthat he admitted it.”4Thomas Commerford Martin arrived at his office on Monday, December 16to review the astonishing report from Newfoundland. With only Marconi andone aide as a witness and the plans having been kept secret until the deed wasaccomplished, many doubted the Italian’s proclamation. Prof. SilvanusThomson, of Great Britain, suggested that Marconi had probably received staticcaused by severe weather conditions. One of Martin’s colleagues concurred: “It’sa fake. Such a thing cannot be done.”“I think I should seek another opinion,” the editor said as he put in a call toTom Edison.“Very doubtful. How’s it going to get around that blasted curve?” cameEdison’s hedging response. Martin dialed up Michael Pupin.“Professor, do you believe Marconi’s transmission is genuine?”“I most certainly do.”“Then I think we ought to celebrate it.”5It was the dead of winter when Tesla ducked out of the Waldorf-Astoria asthe new crowning electrical savant checked in. Tesla probably went toWardenclyffe to stare at the first tier of the tower, which was finally underconstruction. With the temperature so cold, it was just one more annoyance toslow down progress.With only a few days to prepare, Martin was able to book the Astor Galleryat the Waldorf for the banquet, on Monday, January 13, 1902. With threehundred guests arriving, the task of arranging all the particulars put him in afrenzied state. He brushed by fantastic pictures of a wizard’s laboratory as hehurried out the door.The hall was decorated with a large map of the Atlantic placed on the walland a festoon of wires “with clusters of three lights” blinking dot-dot-dot strungbetween large tablets reading Signal Hill in Newfoundland and Poldhu inEngland. Around the room, each table had its own model transmission tower,nameplates, and “Italian olive green menus” on card stock with pen and inkdrawings of the transatlantic accomplishment. At the upper dais “in the middlewas a medallion with Mr. Marconi’s portrait, draped with the Italian flag.”American and British flags and pendants for the AIEE and the Italian coat ofarms were also placed there.“At fitting times, [the lights] were flashed” to the applause of the audience;and to cap off the dinner, for dessert, a “procession of waiters” came marching inwith ice cream imbedded in ice carvings of incandescent lamps, ships at sea,electric vehicles, and wireless telegraph towers.6The four-foot gnome trimmed his goatee and checked his gold pocket watchbefore smiling at himself once more in the mirror as he departed for the affair.Although he rocked from side to side when he walked, Charles ProteusSteinmetz developed a new swagger, for he had just been elected to thepresidency of the AIEE. He was about to receive an honorary doctorate fromHarvard and a professorship in engineering from Union College, located nearGE headquarters in Schenectady, New York. The college appointment enabledSteinmetz to divide his time between academia and the corporate world.During the six-hour train ride down to the city, the abstract mathematicancarefully read through galleys of his opus on AC which was about to berepublished in a larger format by McGraw-Hill. It was a small matter to thepreeminent scholar that he had removed the name of his coauthor and hadcontinued the practice of eliminating reference to the source of his work, TheInventions, Researches and Writings of Nikola Tesla. Electricians, herationalized, would be more interested in his advanced concepts than “inknowing who first investigated the phenomena.”7 By 1907, Steinmetz wouldlead in establishing the AIEE Code of Ethics.8 Who was Tesla, anyway?Marconi was the man of the hour.At the upper dais sat a gaggle of Tesla adversaries. Aside from the newpresident, there was Professor Pupin, now financially tied to Marconi; ElihuThomson, who claimed priority on the invention of the AC motor and Tesla coil;Carl Hering, who had backed Dobrowolski in priority discussions of the inventorof long-distance AC transmission; William Stanley, who had pirated theTesla/Westinghouse induction motor and was now producing them legally forGE; Frank Sprague, who gained his reputation in part as the inventor of theelectric railroad when, in fact, it was all part of Tesla’s AC polyphase system; T.C. Martin, who was still angry about past moneys owed for sale of the inventor’scollected works; and, of course, Guglielmo Marconi, the chap who had beatenhim to the punch. Tesla’s decision not to attend created an excellent atmospherefor gaiety—and for perpetuating Steinmetz’s published position of relegating thepioneer to the category of nonperson.Others present at the infamous upper dais included Alexander Graham Belland general counsels from Great Britain and Italy, and around the hall were JoshWetzler, D. McFarlan Moore, many of the men’s wives, and Mrs. Thomas AlvaEdison, who was representing her husband.Martin presided over the occasion, opening up the period for lectures withreadings of telegrams from those not in attendance. He began with a letter fromthe mayor and then read a communiqué from the Wizard of Menlo Park.To T. C. Martin:I am sorry that I am prevented from attending your annual dinner to-night, expecially as I would like to pay my respects to Marconi, the youngman who had the monumental audacity to attempt, and succeed in, jumpingan electric wave clear across the Atlantic. Thomas A. Edison9Martin did not announce that at Christmas Marconi had sent Edison a“cheerful telegram” reiterating his success and offering to display personally tothe master his transatlantic equipment or that Marconi was already tenderingEdison offers for his early wireless patents.10The New York Times reported “cheers when the toastmaster came to a letterfrom Nikola Tesla who said that he ‘could not rise to the occasion.’”11 No doubt,they masked the jeers. Grinning through his oversized mustache, Martin waitedfor the clamor to subside before continuing with the rest of the letter:I regret not being able to contribute to the pleasure of the evening, butI wish to join the members in heartily congratulating Mr. Marconi on hisbrilliant results. He is a splendid worker, full of rare and subtle energies.May he prove to be one of those whose powers increase and whose mindfeelers reach out farther with advancing years for the good of the world andhonor of his country.Prof. Elihu Thomson followed. “I had received the news of Marconi’s greatfeat from over the telephone from a reporter, who wished to know whether Ibelieved that signals had actually been received across the Atlantic.” Riding onthe accolades of the audience, Thomson related his response: “As I told thereporter, if Marconi says that he received the signals, I believe they werereceived.” And then the hero took the pulpit. Waiting gratiously for the applauseto subside, he began.Signor Marconi explained his syntonic wireless system and pointed out that“he had built very largely on the work of others and mentioned Clerk Maxwell,Lord Kelvin, Professor Henry and Professor Hertz.” At this time, its mostimportant use was for communication between ships. The Italian was pleased toannounce that “over 70 ships now carried his wireless system, 37 for the Britishnavy, 12 for the Italian navy, and the remainder on large liners, such as theCunard Line, the North German Lloyd and the Beaver Line. There were alsoover 20 stations in operation…with more on construction.” Marconi addressedthe problem of selective tuning and suggested that he had such a system createdso that “messages transmitted [from one ship] can in no way be received by anyother, except that attuned to receive the message.”12 Stated as bravado, Marconiwas bluffing, as he had no system for creating separate channels.“It is my hope,” Signor Marconi concluded, “that at no great distant date, Ishall bring my system to the point of perfection of allowing friends and relativesto communicate with each other across the ocean at a small expense.”Professor Pupin concluded. “Referring to claims made that previous toMarconi wireless signals had been transmitted over short distances,” Pupin said,glancing back to the upper dais, “any schoolboy by means of an Hertzianoscillator could transmit such signals over a short distance…but it required theengineer to make [such] work of avail to the world.” In attempting to allay fearsthat Marconi’s system would make obsolete Atlantic cables, Dr. Pupin shrewdly“pointed out, as an illustration, how the completion of electric lighting has aidedthe gas industry and enhanced rather than decreased the value of [their]investments.”13On January 9, Tesla dispatched a letter to Morgan explaining that thepatents of the “Marconi-Fleming syndicate” do not accurately reflect their actualapparatus but are covered “by my patents of 1896 [and] 1897.” The balance ofthe letter describes the precursor to what became, a half century later, the majortelevision networks:I need not tell you that I have worked as hard as I have dared withoutcollapsing…Hav[ing] examined and rejected hundreds of experiments…with the capital at command, I am glad to say that by slow and steadyadvances, I have managed to continue a machine…[which shall produce] anelectrical disturbance of sufficient intensity to be perceptible over the wholeof the earth…[When] I throw the switch, I shall send a greeting to thewhole world and for this great triumph I shall ever be grateful to you…[This system] will do away not only with the cables but with thenewspapers also, for how can journals as the present [stay in business]when every [customer] can have a cheap machine printing its own worldnews?[The] beautiful invention which I am now developing, will enable meto spread our name into [every] home, and it will be [able] everywhere to[hear] the tune of my voice.14This would be the inventor’s last communiqué to the financier for fully ninemonths. He set himself the difficult task of completing construction of theeighteen-story transmission tower, knowing full well that he did not havesufficient funds. From bank records dating back to 1896, it is apparent that Teslahad nearly $50,000, some of which had been converted into land assets.15 Thelast of Morgan’s money had probably been received, so it was at this time, in themidst of 1902, that the trailblazer began to tap his personal reserves to keep theproject going. Work would continue at a steady pace throughout the year.OTHER COMPETITORSHaving received his doctorate in electrical engineering in 1899, Lee De Foresthad tried once again to gain entrée into his idol’s laboratory, but for a third timeTesla refused him. De Forest decided, therefore, to set out on his own. In 1901he succeeded in sending wireless messages across the Hudson River over adistance of one or two miles and shortly thereafter sent impulses from StateStreet, in downtown New York, to Staten Island, seven miles away. By using“self-restoring detectors with telephone receivers instead of Morse inkers orsounders,” De Forest succeeded in increasing substantially the speed oftransmission. Now his apparatus threatened Western Union’s local telegraphlines. Working with D. McFarlan Moore, who had “studied Tesla’s monumentalearly volume,” De Forest was able to decrease the problems of staticinterference. By 1903 he was reporting yacht races at a speed of twenty-five tothirty words per minute, or about as fast as a Morse-code operator could sendthem. By 1904 he could transmit messages “180 miles over land, betweenBuffalo and Cleveland,” and by 1908 his signaling device was jumpingcontinents.16Perhaps it was because of Tesla’s regard for the Yale graduate or because ofthe canniness of his patents that Tesla did not try to prevent De Forest from usinghis oscillators and general scheme. The same, however, could not be said forReginald Fessenden, whom he sued for patent infringement in April 1902.Fessenden, who had worked for both Edison and Westinghouse as far backas the early 1880s, is generally credited with having invented the means ofsending voice over the airwaves. Although Marconi was using theelectromagnetic frequencies to mimic the impulse patterns of the Morse code, “itoccurred to Fessenden to send out a continuous signal with the amplitude of thewaves varied (or ‘modulated’) to make the variation follow the irregularities ofsound waves. At the receiving station, these variations could be sorted out andreconverted into sound. In 1906 the first such message was sent out from theMassachusetts coast, and wireless receivers could actually pick up the music. Inthis way radio, as we know it, was born.”17 A year later, using his patentedaudion, which was, in essence, a modification of Tesla’s ‘brush tube,’ De Forestsucceeded in transmitting the voice of Enrico Caruso, who was singing at theMetropolitan Opera House in New York.18Interested for reasons of priority in obtaining Edison’s grasshopper wirelesspatent (dating from the 1880s), Fessenden sought a job with GE in 1902 toinaugurate construction of a wireless transmitting station at Brant Rock,Massachusetts. Although he stayed friendly with Edison and looked after hiswayward son, Tom Junior, who had been caught passing bad checks, Fessendenwas unsuccessful in obtaining Edison’s key wireless patent; the Menlo Parkwizard had sold it to Marconi for $60,000.19Legal entanglements were expensive, but Tesla felt that he had no choicebut to protect as many fundamental aspects of his system as he was able to. Howelse could he prove to Morgan that his work in the field really was the basis ofthe systems that were succeeding?In June 1900, Reginald Fessenden had applied for a patent on tunedcircuits. The following month, Tesla filed for one as well. It was a matter ofpublic record that Fessenden’s application preceded Tesla’s. What was at issuewas whether or not Fessenden had compiled his invention from Tesla’s earlierexperiments. Although Fessenden claimed that he had conceived the idea in1898, Tesla pointed out that Fessenden was (1) unable to provide documentationof this earlier date; (2) he did not create a working model of his apparatus; and(3) the machine had not been used commercially.Whereas Fessenden’s application was rudimentary, Tesla’s delineatedclearly a multiplicity of goals, for example, (1) operating distant apparatus; (2)controlling signals by using two or more idiosyncratic electrical frequencies; (3)producing a plurality of distinctive impulses onto a receiving apparatuscomprising a manifold number of circuits; and (4) creating a combinationtransmitter-receiver arrangement set up to respond to a succession of impulsesreleased in a given order. Whereas Fessenden could date his theoreticalconceptualizations to, perhaps, 1898, Tesla dated the onset of his work to 1889and provided his numerous publications as evidence. With specific reference tothe operation of “tuned circuits,” the inventor displayed his fully workingtelautomaton, which he introduced to the world in 1898. Without Tesla’s ACoscillators, Fessenden’s machinery could not operate. Unless he had lived in ahermitage, it would have been impossible for Fessenden to have conceived hisinvention without utilizing Tesla’s attainments. Parker W. Page questioned hisclient for hours; Tesla’s testimony would run seventy-two typewritten pages.Throughout mid-April the testimony continued, and after Tesla wasfinished, his twenty-nine-year-old manager, George Scherff, took the stand.Scherff, who was living at Wardenclyffe by this time, was able to substantiatethat Tesla’s tuned circuits and long-distance wireless experiments were firstconducted in his presence in 1895, when he began working for Tesla at hislaboratory at 33-35 South Fifth Avenue (before it burned to the ground). Scherffremembered the inventor transmitting wireless impulses from the Houston Streetlab to the roof of the Hotel Gerlach, which was one or two miles away.20Fritz Lowenstein, just a year younger than Scherff, followed. Havingreturned from Europe in February and newly married, Lowenstein had gainedreemployment with Tesla at Wardenclyffe. In a heavy German accent,Lowenstein thoroughly described the nature of the confidential experiments atColorado Springs. “Mr. Tesla explained to me,” Lowenstein stated, “that thechief feature of a practical wireless telegraph system was the secrecy, immunityand selectivity; at the same time he explained to me how two oscillations aresecured from one oscillating apparatus…When I came to Mr. Tesla,” the college-educated engineer revealed, “I didn’t understand anything at all about it, but hesoon showed me the great value [of] tuned circuits, and then I understood whattuning was.”21Dear Mr.Scherff,Mr. Page has just told me that my opponent’s attorney has admitted mypriority…[Mr. Fessenden] must be disappointed of course, and I am sorryfor him although you know he has written some articles which are not verynice…My honor as the originator of the principle is assured.22Tesla may have won the case, but he was not about to celebrate. Foremostamong his priorities was his wish to keep the details of the litigation secret. Thelast thing he wanted was publicity, for the transcripts of the trial revealed manytechnicalities that would aid his competition in numerous ways. In the short run,the inventor succeeded in protecting important aspects of his wireless scheme;but in the long run the testimony became an important source text for Fessenden,who now had a legal basis for fashioning a plethora of second-order patents. Bythe time of his death, Fessenden had compiled an astounding five hundredpatents, which was nearly as many as Tom Edison. Obviously, this work alsoaided Lowenstein, who became a wireless expert valuable to different membersof the new crop of engineers who were rapidly emerging. 