41THE INVISIBLE AUDIENCE (1915-21)Dear Tesla,When that Nobel Prize comes, remember that I am holding on to myhouse by the skin of my teeth and desperately in need of cash!No apology for mentioning the matter.Yours faithfully,RUJ1On November 6, 1915, the New York Times published on its front page thatTesla and Edison were to share the Nobel Prize in physics that year. The sourcefor the report was “the Copenhagen correspondent of the [London] DailyTelegraph.” Although Tesla himself forwarded to J. P. Morgan Jr. original copiesof the announcement (which were also carried in a number of other journals),2neither Tesla nor Edison ever received the Nobel Prize.In trying to ascertain what happened, Tesla biographers Inez Hunt andWanetta Draper wrote in the early 1960s to Dr. Rudberg of the Royal Academyof Science of Sweden. Rudberg, referring to an event which took place a halfcentury before, replied, “Any rumor that a person has not been given a NobelPrize because he has made known his intention to refuse the reward isridiculous.” Thus, they concluded that the affair was “a sardonic joke.”3Curiously, this same Times article listed four other people for Nobel Prizesin literature and chemistry who also did not receive the award that year, althoughthree of them eventually obtained it. The fourth, Troeln Lund, like Tesla andEdison, never received the honor.4Although the announcement came in November 1915, the nominationprocess actually was concluded nine months earlier. There were nineteenscientists on the physics committee, each allowed two bids. Out of the thirty-eight possible bids, two were made for inventors in wireless, E. Branly and A.Righi; two were for the quantum physicist Max Planck; Tom Edison receivedone bid; and the Braggs took four. According to the Royal Academy’s records,Nikola Tesla was not nominated that year. (However, two bids, nos. 33 and 34,were missing from their files.) A week after the Times announcement, onNovember 14, Stockholm announced that Prof. William H. Bragg and his sonwould share the award in physics.The man who nominated Edison, Henry Fairfield Osborn, president ofColumbia University (who, twenty years before, had awarded Tesla an honorarydoctorate), apologized to the committee for offering up Edison’s name.“Although somewhat out of the line of previous nominations,” Osborn wrote,qualifying his decision,” I would [like to] suggest the name of Mr. Thomas A.Edison…who is through his inventions, one of the great benefactors ofmankind.” Tesla would not be nominated until 1937 (by F. Ehrenhaft of Wien,who had previously nominated Albert Einstein).5Certainly, both Tesla and Edison deserved such an award, and it is nothingshort of astounding that (1) neither of them ever received it and (2) no one at thetime discovered the reason behind this curious quirk of history.O’Neill, having interviewed Tesla on the subject, stated that Tesla “made adefinite distinction between the inventor, who refined preexisting technology,and the discoverer who created new principles…Tesla declared himself adiscoverer and Edison an inventor; and he held the view that placing the two inthe same category would completely destroy all sense of the relative value of thetwo accomplishments.”6Support for this interpretation can be found in a letter Tesla wrote to theLight House Board in Washington from his Colorado Springs ExperimentalStation in 1899. The navy had written Tesla that they would “prefer” to givetheir impending wireless contract to an American rather than to Marconi.“Gentleman,” Tesla responded curtly. “Much as I value your advances I amcompelled to say, in justice to myself, that I would never accept a preference onany ground…as I would be competing against some of those who are followingin my path…Any pecuniary advantage which I might derive by availing myselfof the privilege, is a matter of the most absolute indifference to me.”7 If no oneelse would recognize his genius, Tesla certainly did. He would not think twiceabout giving up mere cash when faced with the prospect of being compared, inthis case to Marconi.The following letter to Johnson, which the inventor took the time to rewritein a careful hand, was penned just four days after the announcement and fourdays before Sweden’s decision to give the award to the Braggs.My dear Luka,Thank you for your congratulations…To a man of your consumingambition such a distinction means much. In a thousand years there will bemany thousand recipients of the Nobel Prize. But I have not less than fourdozen of my creations identified with my name in technical literature. Theseare honors real and permanent which are bestowed not by a few who are aptto err, but by the whole world which seldom makes a mistake, and for anyof these I would give all the Nobel Prizes which will be distributed duringthe next thousand years.8This passage was contained in its entirety in the Hunt and Draper text;however, they incorrectly concluded that this “sober” message wasovershadowed by “jubilation” because of the announcement.9 Johnson alsoincorrectly understood the full implication of the letter, because in March 1916he refers to the award, fully expecting Tesla to receive it.10In the New York Times interview on the day following their announcement,Tesla stated that Edison was “worthy of a dozen Nobel Prizes.” The variousTesla biographers assumed that this was a public statement congratulatingEdison when, in fact, it was a piquant snub to the Nobel committee. Tesla wasstating between the lines that the Nobel committee recognized only smallaccomplishments rather than truly original conceptualizations.“A man puts in here [in my Tesla coil] a kind of gap—he gets a Nobel Prizefor doing it…I cannot stop it.”11 Thus, Edison’s many “better mousetraps” couldall be honored, but none of them, in Tesla’s opinion, concerned the creation ofnew principles. They were simply refinements of existing apparatus.Edison would probably have agreed with Tesla on this point, for most of hisinventions were actually further developments of other people’s work. However,Edison did have a number of original discoveries and creations. In his ownopinion, his most important contribution was the phonograph, which certainlywas the work of genius, even by Tesla’s criteria, and deserving of a Nobel Prize.Furthermore, Edison’s unparalleled success in bringing promising creations tofruition was exactly Tesla’s failure, and that, too, was a gift placing Edison in acategory all by himself.Quite possibly a letter much like the one sent to Johnson or the Light HouseBoard could also have been wired to the Nobel committee. If this hypothesis iscorrect, a prejudice would have persisted against Tesla and Edison, and thiswould explain the indefensible position of the Swedish Royal Academy in neverhonoring either of these two great scientists.Wizard Swamped by DebtsInventor Testifies He Owes the WaldorfHasn’t a Cent in Bank12As 1915 was drawing to a close, Tesla began to find himself in deeper anddeeper financial straits. Although an efficient water fountain which he designedthat year was received favorably,13 his overhead was still too high. Expensesincluded outlays for the turbine work at the Edison Station, his office space atthe Woolworth Building, salaries to his assistants and Mrs. Skerritt, his newsecretary, past debts to such people as the Johnsons and George Scherff,maintenance costs for Wardenclyffe, legal expenses on wireless litigation, andhis accommodations at the Waldorf-Astoria.Some of the costs were deferred, particularly by the hotel, but Mr. Boldt’spatience had reached its limit. Tesla’s uncanny elusiveness and noble air hadworn thin. Rumors began circulating of peculiar odors and cackling soundsemanating from the inventor’s suite. The maids were complaining that there wasan inordinate amount of pigeon excrement on the windowsills. Boldt sent Tesla abill for the total rent due, nearly $19,000. Simultaneously, Tesla was hit with asuit for $935 for taxes still owed on Wardenclyffe.Tesla signed over the Wardenclyffe property to Boldt just as he was calledinto the state supreme court. Before Justice Finch, the inventor revealed that “hepossessed no real estate or stocks and that his belongings, all told, werenegligible.” Under oath, Tesla revealed that he lived at the prestigious Waldorf“mostly on credit,” that his company “had no assets but is receiving enoughroyalties on patents to pay expenses,” and that most of his patents were sold orassigned to other companies. When asked if he owned an automobile or horses,the inventor responded no.“Well, haven’t you got any jewelry?”“No jewelry; I abhor it.”11This embarrassing article was published for all to see in the World. Yet, aswas his custom with any article about himself, the inventor had his secretarypaste the mea culpa in the latest volume of press clippings. Looking much like amultivolume encyclopedia, this text, along with his other records andcorrespondence, would provide for posterity an accurate account of theinventor’s rich and complicated life. The inventor had chosen his wordscarefully when speaking under oath to the judge. As much as he loathed being ina debtor’s position, he wanted the Morgans, Marconis, Franklin Roosevelts, andWoodrow Wilsons to know of his plight, for in the final analysis this shamewould be theirs as much as his. Even T. C. Martin had turned against him,writing petty letters to Elihu Thomson at this time, complaining of how Teslachiseled money out of him for the opus he had created of the inventor’s collectedworks a generation ago.15Attempting to raise funds in a variety of ways, Tesla continued to try tomarket his speedometer, push to get monies from American firms for thebladeless turbines, and collect royalty payments from Lowenstein andTelefunken for the Tuckerton and Sayville plants. The elder statesman ofinvention also continued to write newspaper articles for the World and the Sunfor ready cash, and he also moved to exploit other creations, such as hiselectrotherapeutic machines, with Dr. Morrell. Tesla wrote Scherff that heexpected the medical market to be $3-$4 million.16The publication of his wretched state in the public forum and the transfer ofWardenclyffe to another party produced in Tesla a deep sense of anger andcorresponding shame; for now the world had officially branded him a dud. Ifsuccess is measured in a material way, it was clear that Tesla was the ultimatefailure.On the exterior, the inventor kept up appearances, but this event wouldmark the turning point in his life. Now he began the slow but steady turningaway from society. Simultaneously, he traveled to live in other states, in part toconduct business in a fresh atmosphere and in part to remove himself from ahostile environment. He wrote a letter to Henry Ford in Detroit, hoping, finally,that the auto magnate would recognize the great advantages of his steam engine.“I can tell, any day, that Ford is going to contact me, and take me out of allmy worries,” Tesla confidently predicted to Julius Czito, Coleman’s son, whowas now working for him. “Sure enough, one fine morning a body of engineersfrom the Ford Motor Company presented themselves with the request ofdiscussing with me an important project,” Tesla revealed a few years later.“Didn’t I tell you,” the prophet remarked triumphantly.“You are amazing, Mr. Tesla,” Julius responded. “Everything is coming outjust as you predicted.”“As soon as these hardheaded men were seated,” Tesla continued, “I, ofcourse, immediately began to extol the wonderful features of my turbine, whenthe spokesmen interrupted me and said, ‘We know all about this, but we are on aspecial errand. We have formed a psychological society for the investigation ofpsychic phenomena and we want you to join us in this undertaking.’”Flabbergasted, Tesla contained his indignation long enough to escort thewayward explorers to the street.17A MEETING WITH A PRINCESSSuffering from an attack of the grippe throughout the first month of 1916, Teslamade the newspapers by posing for a portrait for the provocative painter PrincessVilna Lwoff-Parlaghy. Daughter of Baroness von Zollerndorff and married anddivorced from Prince Lwoff of Russia, Vilna had painted the portraits of suchgreats as Field Marshall von Moltke, Bismarck, the Baroness Rothschild,Andrew Carnegie, Thomas Edison, and Teddy Roosevelt. Reluctant at first to sitbecause of superstitious feelings of foreboding, Tesla soon acquiesced and founda comfortable chair among Her Highness’s various pets, which included, at onetime or another, “two dogs, an Angora cat, a bear, lion cub, alligator, ibis andtwo falcons.” Recently kicked out of the Plaza for unpaid bills totaling $12,000,perhaps the princess shared a good laugh with the Serbian nobleman, whohimself was in a similar predicament. The painting was reproduced in ElectricalExperimenter in 1919 and, once again, on the cover of Time for Tesla’s seventy-fifth birthday, in 1931.18This time period also saw the arrival of Tesla’s sister’s son, NicholasTrbojevich, himself an inventor who wanted to work as Tesla’s assistant.Apparently, Tesla was unable to spend much time with his nephew. Feelingrebuked, Trbojevich turned to the local Serbian community, where he found awilling Prof. Michael Pupin, who took the lad “under his wing” and on a tour ofthe city. Trbojevich endeared himself to the great professor and they becamefriends. Trbojevich would come to develop, in the 1920s and 1930s the hypoidgear and several sophisticated improvements in steering for the automotiveindustry. Working with mathematical principles, this inventor designed anelegant way to lower the driveshaft, running from the motor to the rear axle,nearly a foot. This advance enabled running boards to be eliminated, therebyallowing the car to become more streamlined. Simultaneously, it earnedTrbojevich a tidy sum. Moving to Detroit in the late 1920s, Trbojevich continuedto correspond with Uncle Nikki, who also came to visit around the time of theGreat Depression.19In February, Tesla received a letter from ardent admirer John (Jack)O’Neill, who was now working as a news correspondent for a Long Island dailyand about to transfer jobs to the Herald Tribune. The young man reminded himof their 1907 encounter in the subway and enclosed the following poem, “ToNikola Tesla,” as an “infinitesimal tribute to [the inventor’s] greatness”:Most glorious man of all agesThou wert born to forecast greater daysWhere the wonders thy magic presagesShall alter our archaic ways.Your coils with their juice oscillatingSent electrical surges through the earthSent great energies reverberatingFrom the center to the outermost girth.Is thy mind a power omnipresentThat fathoms the depths of all spaceThat speaks to an adolescentThe future triumphs of the race?20Tesla sent the youngster a letter in return “thanking him heartily,” although“your opinion of me is immensely exaggerated.” Enigmatically, he alsosuggested that O’Neill write a poem for J. Pierpont Morgan, “one man today onwhom the world is depending more than any other.” Should O’Neill do this, “itmight be instrumental in putting [him] in possession of a check.”21 Consideringthat Pierpont was dead, this was a rather peculiar recommendation.The Edison MedalWere we to seize and to eliminate from our industrial world the resultsof Mr. Tesla’s work, the wheels of industry would cease to turn, our townswould be dark, our mills would be dead and idle. Ye[s], so far reaching isthis work, that it has become the warp and woof of industry.B. A. Behrend, 191722To those with eyes for the truth, Tesla’s state of crisis cut deep. Oneengineer in particular, Bernard A. Behrend, the Swiss émigré who had refused totestify against him during the malevolent AC-patent litigation days, felt theurgency to act. Clearly, it was Behrend’s goal to help restore the reputation of hisspiritual benefactor. Having devoted a large measure of his life to refiningTesla’s invention of the induction motor, Behrend informed his mentor that he,Tesla, had been nominated to receive the Edison Medal. In fact, it had beenBehrend who had proposed the idea to the committee. Winners from the past hadincluded Alexander Graham Bell, Elihu Thomson, and George Westinghouse.That Tesla would be nominated by an organization dwelling under thebanner of the Edison name was shocking enough to the brooding Serb. Edisonhimself must have allowed the presentation to be made. It does not appear thatEdison, having just turned seventy, was plagued by the reciprocal feeling ofanimosity that Tesla exhibited. It is more likely that the thought of giving Teslathe medal brought a broad smirk to the Menlo Park Wizard’s visage.Tesla’s first reaction was abhorrence, and he flatly rejected the offer, butBehrend persisted. Here was an opportunity to recognize a worthy recipientalone for his singular contributions. “Who do you want remembered as theauthor of your power system?” Behrend inquired. “Ferraris, Shallenberger,Stillwell, or Steinmetz?” Tesla reluctantly capitulated.The presentation of the Edison Medal was made on May 18, 1917, just twomonths before Tesla found out by telephone that vandals had broken into hisWardenclyffe laboratory and wrecked equipment valued at $68,000 and that “theTower [was] to be destroyed by dynamite.”23 Many familiar faces dotted thecrowd.The Johnsons and Miss Merrington attended, as did Charles Scott andEdward Dean Adams, the man most responsible for recommending Tesla for theNiagara Falls enterprise.The opening speech was delivered by A. E. Kennelly, former Edison crony,who was now teaching at Harvard. Long a Tesla adversary, having been active inexecuting animals with AC current during the heated Battle of the Currents inthe early 1890s, Kennelly spoke for fifteen minutes. During this time, the goodprofessor managed to not mention Tesla’s name even once.“Many people,” Professor Kennelly began, “suppose that the Edison Medalis presented by Mister Edison, but that is a mistake. In fact, Tom Edison hasbeen so busy during his life receiving medals that he has not time to dispenseany.” The speaker droned on, making Tesla more nervous with each obsequioussentence. “Every time a worthy recipient is honored with this Medal, ThomasEdison is also honored. In fact,” the Edison man continued, “We may lookforward to a time, say a thousand years hence, when like this evening the onethousand and seventh recipient will receive the Edison Medal, and once againEdison’s achievements will be honored.”24As legend has it, Tesla disappeared from the room. Panic-stricken, Behrendran out of the building to look for him, while Charles Terry, a prominentexecutive from the Westinghouse Corporation, reviewed Tesla’s greataccomplishments. According to the story, Behrend found the lonely inventoracross the street by the library, feeding his precious pigeons.25During Behrend’s introduction, he stated, perhaps to counter Kennelly’sopening speech, “The name of Tesla runs no more risk of oblivion than does thatof Faraday or Edison. What can a man desire more than this. It occurs to me toparaphrase Pope describing Newton, ‘Nature and Nature’s laws lay hid in night.God said, “Let Tesla be,” and all was light.’”“Ladies and gentleman,” Tesla began, “I wish to thank you heartily for yourkind appreciation. I am not deceiving myself in the fact of which you must beaware that the speakers have greatly magnified my modest achievements.Inspired with the hope and conviction that this is just a beginning, a forerunnerof still greater accomplishments, I am determined to continue developing myplans and undertake new endeavors.“I am deeply religious at heart, and give myself to the constant enjoymentof believing that the greatest mysteries of our being are still to be fathomed.Evidence to the contrary notwithstanding, death itself may not be the terminationof the wonderful metamorphosis we witness. In this way I manage to maintainan undisturbed peace of mind, to make myself proof against adversity, and toachieve contentment and happiness to a point of extracting some satisfactioneven from the darker side of life, the trials and tribulations of existence.”The electrical savant would go on to review much of his life—an anecdotefrom his childhood about a gander who almost pulled his umbilical cord out, hisearly meetings with Edison and work with Westinghouse, lectures in Europe,success at Niagara, and future plans in wireless.“I have fame and untold wealth, more than this,” the inventor concluded,“and yet—how many articles have been written in which I was declared to be animpractical unsuccessful man, and how many poor, struggling writers havecalled me a visionary. Such is the folly and shortsightedness of the world!”26Tesla was aghast that Boldt had not protected Wardenclyffe adequately, forit was valued at a minimum of at least $150,000. Even though he had signed itover to the hotel, he had done so, according to his understanding, to honor hisdebt “until [his] plans matured.” As the property, when completed, would yield$20,000 or $30,000 a day, Tesla was simply flabbergasted that Boldt wouldmove to destroy the place. Boldt or “the Hotel Management” saw Wardenclyffenow as theirs, free and clear, even though Tesla offered as proof “a chattelmortgage” on the machinery that the inventor had placed at his own expense.The hotel’s insurance was only $5,000, whereas Tesla’s coverage for themachinery was valued at $68,000. Why would Tesla independently seek toprotect the property if he didn’t still have an interest in it? Tesla saw the contractas “a security pledge,” but the paper he signed did not specify any suchcontingency. According to the Hotel’s lawyer, Frank Hutchins of Baldwin &Hutchins, “it was bill of sale with the deed duly recorded two years ago. We failto see what interest you have,” Hutchins callously concluded.27Storming into their offices on Pine Street, Tesla demanded to find outfirsthand what was to happen.“You will have to ask Smiley Steel Company. They are the ones in chargeof salvage operations.”J. B. Smiley informed Tesla that indeed the tower was to be taken down, itsparts sold to cover outstanding debts. “A great wrong has been done,” theinventor wrote in reply, “but I am confident that justice will prevail.”28“Pay no attention to Tesla whatsoever, but proceed immediately withwrecking as contracted,” Smiley told his wrecking crew after conferring withHutchins.29Waldorf-Astoria Hotel CompanyJuly 12, 1917Gentlemen:I have received reports which have completely dumbfounded me allthe more so as I am now doing important work for the Government with aview of putting the plant to a special use of great moment…I trust that you will appreciate the seriousness of the situation and willsee that the property is taken good care of and that all apparatus is carefullypreserved.Very truly yours,N. Tesla30The wizard decided that the only way to save Wardenclyffe was to extol itsvirtues as a potential defensive weapon for the protection of the country.Capitalizing on the excellent Nobel Prize publicity, the inventor once againstrained the reader’s credulity with another startling vision.Tesla’s New DeviceLike Bolts of ThorHe Seeks to Patent WirelessEngine for Destroying Naviesby Pulling a LeverTo Shatter Armies AlsoNikola Tesla, the inventor, winner of the 1915 Nobel Physics Prize,has filed patent applications on the essential parts of a machine thepossibilities of which test a layman’s imagination and promise a parallel toThor’s shooting thunderbolts from the sky to punish those who had angeredthe gods. Dr. Tesla insists there is nothing sensational about it…“It is perfectly practicable to transmit electrical energy without wiresand produce destructive effects at a distance. I have already constructed awireless transmitter which makes this possible.”“Ten miles or a thousand miles, it will be all the same to the machine,”the inventor says. Straight to the point, on land or on sea, it will be able togo with precision, delivering a blow that will paralyze or kill, as it isdesired. A man in a tower on Long Island could shield New York againstships or army by working a lever, if the inventor’s anticipations becomerealizations.31Tesla would not draw up an official paper on the particle-beam weapon, or“death ray,” for another twenty years yet it is clear that he had conceived themachine by this time, probably creating prototypes as far back as 1896, when hewas bombarding targets with Roentgen rays.In “a serious plight,” with nowhere else to turn, the inventor contactedMorgan once again to ask for assistance. This was his last chance to protect hiswireless patents and save the tower. “Words cannot express how much I havedeplored the cruel necessity which compelled me to appeal to you again,” theinventor explained, but it was to no avail.32 He still owed Jack $25,000 plusinterest; the financier ignored the entreaty and quietly placed Tesla’s account in abad-debt file.In February 1917, the United States broke off all relations with Germanyand seized the wireless plant at Sayville. “Thirty German employees of theGerman-owned station were suddenly forced to leave, and enlisted men of theAmerican Navy have filled their places.”33 Guards were placed around the plantas the high command decided what to do with the remaining broadcastingstations lying along the coast. Articles began springing up like early crocus toannounce the potential “existence of [yet another] concealed wireless station[able] to supply information to German submarines regarding the movements ofships.”3419 More Taken as German SpiesDr. Karl George Frank, FormerHead of Sayville WirelessAmong Those Detained35On April 6, 1917, President Wilson issued a proclamation “seiz[ing] allradio stations. Enforcement of the order was delegated to Secretary Daniels…Itis understood that all plants for which no place can be found in the navy’swireless system, including amateur apparatus, for which close search will bemade, are to be put out of commission immediately.”36 Clearly, an overt decisionhad to be made about the fate of Wardenclyffe.Tesla’s expertise was well known to Secretary Daniels and AssistantSecretary Franklin Roosevelt, as they were actively using the inventor’sscientific legacy as ammunition against Marconi in the patent suit. Coupled withthe inventor’s astonishing proclamation that his tower could provide anelectronic aegis against potential invasions, Wardenclyffe must have been placedin a special category. However, there were two glaring strikes against it. The firstwas that Tesla had already turned over the property to Mr. Boldt to cover hisdebt at the Waldorf; and the second was the transmitter’s record ofaccomplishment: nonexistent. What better indication of the folly of Tesla’sdream could there be then the tower’s own perpetual state of repose. To many,Wardenclyffe was merely a torpid monument to the bombastic prognosticationsof a not very original mind gone astray. From the point of view of the navy,Tesla may have been the original inventor of the radio, but he was clearly not theone who made the apparatus work.A HISTORY OF NAVY INVOLVEMENTIn 1899 the U.S. Navy, via Rear Admiral Francis J. Higginson, requested Teslato place “a system of wireless telegraphy upon Light-Vessel No. 66 [on]Nantucket Shoals, Mass, which lies 60 miles south of Nantucket Island.”37 Teslawas on his way to Colorado and was unable to comply. Moreover, the navy didnot want to pay for the equipment, but rather wanted Tesla to lay out the fundshimself. Considering the great wealth of the country, Tesla feigned astonishmentat the penurious position of John D. Long, secretary of the navy, via CommanderPerry, who brazenly forwarded the financial disclaimer on U.S. TreasuryDepartment stationery.Upon Tesla’s return to New York in 1900, he wrote again of his interest inplacing the equipment aboard their ships. Rear Admiral Higginson, chairman ofthe Light House Board, wrote back that his committee would meet in October todiscuss with Congress “the estimates of cost.”38 Higginson, who had visitedTesla in his lab in the late 1890s, wanted to help, but he had been placed in theembarrassing position of withdrawing his offer of financial remunerationbecause of various levels of bureaucratic inanity. Tesla spent the time to go downto Washington to confer face-to-face with the high command—Hobson alsonegotiated on his friends behalf—but Telsa was essentially ignored and returnedto New York empty handed and disgusted with the way he was treated.From the point of view of the navy, wireless telegraphy was an entirely newfield, and they were unsure what to do. Furthermore, they may have been turnedoff by Tesla’s haughty manner, particularly when it came to being “compared” toMarconi, which had always enraged Tesla. (Keep in mind, however, that thenavy took over ten years to recompense Hammond for his work on radio-guidedmissiles, and even then they almost didn’t come through. Tesla was by no meansthe only one to get the runaround from the military, and Hammond had the bestconnections possible through his influential father.)In 1902 the Office of Naval Intelligence called Comdr. F. M. Barber, whohad been in retirement in France, back to the States and put him in charge of theacquisition of wireless apparatus for testing. Although still taking a frugalposition, the navy came up with approximately $12,000 for the purchase ofwireless sets from different European companies. Orders were placed withSlaby-Arco and Braun-Siemans-Halske of Germany and Popoff, Ducretet andRochefort of France. Bids were also requested from De Forest, Fessenden, andTesla in America and Lodge-Muirhead in England. Marconi was excludedbecause he arrogantly coveted an all-or-nothing deal.39Fessenden was angry with the navy for obtaining equipment outside theUnited States and so did not submit a bid. Tesla was probably too upset with histreatment from the past and too involved with Wardenclyffe, which was underactive construction at that time, to get involved, and so the navy purchasedadditional sets from De Forest and Lodge-Muirhead.In 1903 a mock battle with the North Atlantic fleet was held five hundredmiles off the coast of Cape Cod. With the “White Squadron” commanded byRear Adm. J. H. Sands and the “Blue Squadron” by Rear Admiral Higginson,Tesla’s ally, the use of wireless played a key role in determining the victor.Commander Higginson, who won the maneuver, commented, “To me, the greatlesson of the search we ended today is the absolute need of wireless in the shipsof the Navy. Do you know we are three years behind the times in the adoption ofwireless?”40Based on comparison testing, it was determined that the Slaby-Arco systemoutperformed all others, and the navy ordered twenty more sets. Simultaneously,they purchased an eleven-year lease on the Marconi patents.41With the onset of World War I, the use of wireless became a necessity fororganizing troop movements, surveillance, and intercontinental communication.While the country was still neutral, the navy was able to continue their use of theGerman equipment—until sentiments began to shift irreversibly to the Britishside. Via the British navy, Marconi had his transmitters positioned in Canada,Bermuda, Jamaica, Columbia, the Falkland Islands, North and South Africa,Ceylon, Australia, Singapore, and Hong Kong. His was a mighty operation. Inthe United States, the American Marconi division, under the directorship of thepolitically powerful John Griggs, former governor of New Jersey and attorneygeneral under President McKinley, had transmitters located in New York,Massachusetts, and Illinois.42 One key problem, however, was that the Marconiequipment was still using the outmoded spark-gap method.In April 1917, the U.S. Navy completed the seizure of all wireless stations,including those of their allies, the British. At the same time, Marconi was in theprocess of purchasing the Alexanderson alternator, which was, in essence, arefinement of the Tesla oscillator. Simultaneously, the Armstrong feedbackcircuit was becoming an obvious necessity for any wireless instrumentation.However, the Armstrong invention created a judicial nightmare, not onlybecause it used as its core the De Forest audion but also because De Forest’sinvention was overturned in the courts in favor of an electronic tube developedby Fessenden. Never mind that Tesla, as far back as 1902, had beaten Fessendenin the courts for this development. With the Fessenden patent now under thecontrol of Marconi, the courts would come to rule that no one could use theArmstrong feedback circuit without the permission of the other players.The most important ruling, concerning the true identity of the inventor ofthe radio, became neatly sidestepped by the War Powers Act of PresidentWilson, calling for the suspension of all patent litigation during the time of thewar. France had already recognized Tesla’s priority by their high court, andGermany recognized him by Slaby’s affirmations and Telefunken’s decision topay royalties; but in America, the land of Tesla’s home, the government backedoff and literally prevented the courts from sustaining a decision. The Marconisyndicate, in touch with kings from two countries, with equipment instituted onsix continents, was simply too powerful.With the suspension of all patent litigation and the country in the midst of aworld war, Franklin Roosevelt, assistant secretary of the navy, penned thefamous Farragut letter. This document allowed such major companies as AT&T,Westinghouse, and American Marconi the right to pool together to produce eachother’s equipment without concern for compensating rightful inventors.Furthermore, it “assured contractors that the Government would assume liabilityin infringement suits.”43On July 1, 1918, Congress passed a law making the United Statesfinancially responsible for any use of “an invention described in and covered bya patent of the United States.” By 1921, the U.S. government had spent $40million on wireless equipment, a far cry from Secretary Long’s policy ofrefusing to pay a few thousand dollars for Tesla’s equipment eighteen yearsbefore. Thus, the Interdepartmental Radio Board met to decide various claimsagainst it. Nearly $3 million in claims were paid out. The big winners wereMarconi Wireless, which received $1.2 million for equipment and installationstaken over (but not for their patents). International Radio Telegraph received$700,000; AT&T, $600,000; and Edwin Armstrong, $89,000. Tesla received aminuscule compensation through Lowenstein, who was awarded $23,000.44In 1921 the navy published a list of all the inventors in wireless whoreceived compensation from them. The list contained only patents granted after1902. Inventors included Blockmen, Braun, Blondel, De Forest, Fuller,Hahnemann, Logwood, Meissner, Randahl, Poulsen, Schiessler, von Arco, andWatkins. Note that both Tesla’s and Marconi’s names are missing.45 Marconi’scould be missing either because his patents had lapsed or, more likely, becausethey were viewed as invalid from the point of view of the government. In thecase of Tesla, all of his twelve key radio patents had “expired and [were] nowcommon property.”46 However, Tesla had renewed one fundamental patent in1914,47 and this should have been on the list, as should have Armstrong’sfeedback patent.RADIO CORPORATION OF AMERICAThe U.S. government, through Franklin Roosevelt, knew that Marconi hadinfringed upon Tesla’s fundamental patents. They knew the details of Tesla’srightful claims through their own files and through the record at the patentoffice. In point of fact, it was Tesla’s proven declaration which was the basis andcentral argument that the government had against Marconi when Marconi suedin the first place, and it was this same claim, and the same Navy Light HouseBoard files, that would eventually be used by the U.S. Supreme Court tovindicate Tesla three months after he died, nearly twenty-five years later, in1943.Rather than deal with the truth and with a difficult genius whose presentwork appeared to be in a realm above and beyond the operation of simple radiotelephones and wireless transmitters, Roosevelt, Daniels, President Wilson, andthe U.S. Navy, in the midst of war, took no interest in protecting Tesla’s tower.In July 1917, Tesla packed his bags and said goodbye to the Waldorf-Astoria. Having lived there for nearly twenty years, he talked George Boldt Jr.into allowing him to keep a large part of his personal effects in the basement ofthe hotel until he found a suitable place for transferring them. “I was sorry tohear about your father,” Tesla told the new manager, George Boldt Sr. havingdied just a few months before.Preparing to move to Chicago to work on his bladeless turbines, Tesla wasinvited to the Johnsons for a farewell dinner. Robert was now directing theaffairs of the American Academy of Arts and Letters, an organization whichcounted among its ranks Daniel Chester French, Charles Dana Gibson, WinslowHomer, Henry James and his brother William, Charles McKim, Henry CabotLodge, Teddy Roosevelt, and Woodrow Wilson. Katharine had been in bed forover a week with the grippe, but this evening was too important, and she draggedherself out of bed and put on her best gown.Dressed in straw hat, cane, white gloves, and his favorite green suede high-tops, Tesla arrived with a large bouquet of flowers and a check for Johnson.“Kate’s been ill,” Robert managed to say before the lady of the houseappeared.Taking center stage, as she always tried to do when “He” was around, Kateradiated an intense glow of amorous pride as she held back the flood of tearswhile she chatted on an on about “how crazy [she was] about all of hergrandchildren.”48Taking a weekend train to Chicago, Tesla moved into the Blackstone Hotel,alongside the University of Chicago. On Monday morning the inventor hired alimousine to drop him at the headquarters of Pyle National Corporation. Havingalready shipped prototypes to give them a head start, he would now work at anintense pace in an entirely new setting, his goal being the perfection of hisrevolutionary bladeless turbines.49At night he liked to walk down the street from his hotel to the Museum ofArts and Sciences, the only building remaining from the World’s Fair of 1893.There he could stand by the great columns and think back to a time when, daily,hundreds of thousands would stream into a magical city powered by his vision.One Saturday, in the heat of summer, he took the mile walk along LakeMichigan, past the Midway, to a series of small lakes and a park which was oncethe Court of Honor. There, at the entranceway, to a place that once was, hefound, to his delight, the Statue of the Republic still standing, its gold plating allworn away. With him was a letter from George Scherff.August 20, 1917Dear Mr. Tesla,I was deeply grieved and shocked when I read the enclosed, but I havethe supreme confidence that more glorious work will arise from the ruins.I trust that your work in Chicago is progressing to your satisfaction.Yours respectfully,George Scherff50At the height of the world conflagration, the Smiley Steel Company’sexplosives expert had circled the gargantuan transmitter to place a charge aroundeach major strut and nail the coffin shut on Tesla’s dream. With the AssociatedPress recording the event and military personnel apparently present, themagnifying transmitter was leveled, the explosion alarming many of theShoreham residents.And with the death of the World Telegraphy Center came the birth of theRadio Broadcasting Corporation, a unique conglomerate of private concernsunder the auspices of the U.S. government. Meetings were held behind closeddoors in Washington between President Wilson, who wanted America to gain“radio supremacy,”51 Navy Secretary Daniels, his assistant Franklin Roosevelt,and representatives from GE, American Marconi, AT&T, and the WestinghouseCorporation. With J. P. Morgan & Company on the board of directors and theMarconi patents as the backbone of the organization, RCA was formed. It wouldcombine resources from these megacorporations, all of which had cross-licensing agreements with each other and co-owned the company.52 (Cross-licensing agreements also existed with the government, which also owned somewireless patents.) Here was another entente cordiale reminiscent of the ACpolyphase days, which was not so for the originator of the invention. It was asecond major time Tesla would be carved from his creation,53 a secret dealprobably concocted which absolved the government from paying any licensingfee to Marconi in lieu of their burying their Tesla archives. David Sarnoff, asmanaging director, would soon take over the reins of the entire operation.The New York Sun inaccurately reported:U.S. Blows Up Tesla Radio TowerSuspecting that German spies were using the big wireless tower erected atShoreham, L.I., about twenty years ago by Nikola Tesla, the FederalGovernment ordered the tower destroyed and it was recently demolishedwith dynamite. During the past month several strangers had been seenlurking about the place.54The destruction of Nikola Tesla’s famous tower…shows forcibly thegreat precautions being taken at this time to prevent any news of militaryimportance of getting to the enemy.55At the end of the war President Wilson returned all remaining confiscatedradio stations to their rightful owners. American Marconi, now RCA, of course,was the big beneficiary.56In 1920 the Westinghouse Corporation was granted the right to“manufacture, use and sell apparatus covered by the [Marconi] patents.”57Westinghouse also formed an independent radio station which became asprominent as RCA. At the end of the year, Tesla wrote a letter to E. M. Herr,president of the company, offering his wireless expertise and equipment.November 16, 1920Dear Mr. Tesla,I regret that under the present circumstances we cannot proceed furtherwith any developments of your activities.58A few months later, Westinghouse requested that Tesla “speak to our‘invisible audience’ some Thursday night in the near future [over our…]radiotelephone broadcasting station.”59November 30, 1921Gentleman,Twenty-one years ago I promised a friend, the late J. Pierpont Morgan,that my world-system, then under construction…would enable the voice ofa telephone subscriber to be transmitted to any point of the globe…I prefer to wait until my project is completed before addressing aninvisible audience and beg you to excuse me.Very truly yours,N. Tesla60 