13THE FILIPOVS (1894)Mr. Tesla has been held a visionary, deceived by the flash of casualshooting stars; but the growing conviction of his professional brethren isthat because he saw farther he saw first the low lights flickering on tangiblenew continents of science. The perceptive and imaginative qualities of themind are not often equally marked in the same man of genius.T. C. MARTIN1Fame had arrived, and at all levels. In engineering circles Tesla was known as“one of the most remarkable discoverers of the age,”2 to the magazines as(heaven forbid!) “the New Edison,”3 to the newspapers as “Our ForemostElectrician,”4 to the masses as a wondrous wizard from a strange land, and to thefinanciers as bankable.Having recognized the virtuoso from the outset, T. C. Martin, as headtrumpeter, was now helping choreograph Tesla’s vault into the public arena.Commerford, as he was known to his friends, had generated a propitiousrelationship to all concerned when he met with Robert Underwood Johnson,associate editor of the Century, to propose a feature article on the thrivingelectronic savant.“Take a seat,” Johnson offered as he scanned through toppling stacks ofmanuscripts scattered about the office to find a chair that could be easily cleared.A brother of a congressman and a poet, Johnson had, in 1889, been honored bythe city when he was chosen to contribute an original sonnet for the unveiling ofthe Washington Square arch which he read before President Harrison and otherdignitaries. A temporary structure designed by Standford White commemoratingone hundred years since the inauguration of George Washington, this archpredated by a few years the permanent marble Arch also designed by White.Johnson was also knowledgeable about inventors, having visited Edison’slaboratory in the early 1880s as a reporter for Scribner’s Monthly, the precursorof the Century. Tesla, no doubt, had already piqued his interest.Impressed with the eloquent portrait Martin had painted of Tesla, Johnsoninvited his colleague over for dinner. “Why not bring the wizard along. Perhapsthere is more than one article here for the offing.”On a first-name basis with such personalities as mayoral candidateTheodore Roosevelt and writer Mark Twain, two frequent visitors to his UnionSquare office, Johnson and his ebullient wife, Katharine, were the very essenceof the phrase “gracious hosts.” Through their dinner parties at their home at 327Lexington Avenue, a visitor could dine with any number of luminaries, such assculptor August Saint-Gaudens; actress Eleonora Duse; poet and editor in chiefof the Century, Richard Watson Gilder; naturalist John Muir; activist forchildren’s rights Mary Mapes Dodge; conductor of the Boston SymphonyMonsieur Gericke; composer and pianist Ignace Paderewski; thespian JosephJefferson; or writer extraordinaire Rudyard Kipling. Johnson had just returnedwith his wife from their second trip to Europe, where they had, by chance, runinto Twain in Venice. The world was a cozy and romantic place for the Johnsons,in part because they found it that way and in part because they molded it thatway.5Martin arrived with a “pallid, drawn and haggard” Tesla at the Johnsonhome in the middle of the Christmas season. They were greeted by Katharineand Robert Johnson and their two children, Agnes, who was about sixteen, andOwen, who was two or three years younger.The inventor’s frail condition, which one reporter described as having“reached the limits of human endurance,”6 took the Johnsons, especiallyKatharine, by surprise. A facile conversationalist, Katharine was a strikingwoman of Irish descent, poised, with shoulders swept back, her head held erect.Although her hair was now beginning to streak gray, she still exuded an air ofyouth. It was her eyes in particular that visitors were drawn to. Slightlycoquettish, they displayed a daring sense of play beneath a wistful stare.Triggering a constellation of emotions ranging from maternal instincts tobeguilement, Katharine became enthralled, some would say mesmerized, by theSerbian superman who had entered her world; and he had taken to her.Tesla talked about his European tour, particularly his meeting with SirWilliam Crookes, and the Johnsons invited him for Christmas.“You are overworked, Mr. Tesla, and you should take a holiday,” Katharinedeclared. “Perhaps a good Christmas meal will keep you going through the firstmonths of the new year.”“I get all the nourishment I require from my laboratory,” Tesla retorted. “Iknow I am completely worn out, and yet I cannot stop my work. Theseexperiments of mine are so important, so beautiful, so fascinating, that I canhardly tear myself away from them to eat, and when I try to sleep I think aboutthem constantly. I expect I shall go on until I break down altogether. Come, letus go there for our dessert.” A carriage was called, and in short order theJohnsons were lured to the “magician’s den.”7“Be prepared for a surprise or two,” Tesla said as he, in the words of areporter who experienced a similar episode, “ushered [them] into a room sometwenty five feet square, lighted on one side by two broad windows, partiallycovered by heavy black curtains. The laboratory was literally filled with curiousmechanical appliances of every description…Snakelike cables ran along thewalls, ceiling, and floor. In the center was [an electric dynamo which sat upon] alarge circular table covered with thick strips of black woolen cloth. Two largebrownish globes, eighteen inches in diameter, [were sus]pended from [the]ceiling by cords. Composed of brass, coated [and insulated with] wax, [theseglobes] served the purpose of spreading the electrostatic field…”Tesla shut the doors and drew the curtains “until every chink or crevice forthe admission of light was concealed and the laboratory bathed in absolutelyimpenetrable gloom. [As we] awaited developments, exquisitely beautifulluminous signs and devices of mystic origin began to flash about. Sometimesthey seemed iridescent, the entire room filled with electric vibrations, [as] tubes[and] bulbs [which we held] became luminous…What impressed [us] most ofall, perhaps, was the simple but cheerful fact that [we] remained unscathed,while electrical bombardments were taking place on every side.”8A few days later, in honor of the celebration of the Serbian Christmas, onJanuary 6, Katharine sent Tesla a bouquet.“I have to thank Mrs. Johnson for the magnificent flowers,” Tesla wroteRobert. “I have never…received flowers [before], and they produced upon me acurious effect.”9Tesla would return to the Johnson home on a regular basis, for dinner orafter an evening on his own for a late nightcap; and the inventor reciprocated bytaking the Johnsons out on the town. They would be attending the galaperformance of Dvořák’s New World Symphony.“Upon receipt of your first note,” Tesla wrote Robert, “I immediatelysecured the best seats I could for Saturday. Nothing better than the 15th row!Very sorry, we shall have to use telescopes. But I think the better for Mrs.Johnson’s vivid imagination. Dinner at Delmonico’s.”10Intrigued with Tesla’s fascinating heritage, Robert became interested inSerbian poetry, and so Tesla began to translate for him. They obtainedpermission from Zmaj Jovanovich to feature some of his poems for inclusion inthe Century, and also in a book Johnson entitled Songs of Liberty. Their favoritewas undoubtedly the ballad about a warrior from a Montenegrin battle whichtook place in 1874.Luka FilipovOne more hero to be partOf the Servians’ glory!Lute to lute and heart to heartTell the homely story:Let the Moslem hide for shame,Trembling like the falcon’s game,Thinking on the falcon’s name—Luka Filipov.The verse goes on to describe a fierce battle, in which Luka captures apasha and marches him back to the prince. However, on the way, Luka becomeswounded in an ambush, so his soldiers decide to retaliate by killing the arrestedTurk.We’d have fired, but Luka’s handRose in protestation,While his pistol’s mute commandneeded no translation:For the Turk retraced his track,Knelt, and took upon his back(As a peddler lifts his pack)Luka Filipov!How we cheered him as he passedThrough the line, a-swingingGun and pistol—bleeding fast—Grim—but loudly singing…[But] as couriers came to sayThat our friends had won the day,Who should up and faint away?Luka Filipov!”One can easily envision Robert’s and Katharine’s eyes aglow as Teslaspontaneously translated Zmai’s ode in their living room one special evening andhow Robert worked to hone it for publication. From this moment on, brotherRobert would be known as “Dear Luka,” and Katharine would be addressed as“Mrs. Filipov.”To Katharine, Tesla was more than a man; he was an icon of historicalimportance, a trophy to display before her lady friends, and even more than this,he was a tangible symbol of intangible longings. In her essence, Katharine was afrustrated artist whose ever-present yearnings pulled her from moments ofexaltation to the edge of despair. She must have been a difficult person to livewith, but like Tesla, she had the capability to spark that realm that makes life allthe more worth living. Selfish, egocentric, and histrionic at times, Katharine alsohad a dominant streak that not only pulled people to her but manipulated them toher needs. Even the elusive hermit became a fly in her web.“Dear Mr. Tesla,” she wrote in January 1894, ‘We have had a hospital heresince Thursday. Robert and Agnes the invalids. Robert is better but not out, andwe want you to come…this evening and brighten us up…As a great favorcome…to us immediately.”12This beckoning to her auxiliary mate became a recurrent theme thatreplayed itself again and again through the next many years. For instance, in1896 she wrote, “Dear Mr. Tesla, I shall expect to see you tomorrow evening”;13in 1897, “Come soon”;14 and in 1898, “Will you come to see me tomorrowevening and will you try to come a little early…I want very much to see you andwill be really disappointed if you do not think my request worthy [of] yourconsideration.”15But Katharine was not alone in her infatuation; T. C. Martin had discoveredhim, but Robert would soon become Tesla’s closest confidant. A triad ofintimacy quickly transpired as Commerford Martin’s hold on the inventor beganto loosen. And just as much as the Johnsons would come to cherish Tesla, hewould cherish them. Here was a loving family the isolate could bind to.Tesla’s health constantly was an issue not only for their own concerns butalso, for the good of the species. Martin, whose new article in the Century,would certainly serve to advance his own career as well as Tesla’s, was just assolicitous, and he discussed the precariousness of the situation with Katharine.“I do not believe…that he will give up work at any very early date,” Martinwrote. “Talking of California with him in a casual way elicited the fact that hehad a couple of invitations to lecture there so that I don’t want to jam his headinto that lion’s mouth. I believe he is going to take more care of himself and youmay have done us all a great deal of service by your timely words. Yet in spite ofthat,” Martin continued, “I fear he will go on in the delusion that woman isgenerically a Delilah who would shear him of his locks. If you can manage it, Ibelieve it would be a good scheme to have that Doctor get hold of him…Myprescription is a weekly lecture from Mrs. RUJ.”16 This passage, by a Teslacolleague, is a rare glimpse at one of the enduring mysteries about Tesla, namelyhis supposed celibacy and mysterious sexual inclinations.By coincidence, only a fortnight later, Heinrich Hertz was dead. He wasonly thirty-six. Martin wrote to Tesla, “For God’s sake, let it be a warning toyou. All Europe mourns for such an untimely taking off.”17But Tesla would take no heed, and his custom of driving himself to the limitwould be a style of living that he would continue for many years. The future ofthe race and his role in it was clear to him; nothing could stand in his way.“The time will come,” Tesla told Katharine, “when crossing the ocean bysteamer you will be able to have a daily newspaper on board with the importantnews of the world, and when by means of a pocket instrument and a wire stuckin the ground, you can communicate from any distance with friends at homethrough an instrument similarly attuned.”18 His gaze and seeming powers ofdivination took her breath away. Penetrating his inner sanctum only added to hercaptivation.At the outset, Tesla’s unparalleled achievements, explosion intointernational stardom, and promise for the future generated an express desire forall to cash in, to sell his multitudinous array of inventions so that they couldascend together to the next social rung. Their goal was to become millionaires.Tesla’s “cold light” appeared to be the first ticket.As Martin’s erudite biographical essay had received words of praise evenfrom competitors, Johnson suggested that they plan a second piece, one thatfeatured the lab. Johnson would get some of his more famous friends to come,and photos would be taken. This would be an exclusive, the first ever with thenew revolutionary cold light. Johnson writes:We were frequently invited to witness his experiments, which included…the production of electrical vibrations of an intensity not before achieved.Lightning-like flashes of the length of fifteen feet were an every-dayoccurrence, and his tubes of electric light were used to make photographs ofmany of his friends as souvenir of their visits. He was the first person tomake use of phosphorescent light for photographic purposes—not a smallitem of invention in itself. I was one of a group consisting of Mark Twain,Joseph Jefferson, Marion Crawford and others who had the uniqueexperience of being thus photographed.19Naturally, the Twain pictures would become the centerpiece. S. L. Clemens,as he signed his letters to Tesla, came to the laboratory on March 4, 1894, andagain on April 26.20 Twain wrote to postpone the initial meeting for one day, andTesla and Johnson exchanged notes about it. Curiously, Twain’s private log forthis period makes no reference to the occasion. He had dined with StanfordWhite at his Madison Square Garden tower in January and, the following month,had received a notice that $160,000 in royalties were coming his way because ofthe Paige typesetting machine which he had backed, but that was all he jotteddown, even though Twain had been aware of Tesla from the very first momentthat the inventor had gone public with his creation of the AC polyphasesystem.21 Back in November 1888, Twain had written: “I have just seen thedrawings & description of an electrical machine lately patented by a Mr. Tesla,& sold to the Westinghouse Company, which will revolutionize the wholeelectric business of the world. It is the most valuable patent since thetelephone.”22Twain had run into Tesla on occasion, at the Players’ Club or Delmonico’s,or at the artist Robert Reid’s studio. One night, in Twain’s words, “the world-wide illustrious electrician” had joined the Reid party. Jokes and stories wereswapped, and songs were sung, particularly Kipling’s “On the Road toMandalay.”23 Tesla related the story of how Twain’s books saved his life whenhe was a boy of twelve struck down with a case of malaria, and this tale servedto endear Tesla to Twain to the point of bringing tears to the writer’s eyes.24Interested in inventions and their exploitation, Twain asked Tesla at the labif it would be all right if he could sell high-frequency electrotherapy machines torich widows in Europe upon his next sojourn; the inventor naturally agreed.Tesla, in turn, showed the great writer yet another creation which he claimedwould help these widows digest their meals.This contraption, he explained, “consists of a platform supported on elasticcushions that are made to oscillate by means of compressed air. One day, Istepped on the platform and the vibrations imparted were transmitted to mybody…Evidently, these isochronous rapid oscillations stimulated powerfully theperistaltic movements which propel the food-stuffs through the alimentarychannels.”“You mean, it’ll make me regular?” Twain inquired.“Precisely, and without the use of elixirs, specific remedies or internalapplications whatever.”Without further ado, Twain stepped aboard as Tesla tried to stop hisassistants from chuckling. As Twain had been so enthusiastic, Tesla neglected toinform him that peristaltic action is induced almost immediately.“Suddenly, Twain felt an unspeakable and pressing necessity which had tobe promptly satisfied,” Tesla told the Johnsons the next day to their tearful glee,for he had to jump off the platform and find his way swiftly to the lavatory.“I think I’ll start with the electrotherapy machines,” Twain said upon hisreturn. “Wouldn’t want the widows to get too healthy all at one shot.”25The photos of Twain and the others were processed nearly one full yearbefore they would appear in print. Tesla was elated and commented to Johnsonthat the one of Joseph Jefferson was “simply immense. I mean the one showinghim alone in the darkness. I think it is a [work] of art.”26 Katharine suggestedthat they all celebrate at Delmonico’s and that he then join them for a summerholiday at the Hamptons. Tesla wrote back: “I fear that if I depart very oftenfrom my simple habits I shall come to grief.” However, realizing that he wouldsoon be missing “the pleasure of your company” he reluctantly agreed to go todinner, but not to the holiday, and therefore signed off, “In the anticipation of thejoy [of dining with friends] and subsequent sorrows, I remain, Yours sincerely,N. Tesla.”27Concerning the photographs, which were the first ever taken withphosphorescent lights, Tesla, who had his eye on potential investors, becameimpatient for the publicity; but Martin and Johnson were aghast.“I think that we ought to have a little talk about giving to the dailynewspapers a hint that Mr. Tesla has succeeded in taking photos byphosphorescence,” Martin warned. “It will leak out some hour and thensomeone…with the customary arrogance [will place it] in the papers…[Weneed] to get our priorities established. I think R. U. Johnson feels the sameway.”28This became the beginning of a series of disagreements between theinventor and his editor. The Inventions, Researches and Writings of Nikola Teslawas now in press, and Martin and Tesla were making money from the sale of thebook; however, Tesla kept wanting to give copies away freely. He sent the text toeach of his uncles and his three sisters in Bosnia/Croatia and also mailed hisarticle on Zmai to his uncle Pajo and his sister Marica.29Martin had to tread carefully, for although he was unhappy with Tesla’s lackof concern for the financial side of the situation, he also in no way wanted toalienate himself from the wellspring. Martin wrote, “Your request [for more freecopies] is just too hard. It seems to me that the Pittsburgh boys, if they love you,ought to be willing to blow a little money of their own on the book. But you arethe best judge of relations to them.” Martin promised to send Tesla a dozencopies at reduced prices. “Perhaps,” Martin requested, “you would like to makeus a bid on the whole edition,” closing as follows: “When you write me, make itautographic as often as you can. People are beginning to deplete my stock.”30From Tesla’s point of view, it was his book, and Martin should simply do ashe asked. This would become a sore point, especially because Martin wouldcome to lend Tesla money based on profits that were due him as editor and Teslawould never repay him.31 Martin would overlook it, for now.After the first photographs arrived, including the discreetly stylizedengraving of Tesla based on his most recent portrait, Martin requested a sneakpreview. “I will lock [them] up or put [them] in a safe deposit vault, if you wish,until the hour of publication,” promised Martin. “But I want to get one of thefirst as an historical souvenir.” At the same time, Martin informed Johnson thatthe University of Nebraska had offered Tesla an honorary doctorate incelebration of their twenty-fifth anniversary. “I have urged him to accept. I wantyou and Mrs. Johnson to bring your influence on him also. Her spell is now apotent one, I fancy, with him, so far as any woman’s can be, next [to] hissisters.”32It is unlikely, however, that Tesla thought much about getting a doctoratefrom the obscure University of Nebraska. To a person of his background andeducation, the offer was virtually meaningless. Johnson thought it moreappropriate for a prestigious institution, such as Columbia College, to grant suchan honor. Tesla had just received the Elliott Cresson Gold Medal Award from theFranklin Institute for “his earnest and indefatigable work as a pioneer in thisfield, and on account of the great value to science of his researches.”33 However,this was not the same as a doctorate, and so Johnson wrote to Hewey FairfieldOsborn, one of the dignitaries at Columbia, urging that they make the offerinstead.Johnson wrote:There would be a particular appropriateness in Columbia giving him adegree, since his first lecture was, if I mistake not, delivered at the Collegeand since New York City is the scene of his most important discoveries…Ithink it may truly be said that there are few men occupying this uniqueposition…in both the theoretical and practical phases of scientific work…As to his general culture, I may say that he…is widely read in the bestliterature of Italy, Germany and France as well as much of the Slaviccountries to say nothing of Greek and Latin. He is particularly fond ofpoetry and is always quoting Leopardi…or Goethe or the Hungarians orRussians. I know of few men of such diversity of general culture or suchaccuracy of knowledge.Johnson ended the letter with a character reference. His personality, he said,“is one of distinguished sweetness, sincerity, modesty, refinement, generosityand force.”34Since Professor Osborn knew Tesla well and had been witness to theColumbia lecture, he concurred with Johnson and thereupon spoke to Seth Low,the president of the university. “Poulton tells me,” Osborn said, “that Tesla wascovered with honors while in England and France. We certainly must not allowany other university to anticipate us in honoring a man who lives under our veryeyes.”“Isn’t he a countryman of Pupin’s?” Low inquired.“Yes, of course. It was at the urging of Professor Pupin and ProfessorCrocker that Tesla spoke here to begin with.”“Didn’t they have a row between them?” the president respondedcautiously.“I have learned confidentially that there has sprung up some slightdifference between them, but I’m sure it will probably be healed. In any event,there seems little doubt that Tesla is the leading electrician in the country.”35Within a few weeks, the inventor was given an honorary doctorate fromColumbia, and shortly thereafter he received a similar honor from Yale.Having received professional recognition among his peers, Tesla hadarrived. Feature articles were appearing in prestigious periodicals, and he washobnobbing with the most esteemed literary and social figures of the day. 