1HERITAGEHardly is there a nation which has met with a sadder fate than the Servians.From the height of its splendor, when the empire embraced almost the entirenorthern part of the Balkan peninsula and a large portion of what is nowAustria, the Servian nation was plunged into abject slavery, after the fatefulbattle of 1389 at the Kosovo Polje, against the overwhelming Asian hordes.Europe can never repay the great debt it owes to the Servians for checking,by the sacrifice of its own liberty, that barbarian influx.NIKOLA TESLA1It was during a crackling summer storm in Smiljan, a small hamlet at the backedge of a plateau set high in the mountains, when Nikola Tesla was born. TheSerbian family resided in the province of Lika, a plateau and gentle river valleyin Croatia where wild boar and deer still dwell and farmers still travel on ox-drawn wagons. Only a cart ride from the Adriatic, the land is well protected frominvasion by sea, by the Velebit ridge to the west, which runs the length of theprovince and towers over the coastline as a steep cliff, and by the Dinaric Alps tothe east, a chain of mountains that emerge from Austria, span the Balkanpeninsula and culminate in the south as the isle of Crete.Though hidden, Smiljan was centrally located, fifteen miles east of the tinyseaport of Karlobag, six miles west of the bustling town of Gospić and forty-fivemiles southwest of the cascading wonder known as Plitvice Lakes, aninterlinking chasm of caves and streams and magnificent waterfalls that lie at thebase of the Dinaric chain.2In the early 1800s, having been briefly part of Napoleon’s Illyrianprovinces, Croatia was now a domain of Austria-Hungary. With its neighboringSlavic countries of Bosnia, Hercegovina, Montenegro, Serbia, and Slovenia,Croatia was sandwiched between the ruling Hapsburg dynasty to the north andthe Ottoman Empire to the south.In ancient times, and for many centuries, much of the coastline along theAdriatic was ruled by the Illyrians, a piratical tribe believed to have descendedfrom regions around Austria. Successfully protecting their borders from suchrulers as Alexander the Great, many Illyrians rose into social prominence; some,at the time of Christ, became emperors.Slavs, traveling in close-knit clans known as zadrugas, were firstrecognized by the Byzantines in the second century A.D. in the areas aroundwhat is now Belgrade. Tesla’s appearance resembled the characteristic featuresof the Ghegs, a tribe described as being tall and having convex-shaped noses andflat skulls. Like other Slavs, these people were originally pagans and worshipednature spirits and a god of thunder and lightning. Tesla’s early ancestors wereprobably born in the Ukraine. They most likely traveled down through Romaniainto Serbia and lived near Belgrade, along the Danube. After the Battle ofKosovo in the latter part of the fourteenth century, they crossed the Kosovoplains into Montenegro and continued their migration northward into Croatia inthe latter part of the eighteenth century.3All Slavs speak the same language. The major distinction between Croatsand Serbs stems from the differences in the histories of their respectivecountries. The Croats adopted the pope as their spiritual leader and followed theRoman form of Catholicism; the Serbs adopted a Byzantine patriarch and theGreek Orthodox view. Whereas Roman priests remain celibate, Greek Orthodoxpriests may marry.In the east and central regions Slavs were more successful in maintainingtheir own control over what came to be called the kingdom of Serbia; whereas inthe west, in Croatia, outside rulers, such as Charlemagne in A.D. 800, occupiedthe region. While Croatia maintained the Christianization policies of the Franks,the Serbs and Bulgarians drove out the papacy and revived their own paganfaith, which included animal sacrifice and pantheism. Many of the ancient pagangods were made saints and were celebrated in higher esteem than Jesus. Tesla’spatron saint Nicholas was a fourth-century god who protected sailors.4To further alienate the two groups, although speaking the same verballanguage, Croats adopted the Latin alphabet, whereas Serbs and Bulgarians tookon the Cyrillic alphabet used by the Greek Orthodox church.5Before Turkish rule, from the ninth century until the 1300s, Serbia hadmaintained autonomy. For Serbia, this period was its golden age, as theByzantines accepted its autonomous status. Due to the philanthropic nature of itskings, a dynamic medieval art flourished, and great monasteries were erected.6Croatia, on the other hand, was in much more turmoil. Influenced bywestern Europe, the ruling class attempted unsuccessfully to institute a feudalsystem of lords and serfs. This policy directly opposed the inherent structure ofthe democratic zadrugas, and so Croatia was never able to establish a unifiedidentity. Nevertheless, one independent offshoot of Croatia, Ragusa(Dubrovnik), which had established itself as a port of commerce and a rival ofVenice as a major sea power, became a melting pot for south Slavic culture and asymbol for the Illyrian ideal of a unified Yugoslavia.The identity of Serbia as a nation, however, changed for all time on June15, 1389, the day 30,000 Turks obliterated the Serbian nation in the Battle ofKosovo. Cruel conquerors, the Turks destroyed Serbian churches or convertedthem to mosques. Drafting the healthiest male children into their armies, theyskewered and tortured the men and forced the women to convert and marryTurks. Many Serbs fled, taking up residence in the craggy mountains ofMontenegro or the hidden valleys of Croatia. Some of those that remainedbecame wealthy as Turkish vassals; others, mostly of mixed blood, becamepariahs.The Battle of Kosovo is as important to the Serbs as the Exodus to the Jewsor the Crucifixion to the Christians. It is commemorated every year on theanniversary of the tragedy as Vidov Dan, the day “when we shall see.”7 As oneSerb told the author, “It follows us always.”8 The massacre and ensuingdefilement of the kingdom became the dominant motif of the great epic poemswhich served to unify the identity of the Serbian people through their centuriesof hardship.Unlike the Croats, who did not have this kind of all-embracing exigency,the Serbs had Kosovo. Combined with their adherence to the Greek Orthodoxreligion in a twofold way, Serbs, no matter where they lived, felt united.The century of Tesla’s birth was marked by the rise of Napoleon. In 1809the emperor wrested Croatia from Austro-Hungarian rule and established Frenchoccupation. Extending his domain down the Adriatic coast, Napoleon reunitedthe Illyrian provinces and introduced French libertarian ideals. This philosophyhelped dismantle the outmoded feudal system of lords and serfs and reawakenthe idea of a unified Balkan nation. At the same time, the occupation created anidentity with the French culture. Tesla’s paternal grandfather and maternal great-grandfather both served under the French emperor.9With support from the Russians, Serbian bands united in 1804 under theleadership of the flamboyant hog farmer George Petrovich, known as Kara-George (in Turkish, Black George), a man of Montenegrin heritage trained in theAustrian army. However, in 1811, Napoleon invaded Russia; thus, support forSerbia evaporated.Forty thousand Turks marched against the Serbs, leveling towns andbutchering citizens. Serbs were often executed by impalement, their writhingbodies lined up along the roads to the city. All males captured above the age offifteen were slaughtered, and women and children were sold as slaves. Kara-George fled the country.Milosh, the new Serbian leader, was a sly and treacherous character, able towalk a thin line between Serbs and the sultan. In 1817, when Kara-Georgereturned, he was decapitated, his head sent by Milosh to Istanbul. A tyrant asterrible as any Turkish pasha, Milosh became the official head of Serbia in 1830.One of the more sapient figures of the day was the scholar and Serb VukKaradjich (1787-1864). Schooled in Vienna and St. Petersburg, Vuk believed“all Yugoslavs were one.”10Pleading with Milosh to build schools and to form a constitution, Vukcreated, with a student, a Serbo-Croatian dictionary that combined the twowritten languages. He published the epic folk ballads, which gained the attentionof Goethe, and through this means the Serbian plight and also its uniqueliterature were translated and spread to the western world.11In Croatia, the land of Tesla’s birth, Emperor Ferdinand of Austria, in 1843,issued a proclamation forbidding any discussion about Illyrianism, therebyhelping keep the Serbs and Croats a separate people. In 1867 the Austro-Hungarian Dual Monarchy was created, and Croatia became a semiautonomousprovince of the new empire. Simultaneously, in Serbia, Michael Obrenovich wasfinally able to “secure the departure…of the Turkish garrisons from Belgrade”and convert the state into a constitutional monarchy.Tesla’s background was thus a mixture of crossed influences, a monasticenvironment, a Byzantine legacy of a once great culture, and incessant battlesagainst barbarous invaders. As a Serb growing up in Croatia, Tesla inherited arich mix of tribal rituals, egalitarian rule, a modified form of Greek OrthodoxCatholicism, pantheistic beliefs, and myriad superstitions. Women cloaked theirbodies in black garb, and men packed a cross in one pocket and a weapon inanother. Living at the edge of civilization, Serbs saw themselves as protectors ofEurope from the Asian hordes. They bore that responsibility with their blood formany centuries. 