48THE WIZARD’S LEGACYWhen a man looks back over the events associated with his work…hebegins to realize how minor is that part which he himself has played inshaping the events of his career, how overpowering the part played bycircumstances utterly beyond his control.EDWIN ARMSTRONG ACCEPTING THE EDISON MEDAL1As an echo from the Tesla-Morgan affair, Edwin Armstrong had to battle thegiant RCA to get FM accepted over AM radio, even though it was a superiormeans for transmitting music. Col. David Sarnoff, “Napoleonic” head of RCAand NBC, had simply pirated his friend’s FM invention because he required itfor use in television. With the help of CBS, Sarnoff also manipulated the FederalCommunications Commission (FCC) to create a stipulation that severelyrestricted the power of FM transmitters “to one tenth their intended level…andshifted the FM band to a less desirable frequency range.” That is why AMbecame the dominant band for long-distance radio transmission.Required to rebuild his own radio station because of the FCC ruling andforced to battle the media Goliath in the courts for patent infringement,Armstrong cashed in his remaining block of RCA stock to finance the enormousexpenditure that would be required. Lawyers for NBC were able to persuade thehigh court in New York that it was their engineers that invented FM and notArmstrong! Although the Institute of Radio Engineers as a group filed a formalprotest (an unprecedented move in such situations), which eventually caused theruling to be reversed by the Supreme Court, it was too late for Armstrong. Withhis marriage in shambles, his key patents expired, and his fortune drained bylitigation, he jumped out a thirteen-story window in the dead of winter of 1954,spiritually trammeled by the very people who profited from his creativeendeavors. That Tesla survived such a fate is a testament to his fortitude andtranscendent nature.2In 1956 there was a celebration of the centenary of Tesla’s birth. Tohighlight the event, with Nobel laureate Niels Bohr as a speaker, a centennialcongress was held in Tesla’s honor. Simultaneously, the Yugoslav Postal Serviceissued a commemorative Tesla stamp, and the Yugoslav government placedTesla on the 100 dinar note (equivalent to a U.S. dollar). Statues of the inventorwere placed at museums in Zagreb and Vienna, a school was named after him inIllinois, a Tesla day was proclaimed in Chicago, and in Munich the InstituteElectrotechnical Committee agreed to adopt the name “tesla” as the unit ofmagnetic flux density. Now Tesla could take his rightful place beside such otherluminaries as Ampère, Faraday, Volta, and Watt.Twenty years later, as a gift from the Yugoslavian people, in 1976 a statueof Tesla by sculptor Franco Krsinic, was placed at Niagara Falls and an identicalcompanion statue erected on the village square in Gospić, Croatia, where Teslawas raised as a boy. (Unfortunately, this Gospić statue was purposely blownapart during the war in 1993.) President Tito gave a speech in Tesla’s honor inSmiljan before thousands of Croats, Serbs, and Bosnians (who were separated byarmed guards and demarcation fences), and the celebration also continued inAmerica. Plaques were posted at the site of his residence at the Hotel Gerlach inNew York City and at the Wardenclyffe laboratory, which still stands atShoreham, Long Island.In 1983 the U.S. Post Office honored Tesla, along with Charles Steinmetz,Philo Farnsworth, and, alas, Edwin Armstrong, in a block-offourcommemorative stamp. In Boston a giant Tesla coil can be found at the Museumof Science, and Tesla’s picture can be found hanging in the SmithsonianInstitution in Washington, D.C. There are also two major organizations in hishonor, the Tesla Memorial Society, in Lackawanna, New York, and theInternational Tesla Society, which has held conferences every two years since1984 at the society’s headquarters in Colorado Springs.William Whyte wrote in The Organization Man that as beneficial as thelarge corporations can be, they are also static, delusory, and self-destructive.During the inevitable conflict between the individual and society, theorganization man is caught in a bind because the company provides a livelihood,but at the expense of the worker’s individuality. This is what Whyte calls a“mutual deception”: “It is obvious to fight tyranny; it is not easy to fightbenevolence, and few things are more calculated to rob the individual of hisdefenses than the idea that his interests and those of society can be whollycompatible…One who lets the Organization be the judge ultimately sacrificeshimself.”3The corporate view becomes the very embodiment of rationality itself,structuring, restructuring, and thereby controlling consciousness.4 As was thecase with the Tesla situation, the more the corporate world rejected theWardenclyffe idea, the more unworkable it appeared to the engineers working inthe industry, because they, as products and extensions of the corporations, hadtheir consciousness shaped by its policies. Ultimately, Tesla’s worldview becamea threat, and it was easier to dismiss him as an eccentric than consider that hisplans may have been viable.A modern example of a famous innovator who became somewhat of anonperson is Steven Jobs, cofounder of Apple Computer. Realizing, in the mid-1980s, that the Motorola microprocessor was superior for graphics capabilities tothe one in the Apple II computer and the one being used by Bill Gates/Microsoftfor IBM, Jobs produced the Macintosh. First-generation Macintoshes, whichwere admittedly unattractive for business use and constructed so that they werenot expandable, were not immediate successes in the marketplace. The inferiorIBM disk operating system (DOS) was, of course, the standard. Undeterred, Jobswanted to scrap the obsolete but highly profitable Apple II to go solely intoproduction of Macs. Even though he was the wunderkind cocreator of thebillion-dollar enterprise, Jobs became a threat to its financial stability. In astunning move, Jobs was not only deposed; he was literally barred from workingat Apple, even though he was still the largest shareholder! A decade later, theBill Gates/IBM-compatible (Intel/Pentium) chip, although endowed withgraphics (Windows) capabilities, is still based on an inferior design as comparedto the Power-Mac. Nevertheless, the Gates/Intel chip is by far the leading systemin the country, even though the Power-Mac by necessity is the standard in suchfields as graphic design. Coyly, Gates said it this way: “People were coming outwith completely new operating systems, but we had already captured thevolume, so we could price it low and keep selling…[And] believe me, it wouldhave been a lot easier to write Windows so it didn’t run DOS applications. Butwe knew we couldn’t make the transition without that compatibility.”5PSYCHOANALYSISBeing aware of the criticisms of the Freudian paradigm and the problem ofoversimplification, I argued in my doctoral dissertation that in order to explainTesla’s unusual personality, self-proclaimed celibacy, and alleged homosexuality,it is possible that he may have suffered repressed guilt feelings associated withthe untimely death of his older brother Dane when Tesla was five years old. Inthe throes of the Oedipal complex and admittedly overattached to his mother,young Niko experienced great trauma not only because Dane was Djouka’sfavorite son but also because Niko was at that age of gaining his sexual identityand learning to transfer love bestowed upon himself to others. Possibly themother rejected Tesla after Dane’s death, and thus Tesla bestowed the love backupon himself and became narcissistic. Wishing to gain back the perceived loss oflove from his mother and lost brother, later in life Tesla would unconsciouslyseek out figures that would combine the dynamics of “older brother/mothersurrogates,” for example, strong, nurturing authority figures, such asWestinghouse and Pierpont Morgan. This combination of brother and mothermight also explain the confusion associated with Tesla’s sexual identity.To recapture their lost love and, in the symbolic sense, to bring the brotherback from the dead (for that would be the only way to repair the damage), Teslawould have to form a sacrifice as penance. In Westinghouse’s case, he ripped upthe royalty clause, and it cost him millions of dollars (he could have set up adeferred payment schedule);6 and in Morgan’s case, the inventor insisted that thefinancier take the larger share of the partnership, that is, 51 percent, even whenMorgan suggested fifty-fifty.Due, however, to a multitude of personality factors, including egomania,overambition, and his impatient wish to crush the competition, Tesla breachedhis contract with Morgan by deciding to build a larger tower than was agreedupon. This was a self-destructive move (although it might have succeeded andwas also, on another level, simply a calculated risk). From the psychoanalyticstandpoint, unconsciously he was hoping that the financier would forgive hissins (show his surrogate son that he still loved him) by providing him with theadditional funds to complete the tower. When Morgan said no, the unconsciouscould not face such a harsh rejection, so Tesla tried obdurately to turn the manaround; and even when it was clear that Morgan would never come through, theself-perceived surrogate son continued to try.Turning to Tesla’s persistent wish to contact extraterrestrials, from apsychoanalytic perspective these outer space entities may have symbolizedbeings existing in the afterworld. Certainly the need to believe in extraterrestrialsis a powerful and popular one. It explains why so many people accepted PercivalLowell’s “Canals of Mars” hypothesis and, in today’s world, the extremepopularity of such movies as Star Wars, Star Trek, and ET. In Tesla’s case theextraterrestrials may have prelogically stood for his dead brother and mother.The insistence that he had probably been contacted by Martians became anunconscious safety valve which allowed him to hypercathect (release) much ofthe anxiety associated with the death of his older brother, as the brother wouldstill be, in a sense, alive. Thus, if Dane still existed, the trauma of his deathwould be diminished, and Niko’s mother would love him again.This form of regressive behavior could also explain Tesla’s obsession withcaring for pigeons. After Dane died, the family was wrested from their idyllicfarm in Smiljan to the bustling city of Gospić. The pigeons were not onlysubstitute mistresses for Tesla; they also symbolized a return to the utopia of hisearly and untroubled childhood in Smiljan.As a counterhypothesis to the psychoanalytic paradigm (and as no solidevidence of homosexuality has been discovered by this researcher), one mustplace Tesla within his time period. Like William James and other intellects ofthat day, the idea of dedicating oneself to science at the expense of marriage wasnot a unique occurrence. Tesla was keenly aware that the responsibilities ofmarriage would have interfered too greatly with his inventive élan. Purposely,and admittedly through self-denial, he transformed his instincts in the alchemicalsense to raise them to a higher level. This view, however, does not completelyexplain the natural proclivity to partake of the passions, especially when oneconsiders that at his height, in the Gay Nineties, the rising star could probablyhave had his pick of any number of willing females, for example, MargueriteMerrington. Nor does it explain his overattachment to the city pigeons.Nevertheless, the Freudian paradigm falls short in its attempts to explain thenature of Tesla’s wizardry in that it tends to see this ability as a sublimationrather than an end in itself. Tesla’s emphasis on ritual and such obsessions ascleanliness and self-denial were just as much linked to his childhood bouts withcholera, caused by impure drinking water, as to his wish to change his state ofconsciousness through a set routine so that he could prepare his mind to do itswork. Unlike most inventors, Tesla’s creativity did not just lie in one plane. Headapted his mental faculties to a number of separate fields, designingfundamental inventions in lighting, electrical power distribution, mechanicalcontrivances, particle-beam weaponry, aerodynamics, and artificial intelligence.This great versatility of achievement places the inventor in a category all hisown. Ultimately, Tesla was a journeyman searching for the Holy Grail. His goalwas nothing short of altering the very direction of the human species throughextensions of his effort.CULT FIGUREIt was the coil that I noticed first—because I had seen drawings like it yearsago…“Hank, do you understand? Those men, long ago tried to invent amotor that would draw static electricity from the atmosphere, convert it andcreate its own power as it went along. They couldn’t do it. They gave it up.”She pointed at the broken shape. “But there is it.”Atlas Shrugged by Ayn Rand7At 8:00 P.M. on June 20, 1957, in the ballroom of the Hotel Diplomat inNew York City, the Interplanetary Sessions Newsletter announced a meeting tocoordinate an expected visit by the “Space People” to the planet Earth. The eventwas planned by three individuals: George Van Tassel, author of I Rode a FlyingSaucer; George King, purported telepathic contactee with extraterrestrials, andMargaret Storm, author of the occult Tesla biography Return of the Dove, a bookwhose “transcripts were received on the Tesla set, a radio-type machine inventedby Tesla in 1938 for interplanetary communication.” By July 1 it was assuredthat the “Martians” would have “full scale operations” in Washington, D.C.,New York, and “general North American areas.” It was also revealed that “Teslawas a Venusian, brought to this planet as a baby in 1856, and left in a remotemountain province in what is now Yogoslavia [sic].”In attendance at this meeting was a man who preferred to remain unnoticed.He was an FBI agent assigned to continue the expanding file on the enigmaticSerbian inventor Nikola Tesla. It is quite likely that a copy of this newsletter,which is in the FBI file, was also read by J. Edgar Hoover, a man concernedabout the growing interest in the flying-saucer phenomena and the secrecysurrounding various adherents.Margaret Storm’s supposition that Tesla was born on another planet to giveus our entire electric power and mass communications systems stemmed from acolorful history of the inventor’s ties to the group-fantasy belief that life on Marswas a virtual certainty. Fueled by McCarthyism and the fear of Communist(alien) infiltration and also theosophical literature, Storm proclaimed that Teslahad descended from the sixth-root race, a new species of human that wasevolving on the planet. To complicate matters, she was also friends with ArthurMatthews, author of Wall of Light: Nikola Tesla and the Venusian Spaceship. Abizarre electrician who had once written to Tesla in the 1930s, Matthewscontended that he and his supposed employer, Tesla, had traveled many times tonearby planets aboard Venusian spacecraft and that Tesla, as late as 1970, wasstill alive, living as an extraterrestrial.8Relegated to occult status for many decades, Tesla has also beenfictionalized as one of any number of mad scientists in science-fiction literature,as part of the composite New Age hero John Galt in Ayn Rand’s novel AtlasShrugged, as a source for future technology in James Redfield’s 1996 bestsellerThe Tenth Insight, and as the extraterrestrial (played by rock star David Bowie)in the Nicholas Roeg movie The Man Who Fell to Earth. As a cult figure in theUnited States, Tesla has also seen a panegyric resurgence with the youngergeneration because of a rock band which goes by the same name.In Japan, however, Tesla’s cult status is much more complicated. On theone hand, Dr. Yoshiro NakaMats, the world’s leading inventor, whose creationsinclude the floppy disk, is a great proponent of Tesla and has created acelebration in Tesla’s honor. On the other hand, Tesla’s secret weaponry workhas also attracted the attention of one of the most dangerous cults of moderntimes.Just one month after the January 1995 earthquake in Kobe destroyed thecity and killed 5,000 people, followers of the “charismatic psychopath” ShokoAshara, the man responsible for poisoning the subways with Sarin gas in Tokyo,flew into Belgrade to infiltrate the Tesla Museum with hopes of obtaining theinventor’s schematics for his supposed telegeodynamic earthquake machine.Ashara’s cult, known as Aum Supreme Truth, had an Internet of supposedly tensof thousands of members in a half dozen countries with access to state-of-the-arthigh-tech devices, a large data base of military secrets, firearms, and laserapparatus, and other more esoteric New Age weaponry systems. Seeking worlddomination, their plans were interrupted by the earthquake. Rather than seeingthe event as a natural occurrence, Ashara suggested that the Kobe disaster wascaused by electromagnetic experiments conducted by one of the Japanesemegacorporations or by American or possibly Russian military tests of a top-secret Tesla telegeodynamic instrument.Raised in a country that had seen its cities destroyed by the atom bomb,Ashara had been influenced by apocalyptic science fiction stories, by the bookTesla Superman written by Japanese author Masaki Shindo, and by suchTeslaphiles as Lt. Col. Tom Bearden, whose model for the Tesla magnifyingtransmitter hypothesized that it could be used as an intercontinental “electrostaticscalar-wave” delivery system. Realizing that Armageddon was at hand, the Kobeearthquake being proof of the prophecy, Ashara now planned to seize the highground by constructing his own “Tesla howitzer” while at the same timeperfecting the death ray.9Christopher Evans, in his text Cults of Unreason, suggests that cults appearas “stop-gaps” for people in society—ways for them to deal with life’s mysteriesand also for the unsettling feeling associated with the rapid pace of our times.10According to Evans, cults exist in order to discover the “Holy Grail,” thesupposed secret behind the universe. Tesla himself called his magnifyingtransmitter the “philosopher’s stone.” To him, it was the mechanism by which totransform society and interlink the entire globe. Following a Goethean path,Tesla’s weltanschauung suggested a hierarchy of intelligence to the universe. Notonly were his creations derived from natural law, through them, humans couldattain godlike status and communicate with other interstellar neighbors.“According to the idea of esotericism, as applied to history,” says Russianphilosopher P. D. Ouspensky, “no civilization ever begins of itself.”11 Esotericschools involve other (higher) dimensions, says astrologer Dane Rudyar. Certainindividuals, often referred to as avatars, Rudyar suggests, are actually “seedmen” who one way or another have within their being knowledge that can lead aculture into transcendence.Tesla had possession of certain knowledge which for various reasons wasrejected by mainstream science and society or suppressed by powers thatperceived his contributions as threatening. Yet the essence of Tesla’s work isavailable for the seeker. Described by popular New Age writer Robert AntonWilson as an “illuminati,” Tesla remains a cult hero because of his esotericstatus, because his life’s work has served as a template for numerous science-fiction characters and cinematic themes, and because he provides answers forthose who study his work for its inner meaning.12Unlike so many other esoteric figures, however, Tesla is in a uniqueposition because so many of his inventions were incorporated into our modernhigh-tech world. Had his ultimate world broadcasting plan actually coalescedduring his heyday, there is no telling how history might have proceeded and howthe quality of our lives might have changed.The Tesla particle beam weapon. (© Lynn Sevigny 1995) APPENDIX ATHE MAGNIFYINGTRANSMITTER: A TECHNICALDISCUSSIONAt the 1990 International Tesla Conference held in Colorado Springs, Dr.Alexander Marincic, curator of the Tesla Museum in Belgrade; Robert Golka,the only modern electrical engineer to construct large-scale magnifyingtransmitters; and I were engaged in a conversation on the viability of Tesla’splan. Both Marincic and Golka concurred that Tesla’s ultimate plan, that ofsending energy around the earth for industrial purposes, was not practicable.Leland Anderson, an electrical engineer and Tesla expert for nearly fortyyears, agreed. Tesla’s experiments at Colorado Springs, according to Anderson,were probably a local effect caused by the fortuitous placement of his tower nextto the Pikes Peaks range along a great plain. When Tesla detected lightningdischarges and standing waves, he made the incorrect assumption that thesewaves would encircle the globe. In fact, Anderson wrote, the standing wavesTesla detected were probably “unrecognized reinforcement effects” reboundingoff Pikes Peak, and his generated waves probably did the same thing. Hisconclusion was based on measurements that electronic scientist Ralph Johlermade of thunderstorms occurring along the peak.1Two experts who have concluded that the Tesla apparatus was viable areProfessor James Corum and Eric Dollard, both designers of transmittingequipment based on Tesla’s findings. Dollard writes that the invention (circa1920) of the “multiple loaded flat top antenna” by “Steinmetz’s protégé, Ernst F.W. Alexanderson,” was really “fashioned after those developed by Tesla.” Onesuch plant, located at Bolinas, California, sets up a resonant transformer betweentwo separate “earth plates” and an “elevated plate.” This arrangement producesthree separate types of wireless frequencies: “atmospheric induction, antennatransmission, and earth induction.” Acting as a “virtual ground” the aerialtransmitting energy down into the earth sets up standing waves that“continuously bounce back and forth between the earth and the reflectingcapacitance at a rate tuned to a natural rate of the earth.”2A simple tuning fork experiment can be used to explain the importance ofthe ground connection. It resonates much more powerfully when the fork isattached to a ground, such as a table. Due to the conductive property of the earth,individualization of impulse transmission is also facilitated. The electricalenergy “does not pass through the earth in the ordinary acceptance of the term, itonly penetrates to a certain depth according to the frequency.”3Corum, who holds a doctorate in physics and is a former professor ofelectrical engineering at West Virginia University writes, “It has been commonin the past to discard Tesla’s far-sighted vision as baseless. [I] believe that suchdepreciation has stemmed from critics that were uninformed as to Tesla’s actualtechnical measurements, and physical observation.” Having performed variousexperiments himself, Corum surmises that Tesla’s mathematical results writtenin his May 16, 1900, patent application “could have only been obtained as aresult of authentic terrestrial resonance measurements.” In other words, heconcludes that Tesla’s claims that he (a) measured a terrestrial pulse thatrebounded off the antipode of the earth and (b) calculated the resonant frequencyof the earth are essentially correct.4Looking at the wireless project from the technical point of view, mostlikely, Wardenclyffe was to be set up mainly for the purpose of distributinginformation and meager amounts of electrical power, just enough to run clocksand stock tickers, but not enough to charge factories. Each tower could act as asender or a receiver. In a letter to Katherine Johnson, Tesla explains the need forwell over thirty such towers.5Further, the magnifying transmitter was conceived to transmit electricity ina variety of ways. Tesla could utilize the carrier waves traveling within the earth(e.g., the Shuman cavity, and/or the earth’s geomagnetic pulse), he couldtransmit frequencies through the air, or he could beam a carrier wave up to theionosphere and use it for transport:I will confess that I was disappointed when I first made tests along this lineon a large scale. They did not yield practical results. At the time, I usedabout 8,000,000 to 12,000,000 volts of electricity. As a source of ionizingrays, I employed a powerful arc reflected up into the sky…trying only toconnect a high tension current and the upper strata of the air, because mypet scheme for years ha[d] been to light the ocean at night.6Central towers, acting much like today’s wireless trunkline microwavetransmitters for the phone company, could then be hooked up via conventionalwires to numerous households within a given radius.WORLD BROADCASTING SYSTEMFrom what I can ascertain, I believe that Tesla’s magnifying transmitter in acompleted state would have operated as follows: A transmission tower wouldhave been constructed so that its height and ability to radiate electricaloscillations was in a resonant relationship to the size, electronic and geophysicalproperties of the earth.Rather than utilize transverse electromagnetic waves exclusively, Teslawould be utilizing longitudinal waves (such as those found in the impulsestransmitted by earthquakes and by sound).7 The gigantic Tesla coil was alsocalculated to take into account the wavelength of light. In other words, the lengthof the wires wound in the transformer were in a harmonic relationship to thedistance light would travel in a given time. With the production of standingwaves resonant with the planet, “nodal points” on the earth’s surface were alsoplotted out.8A tremendous charge, in excess of 30 million volts and in a harmonicfrequency to the electrical and/or geophysical state of the earth, would be drivendown the tower, into the ground, and out to sixteen 300-foot- long iron spokespositioned in a spiral down the entire length of the 120-foot well. Therebygripping the earth, this pulse would generate an electronic disturbance in aharmonic relationship with the naturally occurring geomagnetic pulse that wouldreach the other side of the globe and in turn would bounce back up the tower. Bycontrolling the period of frequency, this pulse could be modulated and actuallyincreased in intensity in the same way one can make a well-made bell resound inincreasing loudness by tapping it at precisely timed faster and faster rates. Also,the energy would be stored at the top of the tower and in specially builtcondensers by the laboratory. Stationary waves in resonance with known earthcurrents would thereby be established.9Like a vibrating spring with a weight on it, this device enabled Tesla todetermine and manipulate the electrostatic capacity (in analogy, like thepliability of the spring) and the inductance (analogous to the weight on thespring) of the carrier vibrations.10 Tesla also maintained that the use of liquefiedair (-197°F) would greatly augment the production and/or reception of very highfrequencies while also reducing impedance caused by friction or heat.11 Bytransforming energy to higher frequencies on the rebound flow, Tesla increasedthe efficiency of his towers. Each could act as both a sender and receiver. Onetower situated near a waterfall could “jump” energy to another tower situated atanother point on the globe.Just as electricity is available throughout the electrical circuits that runthrough the transmission lines that circumscribe our planet, electricity wouldalso be available throughout the entire electromagnetic grid of the earth itself. Inthe same way electricity is not utilized by conventional means until a plug isplaced in a socket and a switch turned on, electricity would also not be utilizedin the Tesla system until it too was connected up to a wireless instrument andthat instrument was turned on. Electricity by the Tesla system would not bewasted by being diffused, no more so than electricity is wasted by presentmeans, such as with wireless car telephones or by being made available throughtransformers and high-tension wires that run from transmission pole totransmission pole.12It appears that the tower could at this point serve in a variety of ways. Forinstance, intelligible signals (wireless telephone) could be transmitted to anyregion of the globe. Power also could be provided by the same mechanism,probably within a confined region of each tower, to thousands of specificmachines after they sent a coded request impulse or simply to another tower notlocated by a power source. And this second tower, situated in a remote area,could be connected to home appliances and telephones by way of conventionalwires or by wireless. If two transmitters were utilized and separated by manymiles, vector waves could more easily place impulses in desired locations.13Referring to Figure 1: A power source (such as coal or water) wouldgenerate energy into a transformer comprising both a secondary (tuned to thewavelength of light) and primary coil. The secondary coil in the transmittingtower would be the inside thinner one, which is longer and has more turns. Thegenerated frequency would be lowered when induced into the thicker primary,which has fewer turns and is shorter. The transmitter would then pump theenergy into the natural medium, broadcasting it via earth or air (i.e., twodifferent ways). According to Tesla:At the receiving station, a transformer of similar construction is employed;but in this case, the longer coil [of many turns]…constitutes the primary,and the shorter coil [of fewer turns]…the secondary…It is to be noted thatthe phenomenon here involved in the transmission of electrical energy isone of true conduction and not to be confounded with the phenomena ofelectrical radiation.14An Additional CriticismE. Kornhauser, a professor of electrical engineering at Brown University, inreviewing this section, is doubtful that this form of power transmission could beeffectively achieved because the earth is not an efficient conductor (e.g., ascompared to a copper wire). Concerning the possibility of creating wirelesscommunication that could circumscribe the planet, Kornhauser conceded it waspossible. He stated that the navy had unsuccessfully tried to institute a worldradar system utilizing extremely low frequencies. Project Seafarer, as it wasnamed, purportedly could have set up communication even with submarinesdeep underwater at any point of the globe. However, the plan was scrapped, itappears, mainly because of the potential to markedly disturb existing radio andtelevision frequencies and fear of damage to the environment.Figure 1. The sending and receiving magnifying transmitters are built essentially thesame way. The length and size of the tower and transformer is in a harmonic relationshipto the electromagnetic properties of the earth. It has a multipurpose function. Standingwaves generated in resonant relationship to known Earth currents could be used ascarrier frequencies for transmitting electrical power.The efficiency of Tesla’s radio receiving tubes was also questioned byKornhauser, who thought it was doubtful that they would have been efficientenough as it would take another fifteen years before radio tubes of any meritcame into being. Kornhauser did say, however, that the modern AM radiobroadcasting stations use the earth as their primary means of transmitting theirimpulses. FM and television also use the earth, but the atmosphere in theseinstances is the more important medium for impulse transmission. APPENDIX BTHE TUNGUSKA INCIDENTA question often asked is whether Tesla had anything to do with the massiveexplosion which occurred in Tunguska, Siberia in June of 1908. As no meteor orcrater was found, a rumor stemming from Andrija Puharich, picked up by TadWise in his Tesla novel suggested that Tesla used Wardenclyffe to deliver thecharge. Since the tower became disoperational in 1903, I saw no reason toinclude the incident in the first edition of Wizard. However, because the storywas repeated on TV, rumors have persisted. Roy Gallant estimates in his bookThe Day the Sky Split Apart that the Tunguska explosion devastated a fortysquare mile area, and released energy 2,000 times greater than the atom bombdropped on Hiroshima! Tesla expert James Corum allowed that if Tesla had thecapability of releasing just 1% of the earth’s magnetic charge, in theory, he couldhave produced comparable results. However, both Corum and the author are inagreeement that Tesla not only did not do this, but further, Wardenclyffe simplyhad nowhere near that kind of capability. As Gallant suggests, the Tunguskaexplosion was probably caused by a comet or asteroid, which barely missed theearth by skipping along its atmosphere two or three miles above the site.BIBLIOGRAPHYFrequently Used AbbreviationsNT Nikola TeslaFOIA Freedom of Information ActCSN Colorado Springs NotesITS International Tesla Society, Colorado Springs, Colo.TMS Tesla Memorial Society, Lackawanna, N.Y.Research FacilitiesLA Leland Anderson, personal archives, Denver, Colo.American Friends of the Hebrew University, New York, N.Y.SWP Avery Library, Manuscript Division, Columbia University, New York,N.Y. (Stanford White papers) BLCA Bancroft Library, Manuscript Division,University of California,Berkeley, Calif.Brown University Library, Providence, R.I.BLCU Butler Library, Manuscript Division, Columbia University, New York,N.Y. (Robert U. Johnson, George Scherff, and Michael Pupin papers) WBPCornell University Library, Manuscripts Division, Ithaca, N.Y. (WilliamBroughton papers) TAE Edison National Historic Site, West Orange, N.J.(Thomas Alva Edison,Charles Batchelor, and Nikola Tesla papers)Engineering Societies Library, New York, N.Y.FBI Federal Bureau of Investigation, Washington, D.C.George Arents Research Library. Syracuse University, Syracuse, N.Y.GP Gernsback Productions, Farmingdale, N.Y.HC Hammond Castle, Gloucester, Mass.Health Research Publishers, Mokelumne, Calif.HL Houghton Library, Harvard University, Cambridge, Mass.LC Library of Congress, Washington, D.C. (Tesla correspondence on microfilm)JPM J. Pierpont Morgan Library, New York, N.Y.Lloyd’s of London, England MSF MetaScience Foundation Library, Kingston,R.I.National Academy of Science, Stockholm, Sweden NAR National Archives,Washington, D.C.NYPL New York Public Library, New York, N.Y.NYHS New York Historical Society, New York, N.Y.OAP Office of Alien Property, Washington, D.C.Port Jefferson Library, Port Jefferson, N.Y.St. Louis Public Library, St. Louis, Mo.KSP Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D.C. (Kenneth Swezey Papers)NTM Tesla Museum, Belgrade, YugoslaviaUniversity of Prague Library, Archiv Univerzity Karlovy, Prague,CzechoslovakiaUniversity of Rhode Island Library and Interlibrary Loan, Kingston, R.I.USX Corporation, Pittsburgh, Penn.GWA Westinghouse Corporation Archives, Pittsburgh, Penn.YL Yale University Library, New Haven, Conn.Frequently Cited PeriodicalsBE Brooklyn EagleCL Current LiteratureEE Electrical EngineerEEX Electrical ExperimenterER Electrical ReviewEW Electrical WorldEW & E Electrical World & EngeineerNYHT New York Herald TribuneNYS New York SunNYT New York TimesNYW New York WorldPACE Planetary Association for Clean EnergyR of R Review of ReviewsTesla CorrespondenceJJA John Jacob AstorTdB Titus deBobulaRFL Reginald Fessenden LitigationJHH Jr John Hays Hammond Jr.JH Julian HawthorneAH Admiral HigginsonKJ Katharine JohnsonRUJ Robert Underwood JohnsonTCM Thomas Commerford MartinJPM J. Pierpont MorganJPM Jr J. Pierpont Morgan Jr.GS George ScherffNT Nikola TeslaET Elihu ThomsonGSV George Sylvester ViereckSW Stanford WhiteGW George WestinghouseGWC George Westinghouse CorporationFor example: NT/JHHjr January 3, 1911: Tesla wrote Hammond on that date.GS/NT April 7, 1902: Scherff wrote Tesla on that date.Frequently Cited Sources by or About Nikola TeslaNT 1894 The Inventions, Researches and Writings of Nikola Tesla. T. C. Martin,ed. New York: Electrical Engineer.NT 6/1900 “The Problem of Increasing Human Energy.” Century, June 1900, pp.175-211.NT 1916 Nikola Tesla: On His Work With Alternating Currents and theirApplication to Wireless Telegraphy, Telephone, and Transmission of Power.L. Anderson (ed.), Denver Colo.: Sun, 1992.NT 1919 My Inventions: The Autobiography of Nikola Tesla. Ben Johnston, ed.,Williston, Vt.: Hart Brothers, 1981.NT 1937 “The New Art of Projecting Concentrated Non-dispersive EnergyThrough the Natural Medium.” In Elizabeth Raucher and Toby Grotz, eds.Tesla: 1984: Proceedings of the Tesla Centennial Symposium, ColoradoSprings, Colo.: International Tesla Society, 1984, pp. 144-50.NT 1956 Nikola Tesla: Lectures, Patents, Articles. Belgrade: Nikola TeslaMuseum. NT 1961 Tribute to Nikola Tesla: Letters, Articles, Documents.Belgrade: Nikola Tesla Museum, 1961.NT 1979 Colorado Springs Notes and Commentary. Alexander Marincic, ed.Belgrade: Nikola Tesla Museum, 1979.NT 1981 Solutions to Tesla’s Secrets. J. Ratzlaff, ed. Milbrae, Calif.: Tesla BookCo., 1984.NT 1984 Tesla Said. J. Ratzlaff, ed. Millbrae, Calif.: Tesla Book Co., 1984.R & A. Ratzlaff, J., and Anderson, L. Dr. Nikola Tesla Bibliography 1884-1978.Palo Alto, Calif.: Ragusen Press, 1979.Bibliography of Major SourcesAbraham, J., and R. Savin. Elihu Thomson Correspondence. New York:Academic Press, 1971.Adams, E. D. Niagara Power: 1886-1918. Niagara Falls, N.Y.: Niagara FallsPower Co., 1927.Anderson, F., ed. Mark Twain’s Notebooks & Journals. iii, 1883-91. Berkeley,Calif.: University of California Press, 1979.Anderson, Leland, ed. “John Stone Stone on Nikola Tesla’s Priority in Radio.”Antique Wireless Review, 1 (1986)._____ “Priority in the Invention of the Radio: Tesla v. Marconi.” Tesla Journal2, no. 3 (1982-83): pp. 17-20._____ Nikola Tesla; Lecture Before the New York Academy of Sciences.Breckenridge, Colo.: 21st Century Books.Asimov, Isaac. Asimov’s Biographical Encyclopedia of Science and Technology.Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday, 1964.Baker, Paul. Stanny: The Gilded Life of Stanfored White. New York: Free Press,1989.Baker, E. C. Sir William Preece: Victorial Engineer Extraordinary. London:Hutchinson, 1976.Barnow, Erik. A Tower in Babel: A History of Broadcast USA. New York:Oxford University Press, 1966.Barrett, W., ed. The Smithsonian Book of Invention. New York: Norton, 1978.Bearden, Tom. “Solutions to Tesla’s Secrets and the Soviet Tesla Weapon.” InNT 1981, pp. 1-45._____ “Tesla’s Electromagnetics and Soviet Weaponization.” In Raucher andGrotz eds. NT 1984, pp. 119-138.Beckhard, A. Electrical Genius, Nikola Tesla. New York: Messner, 1959.Behrend, B. A. The Induction Motor. New York: McGraw Hill, 1921.Birmingham, Stephen. Our Crowd. New York: Pocket Books, 1977.Blackmore, J. Ernst Mach, His Work, Life and Influence. Berkeley, Calif.:University of California Press, 1972.Bulwer-Lytton, Edward. The Coming Race. London: Routledge, 1871.Cameron, W. World’s Columbian Exposition. New Haven, Conn.: JamesBrennan, 1893.Cantril, H. The Invasion of Mars: A Study in the Psychology of Panic. NewYork: Harper, 1940/1966.Carlson, Oliver. Brisbane: A Candid Biography. New York: Stackpole, 1937.Cases Adjudged in the Supreme Court. United States v. Marconi. 373, pp. 1-80,April 9, 1943.Cheney, M. Tesla: Man Out of Time. Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall,1981.Chernow, Ron. The House of Morgan. New York: Atlantic Monthly Press, 1990.Clark, Roland. Einstein: The Life and Times. New York: World, 1971.Crockett, Albert Stevens. Peacocks on Parade. New York: Sears, 1931.Crookes, William. “Some Possibilities of Electricity.” Forthnightly Review(February 1892): vol. no. 3, pp. 173-81.Coit, Margaret. Mr. Baruch. New York: Houghton Mifflin, 1957.Conot, R. Streak of Luck: The Life Story of Edison. New York: Bantam Books,1980.Corum, James, and Ken Corum. “A Physical Interpretation of the ColoradoSprings Data.” In Raucher and Grotz, NT ITS 1984 Proceedings.Corum, James. “100 Years of Resonator Development.” NT ITS 1990Proceedings, pp. 2-1-2-18.Cowles, Virginia. The Astors. New York: Knopf, 1979.David, C., ed. Chronicle of the 20th Century. Mt. Kisco, N.Y.: Chronicle, 1987.Davis, John. The Guggenheims: An American Epic. New York: Morrow, 1978.De Forest, Lee. Father of Radio: An Autobiography. Chicago: Wilcox & Follett,1950.DelRay, L. Science Fiction Art. New York: Ballantine, 1975.Dickson, W., and A. Dickson. The Life & Inventions of T. A. Edison. New York:Crowell, 1892.Djilan, Milovan. Land Without Justice. New York: Harcourt Brace, 1958.Edison, Thomas. “Pearl Street.” ER (January 12, 1901): pp. 60-62.Einstein, A., B. Podolsky, and N. Rosen. “Can Quantum Mechanical Descriptionof Physical Reality be Considered Complete?” Physical Review 47 (1935):p. 777.Elswick, Steven. 1986 Proceedings of the International Tesla Society. ColoradoSprings, Colo: ITS Press._____ NT ITS 1988 Proceedings.______ NT ITS 1990 Proceedings.______ NT ITS 1992 Proceedings. In press._____ NT ITS 1994 Proceedings. In press.Encyclopedia of Science & Technology. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1987.Evans, Christopher. Cults of Unreason. New York: Dell, 1973.Fabin, Sky. The Zenith Factor (video). Santa Fe, N.M.: Southwestern College ofLife Sciences, 1985.Gates, John D. The Astor Family. Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday, 1981.Gardiner, P., ed. Theories of History. Glencoe, Ill.: Free Press, 1959.Gernsback, Hugo. “Nikola Tesla: Father of Radio.” Radio Craft February 1943,pp. 263-65; 307-10.Gillifan, S. The Sociology of Invention. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1935.Gertz, Elmer. Odyssey of a Barbarian: The Biography of G. S. Viereck. Buffalo,N.Y.: Prometheus, 1978.Goethe. Faust. C. Brooks, ed./trans. Boston: Ticknor & Fields, 1856.Gorowitz, B., ed. The Steinmetz Era. Schenectady, N.Y.: Elfun Hall, 1977.Hammond, John Hays Sr. Autobiography of John Hays Hammond. New York:Farrar & Rhinehart, 1935.Hammond, John Hays Jr. “The Future in Wireless.” National PressReporter, 15, no. 110 (May 1912).Harding, Robert. George H. Clark Radiona Collection. Washington, D.C.:Smithsonian Institution, 1990.Hawkings, L. William Stanley, His Life and Times. New York: NewcomenSociety, 1939.Hayes, Jeffrey. Boundary—Layer Breakthrough. Security, Colo.: High EnergyEnterprises, 1990.Held, David. Introduction to Critical Theory. Berkeley, Calif.: University ofCalifornia Press, 1980.Howeth, L. S. History of Communications-Electronics in U.S. Navy. Washington,D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1963.Hoyt, Edwin. The House of Morgan. New York: Dodd, Mead, 1966._____ The Guggenheims and the American Dream. New York: Funk &Wagnalls, 1967.Huart, M. “The Genius of Destruction.” ER (December 7, 1898): p. 365.Hughes, T. Networks of Power. Baltimore, Md.: Johns Hopkins University Press,1983.Hunt, Inez, and Wanetta Draper. Lightning in His Hands: The Life Story of Tesla.Hawthorne, Calif.: Omni, 1964/1977.Jobs, Steven. Interview. Playboy, February 1985, 49-50, 54, 58, 70, 174-80.Johnson, Niel. George Sylvester Viereck: German/American Propagandist.Chicago: University of Illinois Press, 1972.Johnson, R. U. Songs of Liberty. New York: Century, 1897.______ Remembered Yesterdays. Boston: Little, Brown, 1923.Jolly, W. Marconi. New York: Stein & Day, 1972.Josephson, M. The Robber Barons. New York: J. J. Little, 1934.______ Thomas Alva Edison. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1959.Jovanovic, Branimir. Tesla I Svet Vazduhoplovstva. Belgrade: Nikola TeslaMuseum Press, 1988.Kuhn, T. The Structure of Scientific Revolutions. Chicago: University of ChicagoPress, 1970.Leonard, J. Loki: The Life of Charles Proteus Steinmetz. Garden City, N.Y.:Doubleday, 1928.Lessing, Lawrence. Man of High Fidelity: Edwin Howard Armstrong.Philadelphia: Lippincott, 1956.Lowell, Perceival. Mars and its Canals. New York: Macmillan, 1906.Lyons, E. David Sarnoff, A Biography. New York: Pyramid, 1970.Mannheim, K. The Sociology of Knowledge. London: Routledge, 1952.Marconi, D. My Father Marconi. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1962.Marconi, Guglielmo. “Wireless Telegraphy.” ER 38 (June 15, 1901): pp. 754-56;781-86.Marincic, Alexander. “Research on Nikola Tesla in Long Island Laboratory.”Tesla Journal, 6, no. 7, (1988/89): pp. 25-28.Martin, T. C. “Nikola Tesla.” Century, February 2, 1894, pp. 582-85.Mooney, Michael. Evelyn Nesbit & Stanford White. New York: Morrow, 1976.O’Hara, J. G., and W. Pricha. Hertz & the Maxwellians. London: Peregrinus,1987.O’Neill, John. Prodigal Genius: The Life Story of N. Tesla. New York: IvesWashburn, 1944. Reprinted by David McKay, circa 1972.Ouspensky, P. D. New Model of the Universe. New York: Vintage, 1971.Passer, Harold. The Electrical Manufacturers: 1875-1900. Cambridge, Mass.:Harvard University Press, 1953.Petkovich, Dragislav. “A Visit to Nikola Tesla.” Politika, March 27, 1927.Petrovich, Michael Boro. A History of Modern Serbia. New York: HarcourtBrace, 1976.Prout, Henry. George Westinghouse: An Intimate Portrait. New York: Wiley,1939.Pupin, M. From Immigrant to Inventor. New York: Scribner, 1925.Rand, Ayn. Atlas Shrugged. New York: 1957.Ratzlaff, J., and F. Jost, eds. Tesla/Scherff Correspondence. Milbrae, Calif.: TeslaBook Co., 1979.Raucher, Elizabeth, and Toby Grotz, eds. Tesla: 1984: Proceedings of the TeslaCentennial Symposium. Colorado Springs, Colo.: International TeslaSociety, 1984.Robertson, Andrew. About George Westinghouse and the Polyphase Currents.New York: Newcomen Society, 1939.Roman, Klara. Handwriting: A Key to Personality. New York: Free Press, 1971.Rubin, C., and K. Strehlo. “Why So Many Computers Look Like ‘IBMStandard.’” Personal Computing March 1984, pp. 52-65, 182-89.Rubin, Nancy. John Hays Hammond, Jr.: A Rennaissance Man in the 20thCentury. Gloucester, Mass.: Hammond Museum Press, 1987.Rudhyar, Dane. Occult Preparations for a New Age. Wheaton, Ill.: Quest, 1975.Sartre, J. Search for a Method. New York: Knopf, 1963.Satterlee, H. J. Pierpont Morgan: An Intimate Portrait. New York: Macmillan,1939.Scott, Lloyd. Naval Consulting Board of the U.S. Washington, D.C.: U.S.Government Printing Office, 1920.Siegel, Mark. Hugo Gernsback: Father of Modern Science Fiction. SanBernadino, Calif.: Borgo Press, 1988.Silverberg, R. Light for the World. Princeton, N.J.: Van Nostrand, 1967.Smith, Page. The Rise of Industrial America, vol. 6. New York: McGraw-Hill,1984.Sobel, Robert. RCA. New York: Stein & Day, 1986.Steinmetz, Charles. AC Phenomena. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1900.______ Theoretical Elements of Electrical Engineering. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1902.Stockbridge, Frank Parker. “Tesla’s New Monarch of Mechanics.” NYHT,October 18, 1911, 1.Stoilkovic, Stanko. “Portrait of a Person, a Creator and a Friend.” Tesla Journal,4, no. 5 (1986/87): pp. 26-29.Storm, Margaret. Return of the Dove. Baltimore, Md.: Margaret Storm, 1956.Tate, Alfred O. Edison’s Open Door. New York: Dutton, 1938.Telford, H. Applied Geophysics. New York: Cambrdidge University Press, 1976.Thompson, Silvanus. Polyphase Electric Currents. New York: AmericanTechnical Book Co., 1897.Toomey, J. Location of Sources of Elf Noises. Kingston, R.I.: University ofRhode Island Press, 1970; Philadelphia: Lippincott, 1963.Wheeler, G. Pierpont Morgan and Friends: Anatomy of a Myth. EnglewoodCliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall, 1973.White, W. The Organization Man. Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday, 1956.Wise, Tad. Tesla: A Biographical Novel. Atlanta, Ga.: Turner, 1994.Wolff, Robert Lee. The Balkans in Our Time. Cambridge, Mass.: HarvardUniversity Press, 1956.Wolff, Werner. Diagrams of the Unconscious. New York: Grune & Stratton,1948.Woodbury, David. Beloved Scientist: Elihu Thomson. New York: McGraw-Hill,1944.Works About Tesla by the Author1977 Nikola Tesla [Harry Imber, pseud.] “The Man Who Fell to Earth.” AncientAstronauts, September, pp. 23-26.1978 (H. Smukler, coauthor) “The Tesla/Matthews Outerspace Connection,” astold by Andrija Puharich. Pyramid Guide, May, part 1, p. 5; July, part 2, p.5.1979 “Forty Years of the Handwriting of Nikola Tesla.” Paper presented beforethe National Society for Graphology, New York, N.Y.1982 “On Nikola Tesla.” Letter to Editor. Radio Electronics, June, p. 24.1983 “Nikola Tesla: The Forgotten Inventor.” In J. Dorinson and J. Atlas, eds.Psychohistory: Persons & Communities. New York: Long IslandUniversity, pp. 209-31.1984 “The Belief in Life on Mars: A Turn-of-the-century Group Fantasy.” In J.Dorinson and J. Atlas eds. Proceedings: Sixth Annual InternationalPsychohistory Convention, pp. 101-19.1984 Tesla: Mad Scientist of the Gilded Age. New York: Windsor Total Video,produced in association with Bob Henderson, directed by Marc Seifer,narrated by J. T. Walsh, original score by Marshall Coid. Videocassette.1985 “Nikola Tesla: The Lost Wizard.” In E. Raucher and T. Grotz, eds., Tesla1984: Proceedings of the Tesla Centennial Symposium. Colorado Springs,Colo.: International Tesla Society, pp. 31-40.1986 “The Inventor and the Corporation: Case Studies of Nikola Tesla, StevenJobs and Edwin Armstrong.” In S. Elswick, ed., Proceedings: 1986 TeslaSymposium. Colorado Springs, Colo.: International Tesla Society, pp. 53-74.1986 “Nikola Tesla: Psychohistory of a Forgotten Inventor.” Ph.D. diss.,Saybrook Institute, San Francisco, Calif.1988 “Tesla: The Interplanetary Communicator?” Hands on Electronics,December, pp. 62-66; 102.1988 “The History of Lasers and Particle Beam Weapons.” In S. Elswick, ed.,Proceedings: 1988 Tesla Symposium. Colorado Springs, Colo.:International Tesla Society.1988 The Lost Wizard. Screenplay, cowritten with Tim Eaton.1989 “Nikola Tesla: Psychohistory of a Forgotten Inventor.” 1990 DissertationChapter Abstracts. Tesla Journal. Lackawanna, N.Y.: Tesla MemorialSociety, pp. 49-57.1990 Nikola Tesla and John Hays Hammond, Jr.: “Pioneers in Remote Control.”In S. Elswick, ed., Proceedings: 1990 Tesla Symposium. Colorado Springs,Colo.: International Tesla Society. In press.1991 Nikola Tesla: The Man Who Harnessed Niagara Falls. Kingston, R.I.:MetaScience Publications.1991 “Nikola Tesla and John Muir: Ecologists.” IV International TeslaSymposium. Belgrade, Yugoslavia: Serbian Academy of Sciences and Artsand Nikola Tesla Museum, pp. 317-28.1992 “Nikola Tesla and FDR: The Secret History of Wireless.” In S. Elswick,ed., Proceedings: 1992 Tesla Symposium, Colorado Springs, Colo.: In press.1994 Nikola Tesla: The Lost Years. In S. Elswick, ed., Proceedings: 1994 TeslaSymposium. Colorado Springs, Colo.: International Tesla Society. In press.1996 “Taking on Einstein,” Extraordinary Science 8, no. 1 (Jan., Feb., Mar.), pp.38-43.1996 “Wardenclyffe,” Extraordinary Science 8, no. 2 (Apr., May, June), pp. 5-10.1996 “John Jacob Astor and Nikola Tesla.” Proceedings: 1996 Tesla Symposium.Colorado Springs, Colo.: International Tesla Society. In press.Other WorksHandwriting & Brainwriting (collected works)Staretz Encounter (novel)Hail to the Chief (screenplay)The Steven Rosati Story (true-crime biography)CorrespondenceAlker, Henry, Saybrook Institute, San Francisco, Calif.†Anderson, Leland, Denver, Colo.Basura, Nick, Los Angeles, Calif.*Bearden, Tom, Huntsville, Ala.‡Bergstresser, Ralph, Phoenix, Ariz.Bromberg, Joan, Woburn, Mass.Burg, David, Lexington, Ky.Call, Terrence, University of Rhode Island, Kingston, R.I.*Corum, James, Columbus, Ohio*Corum, Ken, Franconia, N.H.Clark, Peggy McKinnon, Shoreham, N.Y.†Czito, Nancy, Washington, D.C.Eaton, Tim, Industrial Light & Magic, San Rafael, Calif.Elswick, Steve, International Tesla Society, Colorado Springs, Colo.Feeley, Terrence, Johnston, R.I.‡Gant, James, Washington, D.C.‡Gertz, Elmer, Chicago, Calif.Gold, Harry, Tesla Coil Builders Association, Glens Falls, N.Y.*Golka, Robert, Colorado Springs, Colo.Grotz, Toby, Colorado Springs, Colo.Hessen, Robert, Stanford University, Calif.*Hardesty, James, Ithaca, N.Y.†Jankovitch, M., Paris, France*Jovanovich, Branimir, Belgrade, Yugoslavia†*Jurow, Irving, Washington, D.C.Kasanovich, Nicholas, Tesla Memorial Society, Lackawanna, N.Y.Kline, Ronald, Cornel University, Ithaca, N.Y.Kramer, Jurgen, Saybrook Institute, San Francisco, Calif.Krippner, Stanley, Saybrook Institute, San Francisco, Calif.McCabe, Bob, Flint, Mich.McGinnis, J.W., Colorado Springs, Colo.*Marincic, Alexander, Belgrade, Yugoslavia*Markovitch, Michael, Brooklyn, N.Y.Neuschatz, Sanford, Shannock, R.I.Parry, F., Washington, D.C.*Possell, Jake, Colorado Springs, Colo.†Puharich, Andrija, Colorado Springs, Colo.*Ratzlaff, John, Milbrae, Calif.Romero, Sid, Salt Lake, UtahSeifer, Stanley, West Hempstead, N.Y.Seifer, Thelma, West Hempstead, N.Y.Shriftman, Elliott, Manhassett, N.Y.Smukler, Howard, Berkeley, Calif.‡Terbo, William, New York, N.Y.Vagermeerch, Richard, University of Rhode Island‡Viereck, Peter, Mt. Holyoke, Mass.*Vujovic, Ljubo, Brooklyn, N.Y.Walsh, J.T., Studio City, Calif.White, Debra, Saybrook Institute, San Francisco, Calif.White, John, Cheshire, Conn.*Interviewed because of special knowledge about the subject.†Personally knew associates of Tesla.‡Personally met with Tesla. NOTESPreface, pp. xiii-xvi1. Margaret Storm, Return of the Dove (Baltimore: M. Storm Productions,1956).2. Nikola Tesla, My Inventions: The Autobiography of Nikola Tesla(Williston, Vt.: Hart Brothers, 1982) [Originally published, 1919].Chapter 1: Heritage, pp. 1-41. Nikola Tesla, “Zmai Ivan Ivanovich, the Chief Servian Poet of To-day.”In R. U. Johnson, ed., Songs of Liberty and Other Poems (New York: CenturyCompany, 1897).2. Personal trip to Yugoslavia, 1986.3. Robert Lee Wolff, The Balkans in Our Time (Cambridge, Mass.: HarvardUniversity Press, 1956).4. Michael Markovitch, personal interview, 1988.5. Louis Adamic, My Native Land (New York: Harper & Brothers, 1943).6. Michael Boro Petrovich, The History of Nineteenth-Century Serbia, 2vols. (New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1976), p. 5.7. Petrovich, History, p. xii.8. Markovitch, interview, 1988.9. Markovitch, interview, 1988.10. Adamic, My Native Land, p. 270.11. Ibid; Petrovich, History, pp. 142-43, 350-51.Chapter 2: Childhood, pp. 5-141. NT, “A Story of Youth” (1939). In John Ratzlaff, ed., Tesla Said(Milbrae, Calif.: Tesla Book Co., 1984), pp. 283-84. Articles included in thisvolume will be referred to hereafter by two dates—of original composition andthe date of the Ratzlaff anthology.2. John O’Neill, Prodigal Genius: The Life Story of Nikola Tesla. (NewYork: Ives Washburn, 1944), p. 12.3. Ibid., p. 13.4. Nikola Pribic, personal correspondence, April 19, 1988.5. V. Popovic, Nikola Tesla. (Belgrade: Tecnicka Knjiga, 1951).6. O’Neill, Prodigal Genius, p. 11.7. Nikola Tesla, “Scientists Honor Nikola Tesla.” Unidentified newspaperarticle, 1894. Displayed at the Edison Archives, Menlo Park, N.J.8. Nikola Tesla, My Inventions: The Autobiography of Nikola Tesla(Williston, Vt: Hart, 1982), p. 29; originally published in ElectricalExperimenter, in six monthly installments, February-July, 1919.9. William Terbo, interview, 1988.10. Birth charts from M. Markovitch archives.11. Tesla, My Inventions, p. 30.12. Terbo interview, 1988.13. T. C. Martin, “Nikola Tesla,” Century, February 1894, pp. 582-85;Tesla, April 22, 1893. Branimira Valic, ed., My Inventions (Zagreb: MojiPronalasci; Skolska Kanjiga, 1977).14. O’Neill, Prodigal Genius, p. 10.15. NT, My Inventions, p. 31.16. O’Neill, Prodigal Genius, p. 12.17. Tesla, 1939/1984.18. T. C. Martin, “Nikola Tesla,” Electrical World 15, no. 7 (1890), p. 106.19. NT, My Inventions, p. 45.20. NT, 1939/1984, p. 285.21. Ibid., pp. 284-85 (condensed).22. NT, My Inventions, p. 29.23. Ibid., p. 30.24. NT, “Nikola Tesla and His Wonderful Discoveries,” N.Y. Herald, April23, 1893, p. 31.25. D. Budisavljevic, “A Relative of Tesla’s Comments on the TeslaLibrary,” in Nikola Kasanovich, ed., Tesla Memorial Society Newsletter, Spring1989, p. 3.26. NT, My Inventions, p. 30; NT, 1939/1984, p. 283.27. The date may have been 1861.28. NT, My Inventions, p. 28. Rumors suggesting Niko pushed his brotherdown a flight of stairs stem from A. Beckhard, Electrical Genius, Nikola Tesla(New York: Julian Messner, 1959). Beckhard’s book, clearly written for youngadults, utilized only one referenced source, the O’Neill work. An imaginativewriter, Beckhard made up the names of the townspeople from Tesla’s childhoodas well. In Tesla: Man Out of Time (Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall, 1981)Margaret Cheney repeats the rumor without referencing it. Leland Anderson,who helped on the research, stated that Cheney heard the story at the TeslaMuseum. The original source was probably still Beckhard, as the book isprominently referred to by V. Popovic, professor at Belgrade University and vicepresident (in 1976) of the Tesla Society in Belgrade in his article “Nikola Tesla—True Founder of Radio Communications,” in Tesla: Life and Work of a Genius(Belgrade: Nikola Tesla Society, 1976).29. Ibid., p. 47.30. Phillip Callahan, “Tesla the Naturalist,” in Steven Elswick, ed., TeslaProceedings, 1986, pp. 1-27.31. Michael Markovitch personal archives, New York City.32. NT, My Inventions, p. 46.33. Ibid., p. 32, 36 (condensed).34. Ibid., pp. 32-33 (condensed).35. Ibid.36. Ibid., pp. 36-37.37. Marc Seifer, Nikola Tesla: Psychohistory of a Forgotten Inventor (SanFrancisco: Saybrook Institute, 1986). (Doctoral dissertation.) 38. NT, MyInventions, p. 53.39. Ibid., pp. 35-36 (condensed).40. TCM “Nikola Tesla,” p. 106.41. NT, My Inventions, p. 47 (condensed).42. NT, April 23, 1893.43. NT, My Inventions, p. 53.44. Nikola Pribic, “Nikola Tesla: A Yugoslav Perspective,” Tesla Journal6&7 (1989/1990), pp. 59-61 (condensed).45. NT, My Inventions, p. 54; Valic, 1977, p. 101.46. Ibid., p. 53.47. Ibid., p. 54.48. Ibid., p. 55.49. Ibid.50. O’Neill, Prodigal Genius, p. 29.51. NT to R. U. Johnson, April 5, 1900 [BLCU].Chapter 3: College Years, pp. 15-261. NT, Electrical Engineer, September 24, 1890.2. NT, My Inventions, pp. 56-57.3. Franz Pichler, “Tesla’s Studies in College,” ITS Conference, ColoradoSprings, 1994.4. Kosta Kulishich, “Tesla Nearly Missed His Career as Inventor: CollegeRoommate Tells,” Newark News, August 27, 1931.5. NT, My Inventions, p. 56.6. Pichler, “Tesla’s Studies in College.”7. K. Kulishich, “Tesla Nearly Missed…”8. NT, My Inventions, p. 37.9. Thomas Edison, “A Long Chat With the Most Interesting Man in theWorld,” Morning Journal, July 26, 1891, p. 17 [TAE].10. T.C. Martin, The Inventions, Researches and Writings of Nikola Tesla(New York: Electrical World Publishing, 1894), p. 3.11. NT, reconstructed from: “A New Alternating Current Motor,” TheElectrician, June 15, 1888, p. 173; NT, My Inventions, p. 57.12. NT, My Inventions, p. 37.13. Ibid.14. Alfred O. Tate, Edison’s Open Door (New York: Dutton, 1938), p. 149.15. Timothy Eaton, to author, quoting William Terbo, 1988.16. W. Terbo, “Remarks at Washington, D.C., premiere of The Secret Life ofNikola Tesla.” (Yugoslavia: Zagreb Films, 1983).17. Kulishich, “Tesla Nearly Missed…”18. Nikola Pribic, personal discussion with the author, Zagreb, 1986.19. Dragislav Petkovich, “A Visit to Nikola Tesla,” Politika, April 27, 1927,p. 4 [LA].20. Blackmore, John T. Ernst Mach: His Life and Work. (Berkeley, Calif.:University of California Press, 1972), pp. 38-39.21. Karel Litsch, director, Archiv Univerzity Karlovy, Prague, CzechRepublic, to author, September 28, 1989.22. William James, quoted in J. Blackmore, Ernst Mach, p. 76.23. Ibid.24. Robert Watson, The Great Psychologists: Aristotle to Freud (New York:Lippincott, 1963), pp. 198-200.25. NT, “How Cosmic Forces Shape Our Destiny,” (February 7, 1915), inLectures, Patents, Articles, 11956, p. A-173.26. Blackmore, Ernst Mach, pp. 41-43.27. C. C. Gillispie, ed, “Ernst Mach,” in Dictionary of Scientific Biography(New York: Scribners, 1977).28. Ibid.29. NT, My Inventions, p. 59.30. Velac, p. 102.31. Batchelor to Edison, October 24, 1881; Batchelor to Mr. Bailey, April11, 1882 [TAE].32. Inez Hunt and Waneta Draper, Lightning in His Hands: The Life Storyof Nikola Tesla (Hawthorne, Calif.: Omni Publications, 1977), p. 33; originallypublished, 1964.33. Petkovich, “A Visit to Nikola Tesla.”34. T. C. Martin, “Nikola Tesla,” Century, February 1894, p. 583.35. Anthony Szigeti, Deposition to the State of New York (February, 1889),in Tribute to Nikola Tesla (Belgrade: Tesla Museum, 1961), p. A-398.36. NT, My Inventions, pp. 60-61.37. For a full discussion of this event from both a neurological andmetaphysical point of view, see author’s doctoral dissertation, chapter 52 on“Creativity, Originality and Genius.”38. NT, My Inventions, pp. 59-60 (condensed).39. P. Lansky, “Neurochemistry and the Awakening of Kundalini,” in J.White, ed., Kundalini, Evolution & Enlightenment (Garden City, N.Y.:Doubleday, 1979), pp. 295-97.40. NT, My Inventions, p. 61.41. NT, “A New System of Alternate Current Motors and Transformers”(1888), in T. C. Martin (ed.), The Inventions, Researches, and Writings of NikolaTesla (New York: Electrical Review, 1894), pp. 11-16.42. NT, My Inventions, pp. 62-63.43. Ibid., p. 65.44. Ibid., p. 66.45. Walter Baily, “A Mode of Producing Arago’s Rotation,” PhilosophicalMagazine, 1879, pp. 286-90.46. Silvanus R. Thompson, Polyphase Electrical Currents (New York:American Technical Book Co., 1899), p. 86. See also Kline, 1987, p. 287.47. Ronald Kline, “Science & Engineering Theory in the Invention andDevelopment of the Induction Motor,” Technology & Culture (April 1987), pp.283-313.48. “Marcel Deprez Gets Publicity for Efficient Power Transmission,” NewYork Times, November 2, 1881.49. Henry Prout, George Westinghouse: An Intimate Portrait (New York:Wiley, 1939), p. 102.50. Ibid., p. 100.51. Galileo Ferraris, “Electromagnetic Rotations With an AlternatingCurrent,” Electrician, vol. 36 (1895), pp. 360-75; C. E. L. Brown, “A PersonalConversation With G. Ferraris.” Electrical World, February 6, 1892; O’Neill,Prodigal Genius, p. 115; Thompson, Polyphased Electric Currents, 1897, p. 88.52. T. Hughes, Networks of Power (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins UniversityPress, 1983), p. 118.53. EW. Silvanus P. Thompson, portrait, January 9, 1892, p. 20; Thompson,1897, pp. 93-96.54. Tesla stated that the invention began to take form while he wasattending the University of Prague. A review of the holdings of the university bythe director of archives, K. Litsch, reveals that Philosophical Magazine was notsubscribed to at that time.55. Ibid., Tesla quoted in Thomson, 1897, pp. 96-97.56. “Sweeping Decision of the Tesla Patents,” Electrical Review, September19, 1900, pp. 288-91.57. “Westinghouse Sues General Electric on the Tesla Patents,” ElectricalReview, March 22, 1899, p. 183; 9/19/1900, pp. 288-91; “Tesla Split-PhasePatents,” Electrical World, April 26, 1902, p. 734; “Tesla Patent Decision,” May17, 1902, p. 871; September 30, 1903,p. 470.58. “Tesla Split-Phase Patents,” Electrical Review, p. 291.Chapter 4: Tesla Meets the Wizard of Menlo Park, pp. 27-391. Thomas Edison, quoted in “Wizard Edison Here. ‘Sage of Orange’ TellsAbout Tesla’s Enormous Appetite as a Youth,” Buffalo New York News, August30, 1896 [TAE].2. Charles Batchelor to T. Edison, November 21, 1881 [TAEs].3. Alfred O. Tate, Edison’s Open Door (New York: Dutton, 1938), p. 148;New York Evening Sun, December 22, 1884.4. Batchelor papers, Edison Archives; New York Evening Sun, ibid.5. Szigeti, in NT, 1961.6. Charles Batchelor to T. Edison, January 2, 1881 [TAE].7. Ibid., November 26, 1881.8. Ibid., October 22, 1883.9. NT, My Inventions, p. 66.10. Ibid.11. TCM, “Nikola Tesla,” Century, 1894, p. 4.12. Branimir Jovanovich interview, Belgrade, 1986.13. NT, My Inventions, p. 34.14. Ibid., pp. 34-35.15. The timing is taken from NT, My Inventions, and Batchelor to T.Edison, September 24, 1882, and November 22, 1882 [TAE].16. Charles Batchelor Papers, 1883 [TAE].17. NT, My Inventions, p. 67.18. Batchelor to T. Edison, January 23, 1883 [TAE].19. Batchelor to T. Edison, January 9, 1882 [TAE].20. Ibid., October 28, 1883 [TAE].21. NT, My Inventions, p. 67.22. Ibid.23. Szigeti, in NT, Tribute to Nikola Tesla (1961), pp. A399-400.24. NT, My Inventions, p. 67.25. Ibid., p. 70.26. O’Neill, Prodigal Genius, p. 60.27. Batchelor to T. Edison, March 1884 [TAE]. It is possible that Batchelorreturned to Paris before Tesla’s arrival between March and late spring of 1884.28. Edison, “Wizard Edison Here…,” August 30, 1896.29. O’Neill, Prodigal Genius, p. 58.30. Thomas Edison, quoted in “An Interview With the Most InterestingMan in the World,” New York Journal, July 26, 1891.31. Batchelor to T. Edison, October 23, 1883 [TAE].32. NT to RUJ, April 5, 1900 [BLCU].33. Nicholas Kosanovich, ed. and trans., Nikola Tesla: Correspondencewith Relatives (Lackawanna, New York: Tesla Memorial Society and the NikolaTesla Museum, 1995), p. iv.34. NT, My Inventions, p. 70.35. NT, Tesla Said, Letter to the National Institute of Immigrant Welfare(May 11, 1938), in John Ratzlaff, ed. (Milbrae, Calif.: Tesla Book Co., 1984), p.280.36. M. Josephson, Thomas Alva Edison (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1959), p.178.37. Ibid., p. 184; H. Passer, The Electrical Manufacturers: 1875-1900(Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1953), pp. 144-45, 178-79.38. Josephson, Thomas Alva Edison, pp. 194-99.39. Robert Conot, Streak of Luck (New York: Bantam Books, 1979), pp.151-52.40. R. Silverberg, Light for the World (Princeton, N.J.: Van Nostrand,1967), pp. 134-35.41. Herbert Satterlee, J. Pierpont Morgan (New York: Macmillan, 1939), p.207.42. TCM, “Nikola Tesla,” Electrical World, 1890, p. 106.43. NT, “Letter to National Institute…” (May 11, 1938) in Tesla Said, p.280.44. Ibid.45. NT, quoted in “Tesla Has Plan to Signal Mars,” New York Sun, July 12,1937.46. NT, “Some Personal Recollections,” Scientific American, June 5, 1915,p. 537, 576-77.47. W. Dickson and A. Dickson, The Life and Inventions of T. A. Edison(New York: Thomas Crowell, 1892), p. 236.48. NT, “Letter to National Institute…” (May 11, 1938), in Tesla Said, p.208.49. TCM, “Nikola Tesla,” Century, February 1894, pp. 582-85.50. NT, quoted in “Tesla Says Edison Was an Empiricist,” New York Times,October 19, 1931, p. 25.51. TCM, “Nikola Tesla,” Century, February 1894, p. 583.52. NT, My Inventions, p. 71.53. NT, October 19, 1931, quoted in “Tesla Says Edison Was…” October19, 1931.54. NT, My Inventions, p. 72.55. NT, October 19, 1931, quoted in “Tesla Says Edison Was…” October19, 1931.56. Josephson, Thomas Alva Edison, p. 9.57. Harold Passer, The Electrical Manufacturers: 1875-1900 (Cambridge,Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1953), p. 180.58. Carole Klein, Gramercy Park: An American Bloomsbury (Boston:Houghton Mifflin, 1987).59. T. Edison, “Pearl Street,” Electrical Review, January 12, 1901, pp. 60-62 [condensed].60. R. Conot, Streak of Luck: The Life Story of Edison (New York: Bantam,1981), p. 305.61. Ibid., p. 259.62. David Woodbury, Beloved Scientist: Elihu Thomson (New York:McGraw-Hill, 1944), pp. 155-57.63. F. Dyer and T. C. Martin, Edison: His Life and Inventions (New York:Harper Bros., 1910), p. 391.64. Josephson, Thomas Alva Edison, pp. 230-32.65. Edison, “Pearl Street,” January 12, 1901.66. Dickson and Dickson, Life and Inventions, p. 236.67. NT, My Inventions, p. 72.68. Kenneth Swezey, “Nikola Tesla,” Science, May 16, 1958, pp. 1147-58;NT, My Inventions, p. 72.69. Ibid., p. 41.70. Alfred Tate, Edison’s Open Door (New York: Dutton, 1938), p. 147.71. Batchelor correspondence, July 14, 1884 [TAE].72. Tate, Edison’s Open Door, 146-47.73. NT, “Some Personal Recollections,” Scientific American, June 5, 1915,pp. 537, 576-77.74. NT, Letter to National Institute…May 11, 1938, in Tesla Said, p. 280.75. Kenneth Swezey, archival material, Smithsonian Institution,Washington, D.C.76. Conot, Streak of Luck, pp. 272x73 [condensed].Chapter 5: Liberty Street, pp. 40-501. NT, “Tesla Has Plan to Signal Mars,” New York Sun, July 12, 1937, p. 6.2. Leland Anderson, ed., Nikola Tesla: On His Work With AlternatingCurrents and Their Application to Wireless Telegraphy, Telephony andTransmission of Power (Denver, Colo.: Sun Publishing, 1992). This workcontains Tesla’s original testimony before his patent attorneys on the origins ofthe invention of the wireless in 1916.3. NT, March 18, 1891/1980, p. 15; NT, 1959, p. P-199; R. Conot, Streak ofLuck: The Life Story of Edison (New York: Bantam, 1981), p. 597.4. “Tesla Electric Co.” (advertisement), Electrical Review, September 14,1886, p. 14.5. NT, My Inventions: The Autobiography of Nikola Tesla, Ben Johnston,ed., p. 72; Anderson, Nikola Tesla, p. 12.6. “Tesla Electric Co.,” September 14, 1886, p. 14.7. Kulishich, “Tesla Nearly Missed His Career,” 1931.8. NT, Letter to the National Institute of Immigrant Welfare (May 11,1938), in Tesla Said, 1984, p. 280.9. NT, My Inventions, p. 72.10. NT, Letter to the National Institute of Immigrant Welfare (May 11,1938), in Tesla Said, 1984, p. 280.11. Ibid.12. Alfred S. Brown, “Arc Lamp Patents,” Electrician and ElectricalEngineer, 1886.13. NT. 12/1931, p. 78.14. Hugo Gernsback, “Tesla’s Egg of Columbus,” Electrical Experimenter,March 19, 1919, p. 775 [paraphrased].15. NT. Nikola Tesla: Lectures, Patents, Articles (Belgrade: Nikola TeslaMuseum, 1956).16. O’Neill, Prodigal Genius, p. 67.17. TCM, Nikola Tesla, 1890, p. 106.18. “Thomas Commerford Martin Dies,” Electrical World, May 24, 1924,p. 1100.19. Ibid.; Who’s Who of Electrical Engineers, 1924 ed.20. W. J. Johnston, “Mr. Martin’s Lawsuit: Why and How It Failed,”Electrical World, Part I, September 30, 1893, pp. 253-54; Part VII, November11, 1893, pp. 382-87.21. “Thomas Commerford Martin Dies,” Electrical World, May 24, 1924.22. Ibid., p. 5.23. M. Josephson, Thomas Alva Edison (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1959), p.356.24. H. Byllesby to GW, May 21, 1888 [GWA].25. Leonard Curtis in Henry Prout, George Westinghouse: An IntimatePortrait (New York: Wiley, 1939), p. 101.26. Prout, pp. 101-4.27. Charles F. Scott, “Early Days in the Westinghouse Shop,” ElectricalWorld, September 20, 1924, p. 586.28. T. Hughes, Network of Power (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins UniversityPress, 1983), pp. 101-3.29. Prout, George Westinghouse, p. 95.30. Scott, “Early Days.”31. Robert Silverberg, Light for the World (Princeton, N.J.: Van Nostrand,1967), p. 233.32. Alfred O. Tate, Edison’s Open Door (New York: Dutton, 1938), p. 148.33. Laurence Hawkins, William Stanley: His Life and Times (New York:Newcomen Society, 1939).34. George Westinghouse, “No Special Danger,” New York Times,December 13, 1888, 5:3.35. Josephson, Thomas Alva Edison, p. 346.36. David Woodbury, Beloved Scientist: Elihu Thomson (New York:McGraw-Hill, 1944), pp. 169, 179.37. Josephson, Thomas Alva Edison, p. 346.38. N. Tesla, “A New Alternating Current Motor,” Electrician, June 15,1888, p. 173.39. Leland Anderson, Nikola Tesla (slide presentation) (Colorado Springs,Colo.: International Tesla Society, 1988) symposium. August 1988.40. William Anthony, quoted in NT, “A New System of Alternate CurrentMotors and Transformers,” (May 16, 1888), in Lectures, Patents and Articles(1956), p. Lll.41. Elihu Thomson, quoted in NT, i bid., p. L12.42. Ibid., p. L12.43. H. Byllesby to GW, May 21, 1888.[GWA].44. H. Byllesby to GW, May 21, 1888 [GWA].45. Ibid.; see also Harold Passer, The Electrical Manufacturers: 1875-1900(Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1953), p. 175.46. H. Byllesby to GW, December 13, 1888.47. C. C. Chesney and Charles F. Scott, “Early History of the AC System inAmerica,” Electrical Engineering, March 1936, pp. 228-35.48. NT. “Mr. Tesla on Alternating Current Motors,” letter to the editor,Electrical World, May 25, 1888, pp. 297-98; NT, Tesla Said, (1984), p. 4.49. Henry Carhart, “Professor Galileo Ferraris,” Electrical World, February1887, p. 284, “as I understand it, there is a gigantic step from Ferraris’ whirlingpool to Tesla’s whirling magnetic field,” Pupin to Tesla, December 19, 1891[NTM].50. Passer, Electrical Manufacturers, p. 177.51. G. Westinghouse, internal memorandum. July 5, 1888 [GWA].52. Ibid.; see also Passer, Electrical Manufacturers, pp. 277-78.Chapter 6: Induction at Pittsburgh, pp. 51-601. N. Tesla, “Death of Westinghouse,” Electrical World, March 21, 1914, p.637.2. Charles F. Scott, “Early Days in the Westinghouse Shops,” ElectricalWorld, September 20, 1924, pp. 585-87.3. Ibid., p. 586.4. NT, “Tribute to George Westinghouse,” Electrical World & Engineer,March 21, 1914, p. 637.5. H. Passer, The Electrical Manufacturers: 1875-1900 (Cambridge, Mass.:Harvard University Press, 1953), p. 279.6. G. Westinghouse, memorandum, July 11, 1888 [GWA].7. Undated memorandum [GWA]; Passer, Electrical Manufacturers, saidthat the author was Byllesby, July 7, 1888.8. NT to GW, January 2, 1900 [LC].9. NT to GW, September 12, 1892; November 29, 1898 [LC].10. NT to JJA. January 6, 1899 [NTM].11. Westinghouse Co. annual report, Electrical Review, June 30, 1897, p.313.12. The figure most often noted is $1 million, and the source is O’Neill.This same amount was mentioned by R. U. Johnson in his chapter on Tesla in hisautobiography, “This to the man who had sold the inventions used at Niagara tothe Westinghouse Company for a million dollars and lived to rue the bargain!”(Remembered Yesterdays [Boston: Little Brown, 1923], 401). As Johnson wasTesla’s closest confidant, the figure must have originally come from Tesla.13. Letter to Westinghouse Corporation, February 6, 1898 [LC]; Tesla mayhave also been influenced by the consensus concerning the noble profession ofscientist. For instance, Louis Pasteur also refused to seek financial compensationfor his discoveries. To do so, Pasteur said, a scientist would “lower himself…Aman of pure science would complicate his life and risk paralyzing his inventivefaculties” (quoted in M. Josephson, Thomas Alva Edison [New York: McGraw-Hill, 1959], p. 336).14. Leland Anderson, ed., Nikola Tesla: On His Work With AlternatingCurrents… (1916), pp. 64-65.15. P. Callahan, “Tesla Stationary Obtained from Tesla Museum.”16. Scott, September 20, 1924.17. Charles F. Scott, to NT, July 10, 1931 [BCU].18. Ibid.19. L. Hawkings, William Stanley: His Life and Times (New York:Newcomen Society, 1939), p. 32; Stanley advertisement, “The S.K.C. Two PhaseSystem,” Electrical Review, January 16, 1895, p. vii.20. Charles F. Scott, George Westinghouse Commemoration (New York:American Society of Mechanical Engineers, 1936, 1985), p. 21.21. Henry Prout, W. Westinghouse: An Intimate Portrait (New York: Wiley,1939), p. 129.22. NT, My Inventions, p. 23.23. “Brown Executes Dogs,” New York Times, July 31, 1888, 4:7.24. “A Humane Method of Capital Punishment,” Electrical Review,December 24, 1887; “One Dead Dog,” ibid., July 20, 1889, p. 2.25. “Edison and Capital Punishment,” Electrical Review, June 30, 1888, p.1; “Edison Says It Will Kill,” New York Sun, July 4, 1889.26. “Electricity on Animals,” New York Times, December 13, 1888, p. 2.27. George Westinghouse, “No Special Danger,” New York Times,December 13, 1888, p. 5.28. Harold P. Brown, “Electric Currents,” New York Times, December 18,1888, p. 5.29. “Cockran Debates McKinley at Madison Square Garden,” New YorkPress, August 19, 1896, pp. 1-2.30. “Electricity as a Means of Execution,” Elecrical Review, August 3,1889; “Edison Says It Will Kill,” New York Sun, July 24, 1889.31. “Electricity as a Means,” Electrical Review, August 3, 1889.32. “Electrical Execution a Failure,” Electrical Review, August 16, 1890,pp. 1-2.33. “Kemmler Dies in Electric Chair,” New York Times, August 6, 1890, p.1.34. B. Lamme, An Autobiography (New York: Putnam’s, 1926), p. 60.35. O’Neill, Prodigal Genius, p. 83.36. B. Lamme, Autobiography, p. 60.37. Ibid., p. v.38. Francis Jehl, Menlo Park Reminiscences (Dearborn, Mich.: EdisonInstitute, 1939), p. 336.39. Charles F. Scott, “Nikola Tesla’s Achievements in the Electrical Art,”AIEE Transactions, 1943, p. 3.Chapter 7: Bogus Inventors pp. 61-651. “Who Is the Greatest Genius of Our Age?” Review of Reviews, July1890, p. 45.2. Nikola Tesla, “The True Wireless,” Electrical Experimenter, May 1919,p. 28, in NT, Solutions to Tesla’s Secrets, J. Ratzlaff, ed. (1981), p. 62.3. John O’Neill, Prodigal Genius (New York: Ives Washburn, 1944), p. 77.4. NT to JPM, December 10, 1900 [LC]5. NT, “On the Dissipation of the Electrical Energy of the Hertz Resonator,”Elecrical Engineer, December 21, 1892; in NT, Tesla Said, J. Ratzlaff, ed.(Milbrae, Calif.: Tesla Book Co., 1984), p. 22.6. J. G. O’Hara and W. Pricha, Hertz and the Maxwellians (London: PeterPeregrinus Ltd. in assoc. with the Science Museum, 1987), p. 42.7. NT, December 21, 1892; “New Radio Theories,” New York HeraldTribune, Sepember 22, 1929, in NT, Tesla Said, pp. 225-26.8. Nikola Pribic, “Nikola Tesla: The Human Side of a Scientist,” TeslaJournal no. 2/3, 1982-83, p. 25.9. 1889 newspaper clipping, Edison Archives, Menlo Park, N.J.10. R. Conot. Streak of Luck (New York: Bantam Books, 1981), pp. 344-46;M. Josephson, Thomas Alva Edison (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1959), pp. 335-37.11. Ambrose Fleming, “Nikola Tesla,” in NT, Tribute to Nikola Tesla:Letters, Articles (1961), p. A-222.12. Louis Hamon, My Life With the Occult (Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday,1933, 1972), p. 243.13. Review of Reviews, July 1890, p. 45.14. “Was Keely a Charlatan?” Public Opinion, December 1, 1898, p. 684.15. T. Carpenter Smith, “Our View of the Keely Motor,” EngineeringMagazine, vol. 2, 1891-92, pp. 14-19.16. “Keely Not Yet in Jail,” New York Times, September 19, 1888, p. 1.17. “Keely’s Latest Move,” New York Times, August 24, 1888, p. 5.18. “Keely in Contempt,” New York Times, November 11, 1888, p. 6.19. “Inventor Keely in Jail,” New York Times, November 18, 1888, p. 3.20. Francis Lynde Stetson, quoted in William Birch Rankine, deLancyRankine, ed. (Niagara Falls, N.Y.: Power City Press, 1926), p. 30.21. “Science and Sensationalism,” Public Opinion, December 1, 1898, pp.684-85.22. W. Barrett, “John W. Keely,” in R. Bourne, ed., The Smithsonian Bookof Invention (New York: Norton, 1978), pp. 120-21.23. Ibid.24. NT to RUJ, June 12, 1900 [BLCU].Chapter 8: South Fifth Avenue pp. 66-721. Joseph Wetzler, “Electric Lamps Fed From Space, and Flames That DoNot Consume,” Harper’s Weekly, July 11, 1891, p. 524.2. NT to Petar Mandic, August 18, 1890, in Nicholas Kosanovich, ed. andtrans., Nikola Tesla: Correspondence with Relatives (1995), p. 15.3. Ibid., May 17, 1894.4. Ibid. Angelina Trbojevic to NT, January 2, 1897, p. 65.5. Ibid. Jovo Trbojevic to Nikola Tesla, February 27, 1890; Milutin Tesla (acousin) to Nikola Kosanovic, November 10, 1892.6. Ibid. NT to Petar Mandic, December 8, 1893, p. 41.7. Ibid. NT to Pajo Mandic, January 23, 1894, p. 42.8. Ibid. Milkin Radivoj to NT, September 24, 1895, p. 51.9. Karl Marx, “The Materialist Conception of History;” in P. Gardiner, ed.,Theories of History (Glencoe, Ill.: Free Press, 1959), p. 134.10. NT, “Problem of Increasing Human Energy,” Century, June 1900, pp.178-79.11. T. C. Martin to NT, August 5, 1890 [NTM].12. William Anthony, “A Review of Modern Electrical Theories,” AIEETransactions, February 1890, pp. 33-42. See also J. Ratzlaff and L. Anderson,Dr. Nikola Tesla Bibliography, 1884-1978 (Palo Alto, Calif.: Ragusen Press,1979), p. 6.13. M. Pupin, From Immigrant to Inventor (New York: Scribners, 1923), p.144.14. Oscar May, “The High-Pressure Transmission of Power Experiments atOerlikon,” Electrical World, April 18, 1891, p. 291.15. Louis Duncan, “Portrait,” Electrical World, April 5, 1890, p. 236;“Alternating Current Motors, Part 2,” June 16, 1891, pp. 357-58; Ratzlaff andAnderson, Bibliography, p. 7.16. Pupin, From Immigrant to Inventor, pp. 283-84.17. Elihu Thomson, “Phenomena of Alternating Currents of Very HighFrequency,” Electrical World, April 4, 1891, p. 254.For previous aspects of thedebate, see also E. Thomson, “Notes on Alternating Currents of Very HighFrequency, Electrical World, March 14, 1891, pp. 204-5; “Phenomena ofAlternating Currents of Very High Frequency,” Electrical World, April II, 1891,pp. 223-24.18. NT, “High Frequency Experiments,” Electrical World, February 21,1891, pp. 128-30.19. Electrical World, February 21, 1891, pp. 128-30.20. Wetzler, “Electric Lamps Fed From Space,” Harper’s Weekly, July 11,1891, p. 524.21. Ibid.22. E. Raverot, “Tesla’s Experiments in High Frequency,” Electrical World,March 26, 1892.23. Gano Dunn to NT, June 1931, in NT, Tribute to Nikola Tesla: Letters,Articles (1961), LS-54.24. It was the term “without effort” which I believe has beenmisinterpreted. From Tesla’s point of view, energy was not truly availablewithout effort. Machines instead of humans could be constructed that wouldextract this “free energy.” Solar, wind, and water power are all ways to extract“free energy” without the exertion of human effort.25. Sperry’s gyroscope, of course, is based upon the principles inherent inthe Tesla rotating egg, and Tesla should therefore be considered ahead of Sperryin this invention.26. Electrical World, May 20, 1891, p. 288.27. Robert Millikan to NT, 1931, in NT, Tribute to Tesla, p. LS-30.28. Petkovich, p. 3.29. Michael Pupin to NT, December 19, 1891, in NT, Tribute to Tesla, p.LS-11.Chapter 9: Revising the Past, pp. 73-821. Charles Steinmetz, Alternating Current Phenomena (New York:McGraw-Hill, 1900), pp. i-ii [condensed].2. Oscar May, “The High-Pressure Transmission of Power Experiments atOerlikon,” Electrical World, April 18, 1891, p. 291.3. T. Hughes, Networks of Power (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins UniversityPress, 1983), pp. 131-33.4. Ibid.5. Dragislov Petkovich, “A Visit to Nikola Tesla,” Politika, April 27, 1927,p. 3.6. Hughes, Network of Power.7. “C. E. L. Brown Portrait,” Electrical World, October 12, 1891, p. 284.8. M. Dobrowolsky, “Electrical Transmission of Power by AlternatingCurrents,” Electrical World, September 14, 1891, p. 268.9. Carl Hering, “Comments on Mr. Brown’s Letter,” Electrical World,November 7, 1891, p. 346.10. Jonathan Leonard, Loki: The Life of Charles Proteus Steinmetz (GardenCity, N.Y.: Doubleday, 1932), p. 109.11. John Winthrop Hammond, Charles Proteus Steinmetz (New York:Century Co., 1924).12. “Charles Steinmetz,” in M. Pupin, “Pupin on Polyphasal Generators,”AIEE Transactions, December 16, 1891, pp. 591-92.13. Harold Passer, The Electrical Manufcturers: 1875-1900 (Cambridge,Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1953).14. NT to Villard, October 10, 1892 [Houghton Library, HarvardUniversity].15. M. Josephson, Edison: A Biography (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1959),p. 361.16. Ibid., p. 392.17. Ibid.18. J. Leonard, Loki: The Life of Charles Proteus Steinmetz (Garden City,N.Y.: Doubleday, 1928), p. 202.19. H. Prout, George Westinghouse: An Intimate Portrait (New York:Wiley, 1939), p. 125.20. Electrical World, September 16, 1893, p. 208, cited in Passer, ElectricalManufacturers, p. 292.21. Charles Steinmetz, Theoretical Elements of Electrical Engineering(New York: McGraw-Hill, 1902), pp. iii-iv.22. Pupin, From Immigrant to Inventor, pp. 285-86.23. Ibid., p. 289.24. Gisbert Kapp to NT, in NT, Tribute to Nikola Tesla, p. LS-6.25. B. A. Behrend, The Induction Motor (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1921),p. 1.26. C. E. L. Brown, “Reasons for the Use of the Three-Phase Current in theLauffen-Frankfort Transmission,” Electrical World, November 7, 1891, p. 346.27. Carl Hering, “Comments on Mr. Brown’s Letter,” in ibid., p. 346.28. W. H. Johnston, “Mr. Tesla and the Drehstrom Systems,” ElectricalWorld, February 6, 1892, p. 83.29. Carl Hering, “Mr. Tesla and the Drehstrom System,” Electrical World,February 6, 1892, p. 84.30. Behrend, Induction Motor, pp. xiii-xiv.31. Ibid., p. 261.Chapter 10: The Royal Society: pp. 83-971. “Mr. Tesla Before the Royal Institution, London,” Electrical Review,March 19, 1892, p. 57.2. The Tesla oscillator conceived at this time became the basis for all of hislater transmitters, such as at Colorado Springs and also Wardenclyffe (seeespecially, patent nos. 462,418—November 13, 1891; 514,168—February 6,1894; and 568,178—September 22, 1896).3. NT, “Electric Oscillators,” Electrical Experimentation (July 7, 1919), inNT, Nikola Tesla: Lectures, 1956, p. A-78-93.4. NT, “The Problem of Increasing Human Energy,” Century, June 1900, p.203.5. T. C. Martin, “Tesla’s Oscillator and Other Inventions,” Century, April1895.In NT, Tribute to Nikola Tesla, p. A-16.6. “NT and J.J. Thomson” (1891), in NT, Nikola Tesla: Lectures, 1956, pp.A-16-21.7. NT, “High Frequency Oscillators for Electro-Therapeutic and OtherPurposes,” Electrical Engineer, November 17, 1898, pp. 477-81.8. T. C. Martin, J. Wetzler, and G. Sheep to Tesla, January 8, 1892 [NTM].9. William Preece to NT, January 16, 1892 [NTM].10. M. Josephson, Thomas Alva Edison (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1959),pp. 275-77; E. C. Baker, Sir William Preece: Victorial Engineer Extaordinary(London: Hutchinson, 1976), pp. 185-86.11. “Mr. Tesla Before the Royal Institution, London,” Electrical Review,March 19, 1892, p. 57; NT, The Inventions, Researches and Writings of NikolaTesla, T. C. Martin, ed. (New York: Electrical Review Publishing Company,republished, Mokelumne Hill, Calif.: Health Research, 1970), p. 200.12. Most of the titles of these distinguished scientists were obtained later intheir career; for example, Dewar became knighted in 1904; Fleming in1924.William Thomson became Baron or Lord Kelvin a few months after Tesla’slecture.13. Ibid., p. 198 [paraphrased].14. Ibid., p. 200.15. Ibid., p. 186.16. Ibid.17. NT, Inventions, Researches, pp. 130-131; 228-229 [paraphrased in part].18. Ibid., pp. 287-88 [paraphrased].19. Ibid., p. 235.20. W. Kock, Engineering Applications of Lasers and Holography (NewYork: Plenum Press, 1975), pp. 28-35. I Hunt and W. Draper, Lightning in HisHands: The Life Story of Tesla (Hawthorne, Calif.: Omni Publications, 1964),were the first to suggest that Tesla invented the laser.21. NT, “On Electrical Resonance,” Electrical Engineer, June 21, 1893, pp.603-5.22. NT, “On Light and High Frequency Phenomena,” Electrical Engineer,March 8, 1893, pp. 248-49.23. NT, 1916/1992, on his work with alternating currents, p. 62.24. NT, “Mr. Tesla Before the Royal Institution,” pp. 247-49.25. Ibid., pp. 250-52.26. Ibid., p. 292.27. Ibid.28. Ibid. [paraphrased in part].29. Isaac Asimov, Asimov’s Biographical Encyclopedia of Science andTechnology (Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday, 1964), p. 347.30. NT, My Inventions, p. 82.31. Leland Anderson, Slide presentation and lecture before the InternationalTesla Society, Colorado Springs, Colo., August 1988.32. NT, My Inventions, p. 82 [condensed].33. J. A. Fleming to NT, February 5, 1892, in NT, Tribute to Nikola Tesla1961, p. LS-13.34. Asimov, Asimov’s Biographical Encyclopedia, p. 364.35. William Crookes to NT, March 5, 1892, in NT, Tribute to Nikola Tesla,p. LS-12.26. William Crookes, “Some Possibilities of Electricity,” FortnightlyReview, February 1892, pp. 173-81.37. Crookes became president of the Society of Psychical Research in 1896;Lodge, in 1901; and Rayleigh, in 1919.J. J. Thomson was a vice president. SeeA. Koestler, Roots of Coincidence (New York: Vintage, 1972), pp. 32-34.38. William Crookes, “D.D. Home,” Quarterly Journal of Science, January1874 [condensed]. See also C. J. Ducasse, “The Philosophical Importance ofPsychic Phenomena,” in J. Ludwig, ed., Philosophy and Parapsychology(Buffalo, N.Y.: Prometheus Books, 1978), p. 138.39. Crookes to NT, March 5, 1892.40. NT, “Elliott Cresson Gold Medal Presentation,” in Tribute to NikolaTesla, p. D-4.41. NT, “Mechanical Therapy” (undated), in Tesla Said, p. 286.42. Robert O. Becker, “Direct Current Neural Systems,” PsychoenergeticSystems 2 (1976), pp. 190-91.43. “Tesla’s Experiments,” Electrical Review, April 9, 1892, p. 1.44. NT to GW, September 12, 1892 [LC].45. NT, Tribute to Nikola Tesla, p. LS-69; see also B. A. Behrend, TheInduction Motor (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1921), pp. 6-7.46. NT, My Inventions, pp. 94-95.47. Ibid., p. 95.48. Ibid., p. 104.49. Ibid.50. Ibid., pp. 104-5.51. William Broad to author, 1986.52. “Honors to Nikola Tesla from King Alexander I,” in ElectricalEngineer, February 1, 1893, p. 125.53. N. Pribic, “Nikola Tesla: The Human Side of a Scientist,” Tesla JournalNovember 2 and 3, 1982/1983, p. 25.54. Ambrose Fleming, “Nikola Tesla,” Journal of Institution of ElectricalEngineers, London, 91, February 1944, in Tribute to Nikola Tesla, p. A-215.55. J. G. O’Hara and W. Pricha, Hertz and the Maxwellians (London: PeterPeregrinus, 1987), p. 5.56. Hertz’s decision to eliminate scalar potentials was also a puzzlement toOliver Heaviside, who corresponded frequently with the German scientist duringthis same period. “I am quite of your opinion, that you have gone further on thanMaxwell,” Heaviside wrote in 1889, “[but] electrostatical (scalar) potential andmagnetical (scalar) potential ought to remain I think.” Heaviside, however, likeHertz, was in agreement with the idea of dispensing with vector potentials.57. NT, “On the Dissipation of the Electrical Energy of the HertzResonator,” Electrical Engineer, December 21, 1892, p. 587-88, in Tesla Said,pp. 22-23.58. “NT tells of New Radio Theories,” New York Herald Tribune,September 22, 1929, pp. 1, 29; in NT, Tesla Said, pp. 225-26.59. NT, “The True Wireless,” Electrical Experimenter, May 1919, p. 28.60. Tesla researcher Tom Bearden has gone so far as to say that the Hertziandecision to eliminate scalar waves and vector potentials from Maxwell’sequations created a flaw in the next theoretical development called quantummechanics. It was for this reason, Bearden speculates, that Einstein could notcreate a unified field theory. Bearden suggests bringing back these componentsalong with another abandoned aspect called quaternion theory. He furthersuggests that by utilizing Tesla transmitters to produce converging powerfullypumped scalar waves, spinners and twisters can be created, that is, localspace/time can be curved, and large amounts of power can be transmittedwirelessly over long distances (Tom Bearden, “Scalar Waves and TeslaTechnology,” paper presented at the International Tesla Society Symposium,Colorado Springs, Colo., August 1988).61. NT, My Inventions, p. 83.Chapter 11: Father of the Wireless, pp. 98-1091. NT, The Inventions, Researches, and Writings of Nikola Tesla, T. C.Martin, ed. (1893), p. 149.2. J. Ratzlaff and L. Anderson, Dr. Nikola Tesla Bibliography, 1884-1978(Palo Alto, Calif.: Ragusen Press, 1970), p. 21.3. John O’Neill, Prodigal Genius: The Life Story of N. Tesla (New York:Ives Washburn, 1944), p. 101.4. Moses King, King’s Handbook of New York (New York: F. A. Ferris &Co., 1894), p. 2305. Walter Stephenson, “Nikola Tesla and the Electric Light of the Future,”Scientific American Supplement, March 30, 1895, pp. 16408-09; NT to Simp.Majstorovic, Jan. 2, 1893, in Correspondence with Relatives, p. 31.6. NT, “On the Dissipation of Electrical Energy of the Hertz Resolution,”(Dec. 21, 1892), in Tesla Said, pp. 22-23.7. NT, Inventions, Researches and Writings, p. 347.8. NT to Fodor, September 9, 1892; November 27, 1892; January 1, 1893;March 19, 1893 [LC].9. NT to Petar Mandic, Dec. 8, 1893, in Correspondence with Relatives, p.41.10. NT to Thurston, November 4, 1892; January 23, 1893; February 21,1893; October 23, 1893 [WBP].11. NT to GW, September 27, 1892 [LC].12. Henry Prout, George Westinghouse: An Intimate Portrait (New York:Wiley, 1939), p. 143.13. Reconstructed from NT to GW, September 12, 1892 [LC].14. Benjamin Lamme, An Autobiography (New York: Putnam’s, 1926), p.66.15. NT to GW, September 12, 1892 [LC].16. Page Smith, The Rise of Industrial America. vol. 6 (New York:McGraw-Hill, 1984), p. 486-88.17. NT, “On Light and Other High Frequency Phenomena” (Feb./Mar.1893), in Inventions, Researches, pp. 294-95.18. Ibid.19. Ibid., p. 299.20. Ibid., p. 299.21. James Coleman, Relativity for the Layman. New York: Mentor Books,1958, p. 44.22. NT, “Radio Power Will Revolutionize the World,” Modern Mechanix &Invention, 71, 1934, pp. 40-42, 117-19.23. T. C. Martin, “The Tesla Lecture in St. Louis,” Electrical Engineer,March 18, 1893, pp. 248-49.24. NT, “Experiments with Alternate Currents…” (May 20, 1891), inInventions, Researches, p. 148.25. “An infinitesimal world, with molecules and their atoms spinning andmoving in orbits, in much the same manner as celesial bodies, carrying withthem and probably spinning with them ether, or in other words, carrying withthem static charges, seems to my mind the most probable view, and one which ina plausible manner, accounts for most of the phenomena observed. The spinningof the molecules and their ether sets up the ether tensions or electrostatic strains;the equalization of ether tensions sets up ether motions or electric currents, andthe orbital movements produce the effects of electro and permanent magnetism.”NT, “Experiments With Alternate Currents of Very High Frequency and TheirApplication to Methods of Artificial Illumination,” lecture delivered before theAmerican Institute of Electrical Engineers at Columbia College (May 20, 1891).In T. C. Martin, ed., The Inventions, Researches, and Writings of Nikola Tesla(New York: Electrical Engineer, 1893), p. 149.26. Orrin Dunlop, Radio’s 100 Men of Science (New York: Harper andBros., 1944), pp. 156-58.27. NT, “How Cosmic Forces Shape Our Destiny,” New York American,February 27, 1925, in Lectures, Patents, Articles, p. A-172.28. Ibid.29. NT, “On Light and Other High Frequency Phenomena,” (Feb/March1893), in Inventions, Researches, p. 301.30. Ibid., p. 347.31. Ibid., p. 347.32. William Broughton Jr., “William Broughton Dedication Speech,”Schenectady Museum, Schenectady, N.Y., February 6, 1976 [Nick BasuraArchives].33. NT, Inventions, Researches and Writings, p. 348.34. NT, My Inventions, p. 29.35. William Preece, “On the Transmission of Electrical Signals ThroughSpace,” Electrical Engineer, August 30, 1893, p. 209.36. O. E. Dunlap, 1944, pp. 58-59; also James Corum lecture, One HundredYears of Resonator Development, ITS Conference, Colorado Springs, Colo.,1992.37. M. Josephson, Thomas Alva Edison (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1959), p.128.38. R. Conot, Streak of Luck (New York: Bantam, 1981), p. 95.39. Preece, “On the Transmission of Electrical Signals.”40. A. Slaby, “The New Telegraphy,” Century, 1897, pp. 867-77.41. Oliver Lodge, Talks About Wireless (New York: Cassell, 1925), p. 32.42. NT, “The True Wireless,” Electrical Experimenter, May 1919, pp. 28-30, 61-63, 87; in Solutions to Tesla’s Secrets, pp. 62-68.Chapter 12: Electric Sorcerer, pp. 110-1211. “New Electric Inventions,” New York Recorder, June 15; 1891.2. NT, “Nikola Tesla and His Wonderful Discoveries,” Electrical World,April 29, 1893, pp. 323-24.3. “Tesla and His Wonderful Discoveries,” New York Herald, April 23,1893; NT, “Nikola Tesla and His Wonderful Discoveries,” pp. 323-24.4. [WBP].5. TCM, “Tesla’s Lecture in St. Louis,” Electrcial Engineer, March 8, 1893,pp. 248-49.6. [WBP].7. TCM, “Tesla’s Lecture in St. Louis,” Electrical Engineer, March 8, 1893.8. NT, “On Light and Other High Frequency Phenomena,” ElectricalEngineer, June 28, 1893, p. 627.9. NT, “Nikola Tesla & His Wonderful Discoveries,” Electrical World,April 29, 1893, pp. 323-24.10. Ibid.11. NT, “On Phenomena Produced by Electric Force,” in Inventions,Researches and Writings, February/March 1893, p. 318.12. Ibid., p. 318-19.13. TCM, “A New Edison on the Horizon,” Review of Reviews, March1894, p. 355.14. Martin, “Tesla’s Lecture in St. Louis,” March 8, 1893.15. NT, Inventions, Researches and Writings, p. 349.16. M. Josephson, Thomas Alva Edison (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1954), p.235.17. Thomas Edison, “A Long Chat With the Most Interesting Man in theWorld,” Morning Journal, July 26, 1891 [TAE].18. NT, “Nikola Tesla and His Wonderful Discoveries,” Electrical World,April 29, 1893, from New York Herald, April 23, 1893.19. NT, My Inventions, p. 41.20. Ibid., p. 83.21. TCM, “Tesla’s Oscillator and Other Inventions,” Century, April 1895,pp. 916-33.22. Ibid. See also NT, Nikola Tesla: Lectures 1956, pp. P-141-145, P-225-231.23. NT, “On Phenomena Produced by Electrostatic Force,” in Inventions,Researches, and Writings, February/March, 1893, pp. 319-21.24. William Cameron. The World’s Fair: A Pictorial History of theColumbian Exposition (New Haven, Conn.: James Brennan & Co., 1894), pp.108, 669-70; Stanley Applebaum, The Chicago World’s Fair of 1893: A PictorialRecord (New York: Dover, 1980), pp. 96-97, 106.25. W. E. Cameron, World’s Fair, pp. 641-85.26. Ibid., p. 316.27. Ibid., p. 318.28. J. Barrett, Electricity at the Columbian Exposition (Chicago: Donnelley& Sons, 1894), pp. 168-69; “Mr. Tesla’s Personal Exhibit at the World’s Fair,”Electrical Engineer, November 29, 1893, pp. 466-68.29. Cameron, World’s Fair, p. 325; G. R. Davis, World’s ColumbianExposition, 1893 (Philadelphia: W. Houston & Co., 1893), p. 127; World’s FairYouth Companion (Boston: 1893), p. 19.30. “Electricians Listen in Wonder to the ‘Wizard of Physics,’” ChicagoTribune, August 26, 1893 (Edison Archives).31. “Tesla’s Egg of Columbus,” Electrical Experimenter, March 1919, p.775.Chapter 13: The Filipovs, pp. 122-1311. TCM, “Nikola Tesla,” Century, February 1894, pp. 582-85.2. “Electricians Listen in Wonder to the ‘Wizard of Physics’,” August 26,1893.3. TCM, “A New on the Horizon,” Review of Reviews, March 1894, p. 355.4. Arthur Brisbane, “Our Foremost Electrician, Nikola Tesla,” World, July22, 1894.5. Robert Underwood Johnson, Remembered Yesterdays (Boston: LittleBrown, 1923).6. W. T. Stephenson, “Electric Light of the Future,” Outlook March 9, 1895,pp. 384-356.7. Ibid. [The experience of this reporter was adapted to the Johnsonmeeting]8. Ibid.9. NT to RUJ, January 8, 1894 [BCU].10. NT to RUJ, December 7, 1893 [BCU].11. NT, “Introductory Note on Zmai,” in R. U. Johnson, Songs of Libertyand Other Poems (New York: Century, 1897), pp. 43-47.12. KJ to NT [NTM].13. Ibid., April 3, 1896.14. Ibid., December 6, 1897.15. Ibid., June 6, 1898.16. TCM to KJ, January 8, 1894 [BLCU].17. TCM to NT, January 22, 1894 [NTM].18. Johnson, Remembered Yesterdays, p. 400.19. Ibid.20. Mark Twain to NT, March 4, 1894; RUJ to NT, March 5, 1894; NT toRUJ, April 26, 1894 [BLCU].21. Mark Twain Papers [BLCU].22. F. Anderson, ed., Mark Twain’s Notebooks and Journals, vol. 3, 1883-1891 (Berkeley, Calif.: University of California Press, 1979), p. 431.23. Ibid.24. NT, My Inventions, p. 53.25. NT, 1897, pp. 286-87.26. NT to RUJ, May 2, 1894 [BLCU].27. NT to KJ, May 2, 1894 [BLCU].28. TCM to NT, February 17, 1894 [NTM].29. Nicholas Pribic, “Nikola Tesla: The Human Side of a Scientist,” TeslaJournal, nos. 2 & 3 (1982-83), p. 25.30. TCM to NT, February 6, 1894 [NTM].31. J. Abraham and R. Savin, Elihu Thomson Correspondence (New York:Academic Press, 1971), p. 352.32. TCM to RUJ, February 7, 1894 [BLCU].33. NT, “Elliott Cresson Gold Medal Award,” Tribute to Nikola Tesla, p. D-5.34. RUJ to H. G. Osborn, May 7, 1894 [BLCU].35. H. G. Osborn to Seth Low, January 30, 1894 [BLCU].Chapter 14: Niagara Power, pp. 132-1371. NT, My Inventions, p. 48.2. E. D. Adams, Niagara Power: 1886-1918 (New York: Niagara FallsPower Co., 1927), pp. 148-49; H. Passer, The Electrical Manufacturers: 1875-1900 (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1953), pp. 283-84.3. Ibid.4. T. Hughes, Networks of Power (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins UniversityPress, 1983), pp. 97-98, 238-39.5. J. A. Fleming, “Nikola Tesla,” in Tribute to Nikola Tesla (1961), p. A-222.6. Hughes, in Networks of Power, wrote, “It is difficult to understand whyhe [Ferranti] and his financial backers took such a great leap beyond the state ofexisting technology in their Depford project.” Hughes, loath to give Teslaunequivocal credit, was therefore unable to make the connection.7. H. Satterlee, J. Pierpont Morgan: An Intimate Portrait (New York:Macmillan, 1939), pp. 194, 221, 228, 269, 300, 307, 325.8. R. Conot, Streak of Luck: The Life Story of Edison (New York: BantamBooks, 1981), p. 340.9. H. Passer, Electrical Manufacturers, p. 285.10. E. D. Adams, Niagara Power, pp. 173, 176, 185.11. Charles Scott, “Nikola Tesla’s Achievements in the Electrical Art,”AIEE Transactions, 1943 [Archives, Westinghouse Corp.].12. Ibid.13. Ibid., pp. 179-87.14. David Woodbury, Beloved Scientist: Elihu Thomson (New York:McGraw-Hill, 1944), p. 214.15. Electrical World, May 25, 1895, p. 603.16. H. Passer, Electrical Manufacturers, p. 292.17. H. Prout, p. 144.18. H. Passer, p. 298.19. Woodbury; Abraham and Savin. Interestingly, Passer, 1953, whosework is a primary source for this event, completely misunderstood Tesla’scentral role in the Niagara project, even though he had access to the files of G.E.and Westinghouse. Passer could not understand why the contract was given toWestinghouse over G.E.20. H. Passer, p. 292.21. F. L. Stetson, in de Lancey Rankine, Memorabilia of William BirchRankine, (Niagara Falls: Power City Press, 1926), p. 28.22. “Nikola Tesla and His Works,” Review of Reviews, August 8, 1894, p.215.23. “Nikola Tesla and His Work,” New York Times, September 16, 1894,20:1-4.24. “Tesla’s Work at Niagara,” New York Times, July 16, 1895, 10:5.25. NT to JJA, January 6, 1899 [NTM].26. “The Nikola Tesla Company,” Electrical Engineering, February 13,1895, p. 149.27. NT to JJA, January 6, 1899 [NTM].Chapter 15: Effulgent Glory, pp. 138-1451. D. McFarlan Moore to NT, June 13, 1931.In Tribute to Tesla 1961, p. LS-41.2. TCM to NT, February 6, 1894 (some paraphrasing for readability’s sake).3. TCM to NT, May 7, 1894.4. T. C. Martin, “Tesla’s Oscillator and Other Inventions,” Century, April1895, in Tribute to Nikola Tesla, 1961, pp. A-11-32.5. Ibid., July 18, 1894.6. NT to RUJ, December 4, 1894 [BLCU].7. Ibid., p. A-20.8. EE. “American Electr-Therapeutic Association”; “An Evening in Tesla’sLaboratory,” Electrical Engineering, October 3, 1894, pp. 278-79.9. NT vs. Reginald A. Fessenden, Interference, 21:701, April 16, 1902, p.20 [Scherff papers, BLCU].10. Herbert Spencer, The Principles of Biology (New York: Appleton,1896).11. NT, April 16, 1902, p. 19; “The Transmission of Electrical EnergyWithout Wires As a Means for Furthering Peace,” Electrical World, January1905, pp. 21-24.12. T. C. Martin, op. cit. April 1895, in Tribute to Nikola Tesla, 1961, pp.A-31-32.13. Ibid.14. “NT and his works,” Review of Reviews, August 1894, p. 215.15. “Tesla and Edison,” Watertower Times, April 24, 1895 [TAE].16. “Nikola Tesla,” Electrical World, April 14, 1894, p. 489.17. F. Jarvis Patten, “Nikola Tesla and His Work,” Electrical World, April14, 1894, pp. 496-99; “Tesla and Edison,” Watertower Times, April 24, 1895[TAE].16. Arthur Brisbane, “Our Foremost Electrician,” New York World, July 22,1894, Sunday supplement.17. “Tesla’s Triumphs,” St. Louis Daily Globe Democrat, March 2, 1893, p.4.20. NT, “Tuned Lightning,” English Mechanic and World of Science, March8, 1907, pp. 107-108.21. W. T. Stephenson, “Electrical Light of the Future,” Outlook, March 9,1895, pp. 384-86.22. NT vs. Fessenden, April 16, 1902, p. 14.23. Ibid., Scherffs testimony, p. 89.24. Patents 454,622 (June 23, 1891); 462, 418 (November 3, 1891);514,168 (February 6, 1894). In Lectures, Patents, Articles, pp. P-221-27.25. Michael Pupin papers [BLCU].26. NT, “High Frequency and High Potential Currents,” February 1892, inInventions, Researches and Writings (1894), p. 292.27. Pupin papers, March 28, 1894 [BLCU].28. Ibid., August 23, 1895.29. Ibid., May 21, 1895.30. Ibid., July 25, 1896.31. NT to RUJ, December 21, 1894 [BLCU].Chapter 16: Fire at the Lab, pp. 146-1511. Charles Dana, “The Destruction of Tesla’s Workshop,” New York Sun,March 13, 1895; in Tribute, 1961, p. LS-18.2. D. McFarlan Moore to NT, June 13, 1931; in Tribute, 1961, p. LS-41.3. John O’Neill, Prodigal Genius, 1944.4. J. Ratzlaff and Leland Anderson, eds., Dr. Nikola Tesla Bibliography(Palo Alto, CA: Ragusen Press, 1979), p. 34.5. T. C. Martin, “The Burning of Tesla’s Laboratory,” EngineeringMagazine, April 1895, pp. 101-4.6. “A Calamitous Fire,” Current Literature, May 1895 [TAE].7. Michael Boro Petrovich, A History of Modern Serbia (New York:Harcourt Brace, 1976), p. 523.8. T. C. Martin, “The Burning…”9. J. Ratslaff and L. Anderson, Tesla Bibliography, p. 34.10. J. Abraham and R. Savin, Elihu Thomson Correspondence (New York:Academic Press, 1971), p. 352.11. TCM to NT, May 20, 1895; May 21, 1895; May 28, 1895 [NTM].12. H. Passer, Electrical Manufacturers, p. 297.13. “Westinghouse Electric. Ad on Tesla polyphase system.” Review ofReviews, June 1895, p. viii.14. J. Ratzlaff and L. Anderson, Tesla Bibliography, p. 34.15. John O’Neill, Prodigal Genius, p. 123. Concerning Tesla’s expenses,including the loss from the fire and the construction of another lab, Tesla wrote,“Before I ever saw Colorado—I think my secretary knows that—I haveexpended certainly not less than $750,000,” NT, On His Work With A.C., p. 172.16. NT to RUJ, February 14, 1895 [BLCU].17. Ernest Heinreich to NT, February 13, 1895 [LC].18. “Tesla in Jersey,” Rochester Express, April 5, 1895 [TAE].19. NT to A. Schmid (two letters combined), March 23, 1895; April 3, 1895[LC].20. Samuel Bannister to NT, April 8, 1895 [LC].21. Brisbane, June 22, 1894.22. “Edison’s Rival,” Troy Press, April 20, 1895 [TAE]. 22. J. Ratzlaff andL. Anderson, Tesla Bibliography, p. 36.24. “Tesla Solved the Problem,” Philadelphia Press, June 24, 1895 [TAE].25. “The Electric Combinations,” NY Com. Bulletin, April 18, 1895 [TAE].26. TCM to NT, May 22, 1895 [NTM].27. TCM to NT, March 12, 1896 [NTM].28. “Nikola Tesla and the Electrical Outlook,” Review of Reviews,September 1895, pp. 293-94.29. Ibid.Chapter 17: Martian Fever pp. 152-1571. Quoted in New York Sun, March 25, 1896.2. John D. Gates, The Astor Family (Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday, 1981),pp. 112-13.3. Ibid.4. Camille Flammarion, “Mars and Its Inhabitants,” North American Review162 (1896), p. 549.5. William Pickering, “Pickering’s Idea for Signaling Mars,” New YorkTimes, April 25, 1909, Pt. 5, 1:1-6 [some paraphrasing to improve readability].6. NT to JJA, February 6, 1895 [NTM].7. John Jacob Astor, A Journey in Other Worlds (New York: D. Appleton,1894), pp. 115-16.8. Ibid., p. 161.9. George DuMaurier, The Martian (Boston: Little Brown, 1896).10. Camille Flammarion, Stories of Infinity (Boston: Roberts Brothers,1873).11. Carl Jung, The Portable Jung (New York: Viking Press, 1961), p. 311.12. D. Cohan, “Heavenly Hoax,” Air & Space 4-5 (1986), pp. 86-92.13. E. Morse, Mars and Its Mystery (Boston: Little Brown, 1906), pp. 52-53.14. Camille Flammarion, “Mars and Its Inhabitants,” North AmericanReview 162 (1896), pp. 546-57.15. “Strange Lights on Mars,” Nature, August 2, 1894; “Mars InhabitedSays Prof. Lowell,” New York Times, August 30, 1907, 1:7; “Signalling toMars,” Scientific American, May 8, 1909.16. Perceival Lowell, The Canals of Mars (New York: Macmillan, 1906),pp. 376-77.17. W. Von Braun et al., The Exploration of Mars (New York: Viking Press,1956), pp. 84-85.18. Ibid.; J. Abrahams and R. Savin, Elihu Thomson Correspondence.19. NT, Tribute, p. LS-18.20. “Is Tesla to Signal the Stars?” Electrical World, April 4, 1896, p. 369.Chapter 18: High Society, pp. 158-1661. Quoted in Paul Baker, Stanny: The Gilded Life of Stanford White (NewYork: Free Press, 1989), p. 137, circa February 25, 1894.2. Frederick Finch Strong, “Electricity and Life,” Electrical Experimenter,March 1917, pp. 798, 831.3. Jennie Melvene Davis, “Great Master Magician Is Nikola Tesla,”Comfort, May 1896 [NTM].4. “The Field of Electricity: Edison, Tesla and Moore at Work,” untitlednewspaper clipping, Omaha, Nebraska, June 14, 1896 [TAE].5. SW to E. D. Adams, May 14, 1891; August 16, 1892 [ALCU].6. SW to Adams, December 1891; October 1891 [ALCU].7. SW to NT, February 25, 1894 [ALCU].8. SW to NT, February 5, 1895 [ALCU].9. Ibid.10. Michael Mooney, Evelyn Nisbet and Stanford White (New York:Morrow, 1976), pp. 193-99; Paul Baker, Stanny, pp. 249-50.11. SW to NT, November 30, 1895 [ACU].12. George Wheeler, Pierpont Morgan and Friends: Anatomy of a Myth(Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall, 1973), p. 17.13. G. Scherff, 1902 [BLCU].14. R. U. Johnson, Remembered Yesterdays, pp. 480-81; “True Buddhism,Brooklyn Standard Union,” February 4, 1895, in The Complete Works of SwamiVivekananda, vol. 2 (Calcutta, India: Advaita Ashram, 1970); Tad Wise toauthor, April 10, 1996.15. RUJ to NT, October 25, 1895 [BLCU].16. NT to KJ, October 23, 1895 [BLCU].17. Matthew Josephson, The Robber Barons (New York: J. J. Little & IvesCo., 1934), pp. 332-34.18. H. J. Satterlee, J. Pierpont Morgan, p. 214.19. TCM to NT, November 7, 1895; November 17, 1895 [NTM].20. NT to JJA, December 20, 1895 [NTM].21. NT to RUJ, December 13, 1895; December 22, 1895 [NTM].22. NT to SW, January 4, 1896 [NTM].23. NT to RUJ, January 10, 1896 [BLCU].24. Swami Vivekananda to W. T. Stead (ed., Review of Reviews), in Lettersof Swami Vivekananda (Pithoragarth, Himalays: Advaita Ashrama, 1981), pp.281-83; The Complete Works of Swami Vivekananda (Calcutta, India: AdvaitaAshrama, 1979).25. JJA to NT, January 18, 1896 [NTM].Chapter 19: Shadowgraphs, pp. 167-1701. “Phosphorescent Light,” New York Mail and Express, May 22, 1896[TAE].2. Michael Pupin, From Immigrant to Inventor (New York: Scribners,1925), p. 306.3. John O’Neill, Prodigal Genius, 1944.4. Søren Kierkegaard, Either or Or, 1848, translated by David and LillianSvenson (New York: Oxford University Press, 1944).5. NT, “On Roentgen Rays,” Electrical Review, March 11, 1896; in NikolaTesla: Lectures (1956), p. A-27.6. Ibid., p. A-29.7. Ibid., p. A-30.8. NT, “On Roentgen Radiations,” Electrical Review, April 8, 1896; inNikola Tesla: Lectures (1956), p. A-43.9. NT, “Roentgen Rays or Streams,” Electrical Review, , December 1, 1896;in Nikola Tesla: Lectures (1956), p. A-52.10. Ibid.; “On the Roentgen Streams,” Electrical Review, December 1,1896; in Nikola Tesla: Lectures (1956), p. A-56.Tesla also associated this idea toKelvin’s “ether vortexes.”11. NT, “On Roentgen Rays: Latest Results,” Electrical Review, March 18,1896; in Nikola Tesla: Lectures (1956), pp. A-32-38; “On Roentgen Radiations,”Electrical Review, April 8, 1896; in Nikola Tesla: Lectures (1956), p. A-41.12. NT. “On the Roentgen Streams,” Electrical Review, December 1, 1896;in Nikola Tesla: Lectures (1956), p. A-58.13. NT. “On the Hurtful Actions of Lenard and Roentgen Tubes,” ElectricalReview, May 5, 1897; in Nikola Tesla: Lectures (1956), p. A-65.14. “Tesla Opposes Edison,” NY Evening Journal, December 2, 1896[TAE].15. “Tesla Says ‘Let us hope’.” Philadelphia Press, November 20, 1896[TAE].16. “Scoffs at X rays for the blind,” NY Morning Journal, December 3,1896 [TAE].17. “Combined Devices,” NY Evening Journal, December 2, 1896;“Triumph of Science: Combination of Tesla and Edison contrivances,” LouisvilleKY Courier Journal, November 24, 1896 [TAE].18. “Edison Caught a Fluke,” NY Morning Journal, August 10, 1897[TAE].Chapter 20: Falls Speech, pp. 171-1771. Charles Barnard, “Nikola Tesla, the Electrician,” The Chautauguan 25,(1897), pp. 380-84.2. “Nikola Tesla: An Interesting Talk With America’s Great ElectricalIdealist,” Niagara Falls Gazette, July 20, 1896, 1:1.See also T. Valone, “Tesla’sHistory in Western New York,” in S. Elswick, ed., Tesla Proceedings (1986), pp.27-51.3. William Preece to NT, 1896 [NTM].4. E. C. Baker, Sir William Preece: Victorian Engineer Extraordinary(London: Hutchinson, 1976), pp. 269-70.5. NT, “Marconi and Preece,” New York World, April 13, 1930, p. 229, in J.Ratzlaff, Tesla Said, p. 229.6. KJ to NJ, August 6, 1896 [NTM].7. RUJ to NT, July 28, 1896 [LC].8. RUJ to NT, November 7, 1896.9. “History Making Celebration of the Only Electrical Banquet the WorldHas Ever Seen,” Buffalo Evening News, January 13, 1897, 1:1-2; 4:2-5.10. Nikola Tesla, “Niagara Falls Speech,” Electrical World, February 6,1897, pp. 210-11. Reprinted in Nikola Tesla: Lectures (1956), pp. A101-8.11. Ibid.12. Ibid.13. Buffalo Evening News, January 12, 1897; see also D. Dumych, “NikolaTesla and the Development of Electric Power at Niagara Falls,” Tesla Journal 6,7, 1989-90, pp. 4-10.14. Ibid.Chapter 21: Luminaries, pp. 178-1811. R. U. Johnson, Remembered Yesterdays, p. 402.2. Ibid., March 13, 1896.3. JJA to NT, January 29, 1897 [NTM].4. SW to NT, January 29, 1897 [ACU].5. NT to RUJ, March 28, 1896; salutation, March 12, 1896 [BLCU].6. NT to RUJ, April 8, 1896 [BLCU].7. R. U. Johnson, Remembered Yesterdays, pp. 402-3.8. Ignace Paderewski and Mary Lawton, The Paderewski Memoirs (NewYork: Scribners, 1938), p. 205-6.9. NT to KJ, April 8, 1896; April 9, 1896 [BLCU].10. NT to KJ, April 10, 1896 [BLCU].11. NT to R. Kipling, April 1, 1901 [BLCU].12. NT to KJ, March 10, 1899 [BLCU].13. NT to KJ, March 9, 1899 [BLCU].14. Peter Browning, ed., John Muir in His Own Words (Lafayette, Calif.:Great West Books, 1988).15. NT to KJ, November 3, 1898 [BLCU].16. P. Browning, John Muir in His Own Words, p. 12.Chapter 22: Sorcerer’s Apprentice, pp. 182-1921. “Tesla Electrifies the Whole Earth,” New York Journal, August 4, 1897,1:1-3.2. Lee DeForest, Father of Radio: An Autobiography (Chicago: Wilcox &Follett, 1950), pp. 76, 81, 85.3. NT, Nikola Tesla: Lectures, (1956). Essential patents for oscillators andtransmitters: 454622 June 23, 1891; 462418 November 3, 1891; 514168 August2, 1893; 568176-180 April 20, 1896-July 9, 1896; remote control: 613809 July1, 1898; wireless communication: 649621 September 2, 1897; 1119732 January18, 1902.4. “Wizard Edison Here,” Buffalo (N.Y.) News, August 30, 1896 [TAE].5. “Nikola Tesla on Far Seeing—The Inventor Talks Interestingly on theTransmission of Sight by Wire,” New York Herald, August 30, 1896. See alsoRatzlaff & Anderson, 1979, p. 45.6. NT, “Developments in Practice and Art of Telephotography,” ElectricalReview, December 11, 1920, in Lectures (1956), pp. A-94-97.7. A. Korn to NT, May 1931, in Tribute (1961) pp. 25-27.8. NT, “Developments in Practice and Art of Telephotography,” ElectricalReview, December 11, 1920, in Lectures (1956), p. A-97.9. Chauncey Montgomery McGovern, “The New Wizard of the West,”Pearson’s Magazine, May 1899, pp. 291-97.10. NT to Parker W. Page, August 8, 1897 [KSP].11. Patent no. 649621, September 2, 1897; in Lectures (1956) pp. P293-96;C. M. McGovern, “The New Wizard of the West,” p. 294.12. Ibid., pp. P293-96.13. Preece quoted in E. C. Baker, Sir William Preece 1976, p. 270.14. Vyvyan quoted in D. Marconi, My Father, Marconi (New York:McGraw-Hill, 1962), p. 138.15. W. Jolly, Marconi (New York: Stein & Day, 1972), p. 48.16. D. E. W. Gibb, Lloyds of London (London: Lloyds of London Press,1957), p. 158.17. Frank Jenkins, “Nikola Tesla: The Man, Engineer, Inventor, Humanistand Innovator,” in Nikola Tesla: Life and Work of a Genius (Belgrade: YugoslavSociety for the Promotion of Scientific Knowledge, 1976), pp. 10-21. Originalsource, O’Neill, 1944.18. NT vs. Marconi, court transcripts, pp. 440-41 [LA].19. C. M. McGovern, op. cit., 1899, p. 297.20. “A Crowd to Hear Tesla,” New York Times, April 7, 1897, 12:2; J.Ratzlaff and L. Anderson, Tesla Bibliography, p. 49.21. For a discussion of this unpublished lecture, see L. Anderson (ed.), OnHis Work with Alternating Currents 1916/1992.22. “Telegraphy without wires,” Scribners Monthly, 1897, pp. 527x28.23. NT vs. Reginald Fessenden litigation, op. cit., 1902 [BLCU].24. Westinghouse Co. annual report, Electrical Review, June 30, 1897, p.313.25. Westinghouse memorandum, July 7, 1888.26. NT to JJA, January 6, 1899 [NTM].27. NT to E. Heinreich, December 4, 1897 [LC].28. Marica to NT, March 27, 1891, in A. Marincic, ed., Tesla’sCorrespondence with Relatives (Belgrade: Nikola Tesla Museum) [Zoran Bobic,transl.].29. “Tesla at 79 Discovers New Message Wave,” Brooklyn Eagle, July 11,1935, 1:1, 3:4; see also O’Neill, 1944, pp. 158-64.30. Allan Benson, “Nikola Tesla: Dreamer,” The World To-Day, 1915, pp.1763-67 [Archives, Health Research, Mokelumne Hill, Calif].Chapter 23: Vril Power, pp. 193-2031. Edward Bulwer-Lytton, The Coming Race (London: Routledge, 1871).2. NT, “Tesla’s Latest Invention: Electrical Circuits and Apparatus ofElectrically Controlled Vessels,” Electrical Review, November 16, 1898, pp.305-12.3. NT to RUJ, July 12, 1900 [BCU].4. This connection between Tesla and Bulwer-Lytton was originally noticedby Desire Stanton, a newspaper columnist in Colorado Springs in 1899. See I.Hunt and W. Draper, Lightning in His Hands: The Life Story of Nikola Tesla(Hawthorne, Calif.: Omni Publications, 1964.5. Bulwer-Lytton, Coming Race.6. NT to JJA, January 27, 1897; July 3, 1897 [NTM].7. NT to JJA, December 2, 1898 [NTM].8. Virginia Cowles, The Astors (New York: Knopf, 1979), pp. 130-31.9. NT, My Inventions, pp. 107-9.10. John Oliver Ashton to Lee Anderson, July 17, 1953 [LA].11. “Tom Edison’s Son Explodes Desk by Accident,” New York Times, May3, 1898, 7:1.12. “Tesla’s Latest Invention,” Electrical Review, November 9 and 16,1898.13. NT, “Torpedo Boat Without a Crew,” Current Literature, February1899, pp. 136-37.14. “Mr. Tesla and the Czar,” Electrical Engineering, November 17, 1898,pp. 486-87.15. NT, “The Problem of Increasing Human Energy,” Century, June 1900,p. 188.16. M. Huart, “The Genius of Destruction,” Electrical Review, December 7,1898, p. 36.17. Mark Twain to NT, November 17, 1898 [NTM].18. “Mr. Tesla and the Czar,” Electrical Engineering, November 17, 1898,pp. 486-87.19. “Was Keely a Charlatan?” and “Science and Sensationalism,” PublicOpinion, December 1, 1898, pp. 684-85.20. NT to RUJ, January 1, 1898 [BLCU].21. NT to RUJ, January 1, 1898 [BLCU].22. NT to RUJ, November 28, 1898 [BLCU].23. NT, “Mr. Tesla’s reply,” Electrical Engineer, November 24, 1898, p.514.24. Marc Seifer, Nikola Tesla: Psychohistory, 1986, p. 272. Survey derivedfrom Ratzlaff and Anderson, 1979.25. “His Friends to Mr. Tesla,” Electrical Engineer, November 24, 1898, p.514.26. TCM to Elihu Thomson, January 16, 1917, in H. Abrahams and M.Savin, Selections from the Scientific Correspondence of Elihu Thomson(Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1971), p. 352.27. T. C. Martin, “The Burning of Tesla’s Laboratory,” Engineering, 11:1,April 1895.28. NT, “The Problem of Increasing Human Energy,” Century, June 1900,pp. 175-211.29. NT, “How Cosmic Forces Shape Our Destiny,” 1915, in Nikola Tesla:Lectures (1956), p. A-122.30. NT, “The Problem of Increasing Human Energy,” Century, June 1900,pp. 173-74.31. NT, “How Cosmic Forces Shape Our Destiny,” 1915/1956, p. A-172.32. Ibid.33. NT, “The Problem of Increasing Human Energy,” Century, June 1900,pp. 184-85.34. Ibid., pp. 185-86.35. NT, My Inventions. It should also be noted that for many years, in orderfor a patent to be granted, the inventor had to demonstrate his invention.Chapter 24: Waldorf-Astoria, pp. 204-2131. NT to RUJ, November 29, 1897 [BLCU].2. Virginia Cowles, The Astors (New York: Knopf, 1979), p. 126.3. Albin Dearing, The Elegant Inn (Secaucus, N.J.: Lyle Stuart, 1986), pp.75, 78, 87.4. Ibid., p. 81.5. NT to U.S. Navy, September 27, 1899 [NAR].6. P. Delaney, “Telegraphing From a Balloon in War,” Electrical Review,October 1898, p. 68.7. NT to JJA, January 3, 1901 [NTM].8. General Dynamics advertisement, Smithsonian, 1990.9. “Offer of the Holland Owners,” New York Times, June 4, 1898, 1:4.10. NT to U.S. Navy, 1899 [NAR].11. “The Patience of Hobson,” New York Times, April 20, 1908.12. “The Merrimac Destroyed?” New York Times, June 4, 1898, 1:4.13. Martha Young, “Lieutenant Richmond P. Hobson,” Chautauguan 27,1898, p. 561.14. “Lieut. Hobson’s Promotion,” New York Times, June 21, 1898, 1:4.15. KJ to NT, December 6, 1897 [NTM].16. Ibid., June 6, 1898.17. NT, “Tesla’s Latest Advances in Vacuum Tubes,” Electrical Review,January 5, 1898, p. 9.18. Cheiro (Louis Hamon), Cheiro’s Language of the Hand (New York:Transatlantic Publishing Co., 1895).19. Sphynx. Analysis of Tesla’s palm. Private correspondence, August1990.20. KJ to NT, February 8, 1898 [NTM].21. Ibid., March 12, 1898; March 25, 1898.22. NK to KJ, March 12, 1898 [BLCU].23. Ibid., December 3, 1898.24. NK to KJ, November 3, 1898 [BLCU].25. Ibid., March 9, 1899.26. Marguerite Merrington papers, Museum of New York City; JohnO’Neill, Prodigal Genius, p. 302.27. Virginia Cowles, The Astors (New York: Knopf, 1979), pp. 124-25.28. Ibid., p. 135.29. NT to JJA, December 2, 1898; January 6, 1899 [NTM].30. Ibid., December 2, 1898 [NTM].31. NT to JJA, January 6, 1899 [NTM].32. Ibid., January 6, 1899; January 10, 1899; March 27, 1899 [NTM].Whether Tesla actually received the full amount is unknown.33. John O’Neill, Prodigal Genius, p. 176.34. NK to KJ, November 3, 1898 [BLCU].35. R. U. Johnson, Remembered Yesterdays, pp. 418-19.36. “The Gentle Art of Kissing,” New York Times, August 15, 1899, 6:2-4.37. NT to RUJ, December 6, 1898 [BLCU].38. Ibid., November 8, 1898.39. “Lieut. Hobson’s Career,” New York Times, June 5, 1898, 2:4.Chapter 25: Colorado Springs, pp. 214-2191. Desire Stanton, “Nikola Tesla Experiments in the Mountains,” MountainSunshine, Jul-Aug 1899, pp. 33-34.(Real name: Mrs. Gilbert McClurg.) Tesla’s1896 trip to Colorado was discovered by James Corum while researching articlesat the Tesla Museum, Belgrade.2. NT/Reginald Fessenden litigation, August 5, 1902 [BLCU].3. NT. “Some Experiments in Tesla’s Laboratory With Currents of HighPotential and High Frequency,” Electrical Review, March 29, 1899, pp. 193-97,204.4. T. Hunt and M. Draper, Lightning, p. 110.5. Ibid.; NT, On His Work in A.C., 1916/1992, p. 109.6. T. Hunt and M. Draper, Lightning, p. 110.7. Ibid.8. NT/RF litigation, August 5, 1902, p. 12 [BLCU].9. Drawings pertaining to the design of the Colorado Springs experimentalstation were created in 1896 and 1897. In the same manner, while at Colorado,Tesla also worked out plans for his next transmitter, which was erected on LongIsland. NT, My Inventions, pp. 116-17.10. T. Hunt and M. Draper, Lightning, p. 108.11. Ibid.12. Ibid.13. According to present-day understanding, the ionosphere, or Kennelly-Heaviside layer, does not act as a carrier of the electrical waves, as Teslahypothesized, but as a reflector, causing the energy “to bounce back and forthrapidly for long-distance transmission,” and that is how it goes around the entirecurve of the earth (Stanley Seifer, private correspondence, 1985).14. NT/RF litigation, August 5, 1902, p. 51 [BLCU].15. Alexander Marincic, “Research on Nikola Tesla in Long IslandLaboratory.” Tesla Journal 6, no. 7 (1988/89) pp. 25-28.16. NT/RF litigation, August 5, 1902, [BLCU].17. NT to George Scherff, June 22, 1899 [LC].18. NT/RF litigation, August 5, 1902, p. 26 [BLCU].19. The primary of the coil was a specially prepared cable spanning theinside perimeter of the building itself, and the secondary was a tubular shapedsmaller coil in the center of the structure which encircled a transmission towerthat rose from a support column as a single spire. With a removable roof toaugment the adjustment of the aerial, and a small bulb at its apex, the transmittercould be extended to a variable length that could reach a maximum of 200 feetfrom the ground. A. Marincic, Colorado Springs Notes Commentary, in NikolaTesla, Colorado Springs Notes, A. Marincic, ed. (Belgrade, Yugoslavia: NikolaTesla Museum, 1979).20. Due to Tesla’s extraordinary powers of eidetic imagery, a myth,perpetuated by O’Neill and Tesla’s own autobiography, arose suggesting that theinventor worked out all designs and calculations solely in his mind. The originalcurators of the Tesla Museum therefore kept the Colorado notebook a secret, asthey did not want to destroy this image of the inventor’s extraordinary mentalabilities. According to the present curator, Dr. Marincic, “The appearance of theColorado notebook would show Tesla to be human, that he made mistakes, andso on.” Marincic’s position was totally different. He felt that the more peopleunderstood the real Tesla, the better would be the appreciation of hisaccomplishments. It was for this reason that Marincic prepared the notebookwhich was published by the musuem in 1979 (Tesla Museum, A. Marincic,Colorado Springs, August, 1990.) 21. NT/RF litigation, August 5, 1902,[BLCU].22. NT, My Inventions, p. 86. See also Colorado Springs Notes, p. 174:“Now it was of importance to increase the magnifying factor…”23. NT/RF litigation, August 5, 1902, p. 30 [BLCU].24. NT, Colorado Springs Notes, pp. 28, 34.25. NT to JJA, September 10, 1900 [NTM].26. GS to NT, June 14, 1990 [LC].27. GS to NT, June 22, 1899 [LC].28. NT to GS, June 6, 1899 [LC].29. A. Marincic, in Colorado Springs Notes, p. 15.30. NT/RF litigation, Lowenstein testimony, August 5, 1902, pp. 99-101,106 [BLCU].31. NT, CSN, 1979, p. 37.32. NT/RF litigation, Lowenstein testimony, August 5, 1902, pp. 106-8[BLCU].33. NT, Colorado Springs Notes, p. 61.34. Ibid.35. NT to GS, July 4 and 6, 1899 [LC].Chapter 26: Contact, pp. 220-2291. NT to RUJ, January 25, 1901 [BLCU].2. NT to JH, December 8, 1899, in Colorado Springs Notes, p. 314.3. NT, “Talking With the Planets,” Current Literature, March 1901, p. 360.4. Pyramid Guide, 1977 [LA].5. NT, Colorado Springs Notes, pp. 109-110.6. NT/RF litigation, August 5, 1902 [BLCU].7. Ibid., pp. 127-33.8. NT, “Talking With the Planets,” February 9, 1901, Colliers, pp. 405-6;Current Literature, March 1901, pp. 429-31.9. NT, “Interplanetary Communication,” Electrical World, September 24,1921, p. 620.10. NT, “Signalling to Mars,” Harvard Illustrated, March 1907, in TeslaSaid, pp. 92-93.11. GS to NT, July 1, 1899 [LC].12. New York Times articles on wireles operators: D’Azar, September 3,1899, 17:7; Marble November 7, 1899, 1:3; Riccia September 10, 1899, 10:4.13. GS to NT, October 2, 1899 [LC].14. NT to GS, September 27, 1899 [LC].15. On July 28, in the Colorado Springs Notes Tesla also utilizes the wordfeeble. This same word appears in the 1901 article “Talking With the Planets.”See also, Marc Seifer, 1979; 1984; 1986.16. W. Jolly, Marconi (New York: Stein & Day, 1972), pp. 65-66.17. Recent biographers, such as Hunt and Draper, attributed the impulses to“radio waves coming from the stars” or to pulsars. Tesla researcher Prof. JamesCorum suggests that he may have intercepted pulsed frequencies emanating fromJupiter or “the morning chorus,” which are charged particles that “slosh back andforth between the North and South poles in the early morning.” Additionalpossibilities include other natural phenomena associated with the lightningstorms or telluric currents, faulty equipment, or self-delusion.18. NT. Interplanetary communication. EW, September 9, 1921, p. 620.19. R. Conot, Streak of Luck: The Life Story of Edison (N.Y.: BantamBooks, 1981), pp. 415-17.20. Charles Batchelor, papers [TAE].21. R. Conot, Streak of Luck, pp. 415-17.22. Julian Hawthorne, “And How Will Tesla Respond to Those SignalsFrom Mars?” Philadelphia North American, 1901 [BLCA].23. Ibid.24. Anonymous, “Mr. Tesla’s Science,” Popular Science Monthly, February1901, pp. 436-37.The Tesla quotes are from NT, “The Problem of IncreasingHuman Energy,” Century, June 1900.25. NT to U.S. Navy, September 16, 1916 [NAR].26. Francis J. Higginson to NT, May 11, 1899 [NAR].27. NT to U.S. Navy, July 11, 1899 [NAR].28. Ibid., August 20, 1899.29. Ibid., September 14, 1899.30. Ibid., September 27, 1899.Chapter 27: Thor’s Emissary, pp. 230-2351. NT, “Tesla’s reply to Edison,” English Mechanic & World Science, July14, 1905, p. 515, in Tesla Said, pp. 88-89.2. Ibid., August 3, 1899.3. Ibid., November 6, 1899.4. John Ratzlaff and Fred Josst, Dr. Nikola Tesla: English/Serbo-CroatianDiary Comparisons, Commentary and Tesla/Scherff Colorado SpringsCorrespondence. (Millbrae, Calif.: Tesla Book Co., 1979), p. 73.5. NT to GS, September 6, 1899 [LC].6. NT to GS, September 22, 1899, in Ratzlaff and Jost, Dr. Nikola Tesla, p.114.7. Nancy Czito, Personal interview, November 1983, InventorCommemoration Day, Washington, D.C.8. NT, October 1919, p. 516; in Tesla Said, p. 216.9. Leland Anderson, “John Stone on Nikola Tesla’s Priority in Radio andContinuous-Wave Radiofrequency Apparatus,” Antique Wireless AssociationReview, 1:1, 1986.10. NT to GS, October 29, 1899 [LC].11. Alexander Marincic, Colorado Springs Notes, 1979, p. 421.12. NT, Colorado Springs Notes, 1979, p. 111.13. John O’Neill, “Tesla Tries to Prevent World War II” (Originallyunpublished chapter from Tesla biography), Tesla Coil Builders Association,July—August, 1988, pp. 13-14.14. NT to RUJ, October 1, 1899 [BLCU].15. NT, Colorado Springs Notes, 1979, p. 219.16. O’Neill, 1988, p. 14.This work has been replicated by Professor JamesCorum by setting up two coils near each other, one with a low frequency (90KH) and the other with a high frequency (200 KH). When exciting both coils,small fireballs sometimes appear. Placing a “thumbprint of carbon” on one of thecoils also helps augment the process. It is possible, in this latter case, that themicroparticles of carbon, when electrified, attract additional charges. RobertGolka, another Tesla researcher, has also produced fireballs. He suggests thatrotational motion of a boundary layer of charges may be involved in the process.James Corum, “Cavity Resonator Developments,” lecture before theInternational Tesla Society, Colorado Springs, August 1990.17. NT, Colorado Springs Notes, 1979, p. 228.18. NT, “Can Radio Ignite Balloons?” Electrical Experimenter, October1919, pp. 516, 591-92.(Archives, Gernsback Publications, Farmingdale, NY).19. As “the loss [of propagated waves] is proportional to the cube of thefrequency…with waves 300 meters in length, economic transmission of energyis out of the question, the loss being too great. With wave-lengths of 12,000meters [loss] becomes quite insignificant and on this fortunate fact rests thefuture of wireless transmission of energy.” NT, “The Disturbing Influence ofSolar Radiation on the Wireless Transmission of Energy,” Electrical Review andWestern Electrician, July 6, 1912; in Tesla Said, pp. 121-27.20. NT, Colorado Springs Notes, 1979, p. 76.21. H. Winfield Secor, “The Tesla High Frequency Oscillator,” ElectricalExperimenter, March 1916, pp. 614-15, 663.22. NT, “Can Radio Ignite Balloons?” Electrical Experimenter, October1919, p. 591.23. Ibid.24. John O’Neill, Prodigal Genius, p. 187; NT, Colorado Springs Notes,1899/1979, p. 348.25. KJ to NT, December 22, 1899 [NTM].Chapter 28: The Hero’s Return, pp. 236-2441. RUJ to NT, July 7, 1900 [LC].2. Colorado Springs Gazette, “Nikola Tesla to Come Here,” October 30,1903, 1:7; Tesla Sued for $180 by Electrical Co.,” April 6, 1904, 3:1; “NT SaysHe Is Not Indebted to Duffner,” September 6, 1905, 1:2.See also Ratzlaff andAnderson, pp. 79, 81, 86.3. “Signor Marconi Arrival from Europe,” New York Times, January 3,1900, 1:3.4. Dragislav Petkovich, “A Visit to Nikola Tesla,” Politika, vol. XXIV, no.6824, April 27, 1927 [LA].5. Stanko Stoilovic, “Portrait of a Person, a Creator and a Friend,” TeslaJournal, 4/5, 1986/87, pp. 26-29.6. Pupin papers, patent no. 652,231, June 19, 1900 [BLCU].7. Stanko, “Portrait,” Tesla Journal, pp. 26-29.8. U.S. patent letters to Pupin, June 30, 1896; July 25, 1896, Pupin papers[BLCU]; see also Inventions, Researches, and Writings, 1894, p. 292, andprevious discussion in chapter 15.9. NT, “Tesla’s Wireless Torpedo,” New York Times, March 20, 1907, 8:5, inTesla Said, p. 96.10. NT, “The Transmission of Electrical Energy Without Wires as a Meansfor Furthering Peace,” Electrical World & Engineer, January 7, 1905, p. 22.11. Admiral Higginson to NT, October 8, 1900 [NAR].12. Vojin Popovic, “NT, true founder of radio communications,” in NikolaTesla: Life and Work of a Genius (Belgrade: Yugoslavia Society for thePromotion of Scientific Knowledge, 1976), V. Popovic, ed., p. 82.13. The letter also makes reference to Tesla’s continuing partnership withPeck and Brown, Tesla owning 4/9ths of all royalties on the invention. NT toGW, January 22, 1900 [LC].14. Bernard A. Behrend, The Induction Motor and Other AlternatingCurrent Motors: Their Theory and Principles of Design (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1921), pp. 261-62.15. “The Tesla Patents,” Electrical Review, September 19, 1900, pp. 288-92; see also discussions on priority of AC in earlier chapter.16. GW to NT, September 5, 1900 [LC].17. 685,012; 787,412; 725,605.18. Swami Vivekananda to E. T. Sturdy, February 13, 1896, in Letters ofSwami Vivekananda (Pithoragarth Himalayas: Advaita Ashrama May Avati,1981), pp. 281-83.19. RUJ to NT, March 6, 1900 [LC].20. NT to RUJ, March 6, 1900 [LC].21. NT, “The Problem of Increasing Human Energy,” Century, June 1900,pp. 175-211.22. NT to Corinne Robinson, [HL].23. NT to JJA, May 2, 1900; March 30, 1900.24. NT to RUJ, June 21, 1900; June 29, 1900 [LC].25. “A Tesla Patent in Wireless Transmission,” Electrical World andEngineer, March 26, 1900, p. 792.26. NT to RUJ, June 15, 1900 [LC].27. “Science and Fiction,” Popular Science Monthly, July 1900, pp. 324-26.28. NT to RUJ, July 12, 1900 [BLCU].29. R. A. Fessenden, “Wireless Telegraphy,” Electrical World and Engineer,January 26, 1901, pp. 165-66.30. KJ to NT, August 2, 1900 [NTM].31. NT to KJ, August 12, 1900 [BLCU].32. JJA to NT, September 1900 [NTM].33. NT to JJA, October 29, 1900 [NTM].Chapter 29: The House of Morgan, pp. 245-2551. NT, “Our Future Motive Power,” Everyday Science and Mechanics,December 1931, pp. 78-81, 86.2. Ibid.3. H. Satterlee, J. Pierpont Morgan, An Intimate Portrait, p. 344.4. NT to RUJ, January 29, 1900 [BLCU].5. Werner Wolff, Diagrams of the Unconscious (New York: Grune &Stratton, 1948), p. 267.6. H. Satterlee, J. Pierpont Morgan, Morgan, An Intimate Portrait, p. 344.7. NT to JPM, November 26, 1900 [LC].8. H. Satterlee and J. P. Morgan, An Intimate Portrait, p. 345.9. Cass Canfield, The Incredible Pierpont Morgan: Financier and ArtCollector (New York: Harper & Row, 1974).10. A. Satterlee and J. P. Morgan, An Intimate Portrait, p. 343-44.11. G. Wheeler, Pierpont Morgan and Friends: Anatomy of a Myth(Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall, 1973), pp. 61-62.12. NT to JPM, October 13, 1904 [LC].13. Note: All conversations between Tesla and Morgan have been recreatedfrom their correspondence. Some literary license has been taken when inconversation form. Blocked quotes are verbatim. NT to JPM, November 26,1900 [LC].14. NT to JPM, December 10, 1900 [LC].15. “Marconi’s Signals,” New York Times, April 8, 1899, in Jolly, p. 66.16. “New Electric Inventions: Nikola Tesla’s Remarkable Discoveries,”New York Recorder, June 15, 1891.17. “Besides, in this country, I have protected myself, though not quite socompletely, in England, Victoria, New South Wales, Austria, Hungary, Germany,France, Italy, Belgium, Russia and Switzerland” NT to JPM, December 10, 1900[LC].18. Robert Hessen, Steel Titan: The Life of Charles M. Schwab (New York:Oxford University Press, 1975), pp. 116-17.19. M. Josephson, The Robber Barrons (New York: J. J. Little, 1934), p.426 and Satterlee, J. Pierpont Morgan, p. 347.20. Satterlee, p. 348.21. Wheeler, p. 233.22. E. Hoyt, The House of Morgan (New York: Dodd, Mead, 1966), p. 245.23. NT to JPM, December 10, 1900 [LC].24. NT to JPM, September 7, 1902 [LC].25. NT to JPM, March 5, 1901 [LC].26. NT to JPM, October 13, 1904 [LC].27. NT to JPM, December 10, 1900 [LC].28. NT to JPM, October 13, 1904 (size calculated from point 8) [LC].29. NT to JPM, October 13, 1904 [LC].30. Ibid.31. JPM to NT, February 15, 1901 [LC].32. NT to JJA, January 3, 1901 [NTM].33. JPM to NT, March 5, 1901 [LC].34. NT to JPM, October 13, 1904 [LC].35. NT to JPM, February 18, 1901 [LC].36. NT to JJA, January 11, 1901 [NTM].37. NT to JJA, January 22, 1901 [NTM].38. One curious feature to this episode is that aside from lighting patentsdating from 1890 to 1992, no circa-1900 Tesla patents have been uncoveredwhich are specifically written up to describe fluorescent or neon lighting. Thisconclusion is corroborated by correspondence with other Tesla researchers (e.g.,Leland Anderson and John Ratzlaff). If Tesla drafted patents on this invention,they were never filed in Washington. There may be copies in Morgan’s archivesor the Tesla Museum, or the invention might be somehow linked to other patents.A congressional investigation provides tangential evidence that Morganpurposely squelched this invention: “The introduction of fluorescent lighting inthis country was slowed up by GE and Westinghouse, through control of patents,lest its efficiency cut too drastically the demand for current.” (Invention and thePatent System, Report of Joint Economic Committee Congress of the UnitedStates, 88th Cong., 2d sess., December 1964, p. 100.) 39. NT to JPM, March 5,1901 [LC].40. NT to GW, March 13, 1901 [LC].Chapter 30: World Telegraphy Center, pp. 256-2651. NT to JPM, February 12, 1901 [LC].2. NT to RUJ, March 8, 1900; March 9, 1900 [BLCU].3. EH to NT, February 25, 1901 [LC].4. NT to TCM, December 12, 1900 [NTM].5. TCM to NT, December 13, 1900 [NTM].6. TCM to NT, December 18, 1900; December 17, 1900 [NTM].7. NT to Miss Emma C. Thursby, March 3, 1901 [NHS].8. Julian Hawthorne, “Tesla’s New Surprise,” Philadelphia North Americancirca 1900 [BLCU].9. NT to JH, January 16, 1901 [BLCU].10. Paul Baker, Stanny: The Gilded Life of Stanford White (New York: FreePress, 1989), p. 15.11. Ibid., p. 289.12. Ibid., p. 321.13. Literary license taken on conversation. Adapted from R. Fleischer,director, The Girl in the Red Velvet Swing (film), 1955; Michael MacdonaldMooney, Evelyn Nesbit and Stanford White: Love and Death in the Gilded Age(New York: Morrow, 1976), pp. 45-46.14. NT to KJ, June 11, 1900 [BLCU].15. J. Ratzlaff and L. Anderson, p. 70.16. O’Neill.17. NT to RUJ, January 1, 1901 [BLCU].18. Interview with Mrs. Robert Underwood Johnson, July 1, 1990.19. “Nikola Tesla Inventor,” Long Island Democrat, August 27, 1901, 1:3.20. O’Neill.21. Historical Sketches of Northern Brookhaven Town: Shoreham, p. 68[KSP].22. “Mr. Tesla at Wardenclyffe, L.I.” Electrical World and Engineer,September 28, 1901, pp. 509-10.23. Ibid.: Warden’s quote: “the ultimate number spoken of is 2000 to 2500[workers].”24. “When the Man Who Talked to Mars Came to Shoreham,” PortJefferson Record, March 25, 1971, p. 3.25. W. Shadwell, McKim, Mead & White: A Building List, #818, NY, 1978.26. SW to JPM, February 6, 1901; February 7, 1901 [SWP].27. SW to NT, April 26, 1901 [SWP].28. SW to NT, June 1, 1901 [SWP].29. GS to NT, July 23, 1901 [LC].30. SW to NT, January 1, 1901 [SWP].31. G. Marconi, “Wireless Telegraphy and the Earth,” Electrical Review,January 12, 1901; Recent Electrical Patents: “Marconi has been granted anotherpatent on an improved receiver for electrical oscillations in his wirelesstelegraphy system…Electrical Review, March 2, 1901; quotation in text is from“Syntonic Wireless Telegraphy,” Electrical Review, part I, June 15, 1901, p. 755;part II, June 22, 1901, pp. 781-83.32. NT to JPM, October 13, 1904 [LC].33. NT, Wardenclyffe drawing and notes, May 29, 1901 [NTM].34. Stephen Birmingham, Our Crowd (New York: Pocket Books, 1977).See also Satterlee, 1939 and Wheeler, 1973.35. “Fear and Ruin in a Falling Market,” New York Times, May 10, 1901,1:6.36. Edwin Hoyt, The House of Morgan, p. 251.37. NT to JPM, October 13, 1904 [LC].Chapter 31: Clash of the Titans, pp. 266-2741. Thomas Edison, private notebook, March 18, 1902 [TAE, Reel M94].2. O’Neill.3. NT to RUJ, June 14, 1901 [BLCU].4. SW to NT, June 1, 1901 [SWP].5. “Long Island Automobiles,” Electrical World and Engineer, January 26,1901, p. 165.6. Paul Baker, p. 318.7. Lawrence Grant White letter to Kenneth Swezey, December 21, 1955[KSP]. Lawrence had provided Swezey with three letters from Tesla, copies ofwhich are in the Library of Congress and the Swezey Collection. He had askedfor their return, but the originals are missing and copies do not exist in theStanford White papers at the Avery Library.8. The Tesla Museum has a photo of Tesla in one of these bill-board photos.9. NT to KJ, August 8, 1901 [NTM].10. The Johnsons went to Maine every August for a number of years. Teslaprobably joined them during one of these sojourns.11. Satterlee, p. 360.12. New York Times, May 2, 1901, 7:1.13. NT to JPM, February 8, 1903 [LC].14. NT to JPM, October 13, 1904 [LC].15. Sketch of Thomas F. Ryan (description of JPM). New York World, June18, 1905, 1:3.16. NT to JPM, August 8, 1901 [LC].17. NT to SW, August 16, 1901 [SWP].18. Paul Baker, Stanny, p. 326.19. NT to SW, August 28, 1901 [LC].20. NT to SW, August 30, 1901 [NTM].21. Satterlee, p. 363.22. NT to JPM, September 13, 1901 [LC].23. NT to SW, September 13, 1901 [LC].24. NT to SW, September 14, 1901 [NTM].25. Shoreham, in Historical Sketches of Northern Brookhaven Town, pp.69-70 [KSP].26. Ibid.27. NT to KJ, October 13, 1901 [BLCU].28. NT to JPM, November 11, 1901 [LC].29. NT to RUJ, November 28, 1901 [BLCU].30. W. Jolly, Marconi, pp. 103-4.Chapter 32: The Passing of the Torch, pp. 275-2821. Lee DeForest, “Passage From Private Notebook,” in Father of Radio: AnAutobiography (Chicago: Wilcox and Follett, 1950).2. NT, “Tesla on Marconi’s Feat,” April 13, 1930, New York World.3. JAF to ET, January 11, 1927, in Abraham and Savin, p. 239. Fleming’sconnection with Tesla actually began a year earlier, when he wrote the inventorthat “I have been charged with [your] description…on alternating currents ofhigh frequency [and] am very anxious to repeat these in England.” (JAF to NT,July 22, 1891, NTM).4. NT, “Tesla on Marconi’s Feat,” April 13, 1930, New York World.5. ET to Alba Johnson, January 29, 1930, in Abraham and Savin, p. 325;Jolly, p. 111.6. “The Institute Annual Dinner and Mr. Marconi,” Electrical World andEngineer, January 18, 1902, pp. 107-8, 124-26.7. Charles Steinmetz, Alternating Current Phenomena (New York:McGraw-Hill, 1900), preface; see also preface of Theoretical Elements ofElectrical Engineering (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1902).8. Ronald Kline, “Professionalism and the Corporate Engineer: Charles P.Steinmetz and the AIEE,” IEEE Transactions on Education, vol. E-23, 3, August1980.9. Electrical World and Engineer, January 18, 1902, pp. 107-8, 124-26.10. R. Conot, p. 413.11. “Marconi Tells of His Wireless Tests,” New York Times, January 14,1902, p. 1.12. Electrical World and Engineer, January 18, 1902, pp. 107-8, 124-26.13. Ibid.14. NT to JPM, January 9, 1902 [LC].15. [KSP].16. Lee DeForest, “A Quarter Century of Radio,” Electrical World,September 20, 1924, pp. 579-80; D. McFarlane Moore quote from DeForest,1950, p. 220.17. Isaac Asimov, Asimov’s Biographical Encyclopedia of Science andTechnology (Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday, 1964), pp. 464-65.18. DeForest, Electrical World, September 20, 1924, p. 580.19. R. Conot, pp. 413-14, 444.20. Tesla-Fessenden U.S. Patent Interference Case, August, 1902, pp. 87,97-98.21. Ibid., pp. 99, 102.22. NT to GS, August 9, 1902 [BLCU].Chapter 33: Wardenclyffe, pp. 283-2921. “Cloudborn Electric Wavelets to Encircle the Globe,” New York Times,March 27, 1904 [condensed].2. Alexander Marincic, “Research on Nikola Tesla in Long IslandLaboratory,” Tesla Journal, 6/7, 1988/89, pp. 25-28, 44-48.3. P. Baker, p. 326; TCM to NT, March 21, 1895 [NTM].4. RUJ to NT, June 19, 1902 [BLCU].5. NT to JPM, July 3, 1903 [LC]; NT, On His Work with AC, 1916/1992,pp. 152, 169.6. Arthlyn Ferguson, “When the Man Who Talked to Mars Came toShoreham,” Port Jefferson Record, March 25, 1971, p. 3; Natalie Stiefel to M.Seifer, April 10, 1997.7. NT to JPM, September 5, 1902 [LC].8. NT to JPM, September 7, 1902.Obviously, some people knew ofMorgan’s interest at this time (e.g., the Johnsons, Astor), and The Echo, August1901, a local Port Jefferson paper, had revealed Morgan’s interest, but hisconnection at this time was at the level of rumor. Details of Morgan’s connectionwere never revealed until well after Tesla’s death with the publication of theHunt and Draper biography in 1967.9. Mr. Steele (JPM) to NT, October 21, 1902.10. NT to KJ, September 25, 1902 [BLCU]; interview with Mrs. R. U.Johnson Jr., New York City, 1886.11. NT to Agnes, January 2, 1903 [BLCU].12. The biography, coauthored with Frank Oyer, took ten years to complete.13. T. C. Martin, “The Edison of To-day,” Harper’s Weekly, 47, Jan/Jun,1903, p. 630.14. NT to TCM, June 3, 1903 [NTM].15. NT to RUJ, January 24, 1904 [BLCU].16. NT to RUJ and GS corresp., March 14, 1905; January 10, 1909; March24, 1909 [BLCU].17. GS to NT, December 19, 1910; December 31, 1910 [BLCU].18. NT to JPM, April 22, 1903; April 1, 1904 [LC].19. “Cloudborn Electric Wavelets to Encircle the Globe,” New York Times,March 27, 1904.20. The workers included Mr. Hartman, Mr. Clark, Mr. Johannessen, Mr.Merckling, and Mr. Beers [GS to NT, April 14, 1903, BLCU].21. These machines were probably hydraulically operated. Concerning thecupola, Tesla testified that one of his most important discoveries was that “anyamount of electricity within reason could be stored provided [it was made] in acertain shape…That construction enabled me to produce…the effect that couldbe produced by an ordinary plant of a hundred times the size,” NT, On His WorkWith AC, pp. 170-77.22. Mitchel Freedman, “Dig for Mystery Tunnel Ends With Scientist’sSecret Intact,” February 13, 1979, p. 24; “Famed Inventor, Mystery TunnelsLinked,” March 10, 1979, p. 19. Both in Newsday. Also, personal interview withEdwin J. Binney, West Babylon, who as a boy, climbed down into the tunnels;personal inspection of site by author, 1984. Tesla was also conductingexperiments with use of liquid nitrogen and energy transmission during his lastdays in Colorado.23. KSP.24. NT to GS, May 14, 1911 [BLCU].25. A. Ferguson, op. cit., March 25, 1971.26. Marnicic, 1989/90.27. Strange Light at Tesla’s Tower. New York Herald Tribune, July 19,1903, 2:4.Chapter 34: The Web, pp. 293-3061. JPM to NT, July 16, 1903 [LC].2. NT to GS, August 17, 1903 [BLCU].3. NT to Dickson D. Alley, May 26, 1903 [BLCU].4. Petar Mandic to NT, September 2, 1903, in Tesla’s Correspondence WithRelatives, p. 134 [NTM].5. NT to JPM, September 13, 1903 [LC].6. NT to GS, July 30, 1903 [BLCU].7. NT to GS, August 17, 1903 [BLCU].8. Virginia Cowles, The Astors (New York: Knopf, 1979), pp. 134-35.9. JJA to NT, October 6, 1903 [NTM].10. NT prospectus, January 1, 1904 [SWP].11. NT to RUJ, September 22, 1903 [BLCU].12. “NT Says We Will Be Soon Taking Around the World,” New YorkWorld, July 14, 1905.13. “The Reasons Why 5,000,000 Persons Demand that Higgins Investigatethe Equitable,” New York World, July 13, 1905, 1: 3-4.14. Ibid.15. “Eymard Seminary, Suffern, New York, Supported by Mrs. Ryan,” NewYork World, July 1, 1905.16. What John Skelton Williams Thinks of Thomas F. Ryan,” New YorkWorld, June 18, 1905, Editorial Sec., p. 1.[Williams was critical of Ryan. Thissection of article was compiled by the editors of the newspaper.]17. NT to TFR, December 20, 1905? [NTM].18. NT to JPM, October 13, 1903 [LC].19. R. U. Johnson, p. 482.20. NT to RUJ, December 2, 1903 [BLCU].21. G. Wheeler, p. 263.22. Ibid.23. “What J. Skelton William Thinks of T. F. Ryan,” New York World, June18, 1905, Editorial Sec., p. 1.24. H. Satterlee, p. 426.25. Stephen Birmingham, p. 328.26. G. Wheeler, p. 266.27. Marc Seifer and Howard Smukler, “The Tesla/Matthews Outer SpaceConnection: An Interview With Andrija Puharich,” Pyramid Guide, Parts I & II,May and July, 1978.28. Andrija Puharich, in The Zenith Factor, video by Sky Fabin, 1984.29. New York World, Sunday sec., March 8, 1896.30. Robert McCabe, personal correspondence, January 15, 1991, Flint,Michigan.31. On a number of occasions, Tesla stated that Wardenclyffe was set upprimarily for transmitting telephone conversations. Apparently his plan was tocreate identical magnifying transmitter-receivers at strategic points around theglobe. These would be connected by means of wireless; however, individualsubscribers could be linked to the central stations by means of conventionalwires although a wireless connection to the local central station was alsopossible. So, for instance, a subscriber in Australia calling up America wouldmake the wireless connection via the main intercontinental trunk line. Thus, theproblem of providing free electricity was easily circumvented (My Inventions, p.178).32. Margaret Coit, Mr. Baruch (New York: Houghton Mifflin, 1957), p.123.33. “From 1905…to 1931 inclusive, the output was $2,871,300,000.” JohnHays Hammond Sr., Autobiography (New York: Farrar and Rinehart, 1935), p.518.34. Edwin Hoyt, The Guggenheims and the American Dream (UnitedStates: Funk and Wagnalls, 1967), p. 158.35. NT to JPM, December 7, 1903 [LC].36. R. Chernow, p. 140.37. Ann Morgan to NT, April 26, 1928 [NTM]. Literary license taken onconversation. Adapted from John Kennedy, “When Woman Is Boss—AnInterview with NT,” Colliers, January 30, 1926.38. Conversation recreated from NT to JPM December 11, 1903 and twoundated communiques from the same period [LC].39. Robert was publishing a paper by Madam Curie which Tesla wasreading over. Tesla also conferred with Curie through the mail concerning hermost recent discovery of radiant energy.40. KJ to NT, December 20, 1903 [NTM].41. NT to JPM, January 13, 1904 [LC].42. NT to JPM, January 14, 1904 [LC].43. NT to William Rankine, April 10, 1904 [Profiles in History Archives,Beverly Hills, Calif.].44. NT, “The Transmission of Electric Energy Without Wires,” ElectricalWorld and Engineer, March 5, 1904, p. 429-31 [condensed].Chapter 35: Dissolution, pp. 307-3231. NT, “The House of Morgan,” in Tesla Said, p. 243.2. K. Mannheim, The Sociology of Knowledge (London: Routledge andKegan, Paul, 1952).3. J. Goethe, Faust, C. Brooks, ed./transl. (Boston: Ticknor and Fields,1856).4. NT, “Man’s Greatest Wonder,” circa 1930 [KSP].5. NT to JPM, possibly not sent, circa 1903 [LC].6. “Langley Airship Proves a Failure,” New York Herald, January 8, 1903,5:2.7. NT, “Mr. Tesla Praises Professor Langley,” New York Herald, October 9,1903, 8:6.8. Marincic, “Research on L. I. Laboratory,” 1989/90, p. 26.9. NT to GS, December 9, 1903 [BLCU].10. Ibid.11. P. Baker, p. 339.12. NT to GS, March 21, 1904 [BLCU].13. NT to John S. Barnes, April 20, 1904 [NYHS].14. John Flynn, God’s Gold: The Story of Rockefeller and His Times (NewYork: Harcourt Brace, 1932).15. P. Baker, p. 313; literary license taken on conversations between Whiteand Tesla.16. Alfred Cowles, “Harnessing the Lightning,” The Cleveland Leader,March 27, 1904.17. NT to Kerr, Page and Cooper, April 8, 1904 [NYHS].18. NT to GS, June 1, 1904 [BLCU].19. GW announcement, October 28, 1958 [KSP].20. NT to JPM, July 22, 1904 [LC].21. NT to GS, June 1, 1904 [BLCU].22. NT to JPM, September 9, 1904 [LC].23. H. Satterlee, p. 413.24. NT to JPM, October 13, 1904 [LC].25. JPM to NT, October 15, 1904 [LC].26. NT to JPM, October 17, 1904 [LC].27. Ibid., December 16, 1904.28. JPM to NT, December 17, 1904 [LC].29. NT to JPM, December 19, 1904 [LC].30. NT, “The Transmission of Electrical Energy Without Wires As a Meansfor Furthering Peace,” Electrical World and Engineer, January 7, 1905, pp. 21-24, in Tesla Said, pp. 78-86.31. NT to JPM, February 17, 1905 [LC].32. NT to GS, January 23, 1905 [BLCU].33. NT to RUJ, March 10, 1910 [BLCU].34. Ibid., March 22, 1905; March 24, 1905; March 28, 1905.35. Ibid., April 5, 1905; April 12, 1905.36. Hobson to NT, May 1, 1905 [KSP].37. Ginzelda Hull Hobson to K. Swezey, February 14, 1955 [KSP].38. NT to GS, July 25, 1905 [BLCU].39. NT to GS, November 13, 1905 [BLCU].40. JPM to NT, December 14, 1905 [LC].41. NT to JPM, December 15, 1905 [LC].42. TCM to NT, December 24, 1905 [NTM].43. NT to JPM, January 24, 1906 [LC].44. KJ to Mrs. Hearst, March 15, 1906.[Bancroft Library, Berkeley, Calif.]45. Ibid., February 6, 1906.46. NT to JPM, February 15, 1906 [LC].47. GS to NT, April 10, 1906 [LC].48. SW, April 24, 1906 [SWP].49. B. Baker, 1989.50. Marc Seifer, “Forty Years of the Handwriting of Nikola Tesla,” Lecturebefore the National Society of Graphology, N.Y., 1979; “The Lost Wizard,” in T.Grotz and E. Raucher, eds., Tesla Centennial Symposium (Colorado Springs,Colo.: International Tesla Society, 1984); Nikola Tesla: Psychohistory of aForgotten Inventor (San Francisco: Saybrook Institute, 1986) doctoral diss.51. NT to JPM, October 15, 1906 [LC].Chapter 36: The Child of His Dreams, pp. 324-3351. NT, “The People’s Forum,” The World, May 16, 1907.2. “Tesla Tower to be Sold,” New York Times, October 27, 1907, 6:4(literary license on phone conversation).3. NT to KJ, October 16, 1907 [LA].4. “Miss Merrington, Long an Author,” obituary column, New York Times,June 21, 1951.The play opened up in 1906 (literary license taken on relatedchain of events).5. NT, “Sleep From Electricity,” New York Times, October 16, 1907, 8:5.6. NT, Tribute, p. D-11.7. “Nikola Tesla Sued,” New York Times, July 21, 1912, 7:2; “SyndicateSues Nikola Tesla,” New York Sun, July 21, 1912, 1:3; “Tesla Property May Gofor Debt,” New York City Telegram, April 17, 1922.Tesla’s mortgage with theWaldorf Astoria was consummated in May 1908.8. H. Satterlee, p. 456.9. John Davis, The Guggenheims: An American Epic (New York: WilliamMorrow, 1978), p. 106.10. R. Chernow, pp. 123-26.11. NT to GS, November 20, 1907 [BLCU].12. NT to GS, April 1, 1907 [BLCU].13. NT, “Tesla on the Peary North Pole Expedition,” New York Sun, July 16,1907, in Tesla Said, pp. 90-91.14. NT, “Signalling to Mars,” Harvard Illustrated, March 1907; in TeslaSaid, pp. 92-93.15. NT, “Tesla’s Tidal Wave to Make War Impossible,” English Mechanicand World of Science, May 3, 1907; in Tesla Said, pp. 98-102.16. NT, “Tesla’s Wireless Torpedo,” New York Times, March 20, 1907, 8:5;in Tesla Said, pp. 96-97.17. NT, Tesla Said, pp. 96-105.18. NT, “Can Bridge Gap to Mars,” New York Times, June 23, 1907, inTesla Said, pp. 103-4.19. O’Neill, 1944.20. NT to J. O’Neill, February 26, 1916 [NTM]; “O’Neill Writes on Tesla’sLife,” Nassau Daily Review Star, 1944, p. 16; “Life of a Self-Made Superman,”Book review of Prodigal Genius, New York Times, November 19, 1944 [KSP].21. “Sheriff Takes Tesla Tower,” New York Sun, June 13, 1907, 3:3.22. NT to JJA, June 8, 1908 [NTM].23. NT, “Nikola Tesla’s Forecast for 1908,” New York World, January 6,1908; “Aerial Warships Coming, Tesla Tells,” New York Times, March 11, 1908,1:2; “Little Aeroplane Progress: So Says Nikola Tesla,” New York Times, June 6,1908, 6:5.24. Ibid.25. “Zeppelin Flies Over 24 Hours,” New York Times, May 30, 1908, 1:1,2.26. Carl Dienstback, “The Brucker Transatlantic Airship Expedition,”Scientific American, January 21, 1911, pp. 1, 62.27. R. U. Johnson, p. 580.28. Dennis Eskow, “Silent Running,” Popular Mechanics, July 1986, pp.75-77.29. Ibid.30. Branimir, Jovanovic, Tesla I Svet Vasduhoplovstva (Belgrade: TeslaMuseum, 1988), p. 42.31. Frank Parker Stockbridge, “Tesla’s New Monarch of Mechanics,” NewYork Herald Tribune, October 15, 1911, p. 1.32. Illustrated World Encyclopedia (Woodbury, N.Y.: Bobley Pub. Co.,1977).33. Encyclopedia of Science and Technology, vol. 1, p. 288.34. O. Chanute, “Progress in Aerial Navigation,” Engineering Magazine, 2,1891-92, pp. 1-15.35. B. Jovanovic, Tesla I Svet Vasduhoplovstva, pp. 49-50.36. John P. Campbell, “Vertical-Takeoff Aircraft,” Scientific American,August 8, 1960, p. 48.37. “A New Version of Space Shuttle,” Newsweek, July 1, 1996, p. 69.38. Wallace Cloud, “Vertical Takeoff Planes,” Popular Science, August1965, pp. 42-45; 176-77; Wings, [TV show], 1991.39. Encyclopedia of Science and Technology, vol. 19, p. 203.40. “The Allies’ Firepower,” Newsweek, February 18, 1991 (insert).41. William Broad, “Flying on a Beam of Energy: New Kind of Aircraft Ison Horizon as Designers Try Microwave Power,” New York Times, July 21,1987, Cl.42. “Tesla Designs Weird Craft,” Brooklyn Eagle, 8:2.43. NT, “Method of Aerial Transportation,” patent numbers 1,655,113 and1,655,114, filed September 9, 1921, accepted January 3, 1928.44. “The New Weapons,” Newsweek, September 10, 1990, p. 28.Chapter 37: Bladeless Turbines, pp. 336-3421. NT to JJA, March 22, 1909 [NTM].2. Literary license taken. “Messages From Dead Now Made Public; SirOliver Lodge Advertised,” New York Times, September 15, 1908, 1:5; “Talk ofSignals to Mars, Astronomers Gather in Paris,” New York Times, April 21, 1909,1:2; “How to Signal Mars, says N. Tesla,” New York Times, May 23, 1909.3. NT, “Tesla Predicts More Wonders,” New York Sun, April 7, 1912,1:3,4,5; 2:5.4. O’Neill, 1944.5. “French to Establish Wireless Station on Eiffel Tower,” New York Times,January 26, 1908, 1:6.6. “DeForest Tells of New Wireless,” New York Times, February 14, 1909,1:3.7. “Dr. DeForest in Philadelphia. Wireless Telephone Soon,” New YorkTimes, March 23, 1909, 18:4.8. “Steel Towers for Waldorf Wireless,” New York Times, March 6, 1909,14:2.9. Technical World Magazine, circa 1911; in Jeffery Hayes, ed., Tesla’sEngine: A New Dimension For Power (Milwaukee, WI: Tesla Engine BuildersAssoc., 1994), p. 58.10. NT, “New Inventions by Tesla,” Address at NELA. Electric Review andWestern Electrician, May 20, 1911, pp. 986-87.11. F. P. Stockbridge, “Tesla’s New Monarch of Mechanics,” New YorkHerald Tribune, October 15, 1911, p. 1, in Hayes, ed., pp. 23-37.12. Ibid.13. GS to NT, January 10, 1909 [LC].14. NT to GS, March 26, 1909 [LC].15. GS to NT, November 11, 1909; November 4, 1910 [LC].16. “Tesla Propulsion Company,” Electrical World, May 27, 1909, p. 1263.17. G. Freibott, “History and Uses of Tesla’s Inventions in Medicine,” Talkbefore International Tesla Society, Colorado Springs, Colo., 1984; M. Seifer,Psychohistory, p. 429; Frederick Sweet, Ming-Shian Kao, and Song-Chiau Lee,“Ozone Selectively Inhibits Growth of Human Cancer,” Science, August 22,1980, pp. 931-32.18. NT to GS, February 22, 1910 [LC].19. NT to GS, February 19, 1909; November 23, 1909; the company inProvidence was Corliss NT to GW Co., January 12, 1909 [LC].20. “Col. Astor Estate,” New York Times, June 22, 1913, V, p. 2.21. NT to Charles Scott, December 30, 1908[LC].Chapter 38: The Hammond Connection, pp. 343-3561. NT to JHH Jr., November 8, 1910 [LC].2. John O’Neill, p. 175.3. Hammond Jr. to Swezey, May 11, 1956 [KSP]. Note: No letters betweenNT and Hammond Sr. were discovered at the Gloucester or Tesla Museums or inHammond Sr.’s Yale papers.4. John Hays Hammond, Sr., Autobiography of John Hays Hammond (NewYork: Farrar & Rhinehart, 1935).5. M. Josephson, Edison (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1966), p. 292.6. NT to JJA, January 6, 1899 [NTM].7. John Hays Hammond, Jr., “The Future in Wireless,” National PressReporter, vol. XV, no. 110, May 1912.8. John Hays Hammond Sr., Literary Digest, June 20, 1936, p. 27.9. John Hays Hammond Sr., Autobiography, p. 129.10. Ibid.11. “Hammond’s First Job,” New York Times, December 31, 1915, 3:6.12. “JHH Explains Why Is Ambitious to Become Vice President,” NewYork Times, June 7, 1908, v, p. 11.13. Nancy Rubin, John Hays Hammond, Jr.: A Renaissance Man in theTwentieth Century (Gloucester, Mass.: Hammond Museum, 1987), p. 4.14. John Hays Hammond Sr., Autobiography, pp. 481-82.15. Rubin, John Hays Hammond, Jr., p. 8.16. “John Hays Hammond, Jr.,” Franklin Institute, April 15, 1959 [HC].17. Mort Weisinger, “Hammond: Wizard of Patents,” Coronet, May 1949,pp. 67-72.18. Rubin, op. cit.; Weisinger, ibid., pp. 67-68.19. JHH Jr. to NT, February 16, 1911 [NTM].20. JHH Jr. to JHH Sr., September 17, 1909 [HC].21. NT to JHH Jr. September 27, 1909; September 29, 1909 [NTM].22. Rubin, op. cit., p. 8.22. JHH Jr. to NT, November 10, 1910 [NTM].24. NT to Harris Hammond, December 19, 1901 [NTM]. The Nobel Prizefor achievements in wireless was shared with Carl F. Braun, an electricalinventor working for Marconi competitor Telefunken of Germany.25. Rubin, John Hays Hammond, p. 4; guest book, John Hays Hammond Jr.Estate [HC].26. John Hays Hammond Jr., “The Future of Wireless,” National PressReporter, May 1912 [HC].27. NT to JHH Jr., November 12, 1910 [LC].28. JHH Jr. to NT, November 10, 1910 [LC].29. NT to JHH Jr., November 12, 1910 [LC].30. John Hays Hammond Jr., op. cit., May 1912.31. Ibid.32. NT, “Possibilities of Wireless,” New York Times, October 22, 1907, 8:6;in Ratzlaff, op. cit., p. 107.33. Miessner to NT, November 8, 1915 [LC].34. Swezey collection [KSP].35. JHH Jr. to NT, February 16, 1911 [NTM].36. NT to JHH Jr., February 18, 1911 [LC].37. “New Inventions by Tesla,” Electrical Review and Western Electrician,May 20, 1911, pp. 986-88.38. “Tesla Tells of Wonders,” New York Times, May 16, 1911, 22:5.39. “Tesla’s Plan for ‘Wireless’ Electric Lightning,” Electrical Review andWestern Electrician, January 8, 1910, p. 91.40. NT to JHH Jr., February 28, 1911 [NTM].41. Ibid., April 22, 1911; February 14, 1913.42. Cleveland Moffett, “Steered by Wireless: The Triumph of a Man ofTwenty-five,” McClure’s Magazine, March 1914, pp. 27-33.43. JHH Jr. to NT, January 1, 1912 [LC]; Kaempffert, W., A PopularHistory of American Invention (New York: Scribners, 1924).44. NT to JHH Jr., February 1913 [NTM].45. Ibid., July 16, 1913.46. Moffett, “Steered by Wireless,” McClure’s, March 1914.47. JHH Jr. to JHH Sr., December 2, 1914 [HC].48. JHH Jr. to Secretary of Navy, October 11, 1924 [NAR].49. National Archives, Washington, D.C.50. “World Court for Peace says John Hays Hammond,” New York Times,March 22, 1915, 4:2; “To Test Hammond Torpedo,” New York Times, August 29,1916, 9:2; “Control Ships with Radio,” New York Times, February 15, 1919, 3:8.51. Rubin, John Hays Hammond, p. 12.52. Hammond Jr., October 11, 1924.53. NT, On His Work in A.C., 1916/1992, pp. 19, 158.54. Rubin, John Hays Hammond, p. 16.55. Guest book [HC].56. Andrija Puharich, Beyond Telepathy (Garden City, NY: Doubleday,1962).Chapter 39: J. P. Morgan Jr., pp. 357-3671. Fritz Lowenstein to NT, April 18, 1912 [KSP].2. “Electrified Schoolroom to Brighten Dull Pupils,” New York Times,August 18, 1912. 5, p. 1; “Tesla Predicts More Wonders,” New York Times, April7, 1912, 5, 1:4-6.3. “Marconi Lecture Before NY Electrical Soc.” Electrical World, April 20,1912, p. 835.4. Erik Barnouw, A Tower in Babel: A History of Broadcast United States(New York: Oxford University Press, 1966), pp. 76-77.5. Robert Sobel, RCA (New York: Stein & Day, 1986), pp. 19-20; RobertHarding, George H. Clark Radiona Collection (Washington, D.C.: SmithsonianInstitution, 1990).6. NT to GS, January 18, 1913 [LC].7. W. Jolly, Marconi, p. 190.8. NT to JPM Jr., March 19, 1914 [JPM].9. NT to JPM Jr., July 23, 1913 (re: Girardeau, M. E. testimony), [JPM].10. “Judgment Against NT,” New York Sun, March 24, 1912, 1:3;“Syndicate [Stallo, Jacobash, Levy, and Sherwood Jr.] sues NT,” New York Sun,July 21, 1912, 1:3; “NT Sued,” July 21, 1912, New York Times, 7:2; “WirelessLitigation,” Electrical World, June 28, 1913.11. NT to JPM Jr., June 11, 1915 [LC].12. NT to TAE, February 24, 1912 [TAE].13. NT to GW, August 10, 1910; August 19, 1910; GW to NT, August 18,1910 [LC].14. Tesla received royalties of 5%, approximately $1200/month, untilTuckerton was seized in 1916, Tuckerton Radio Station to J. Daniels, Secretaryof the Navy, July 3, 1916 [NA].15. NT to JPM Jr., February 19, 1915 [JPM]; NT to Frank and NT to Pfund,circa 1912-1922 [NTM]; “19 More Taken as German Spies,” New York Times, I,1:3; “Find Radio Outfit in Manhattan Tower,” New York Times, March 5, 1918,4:4.16. NT, On His Work in A.C., 1916/1992, p. 133.17. “Col. Astor Estate,” New York Times, June 22, 1913, 5, p. 2.18. NT to JPM Jr., sympathy letter, March 31, 1913 [LC]; NT to AnneMorgan, March 31, 1913 [NTM].19. NT to JPM Jr., May 19, 1913; May 20, 1913 [LC].20. R. U. Johnson, Remembered Yesterdays, p. 142.21. NT to GS, July 13, 1913 [LC].22. NT to JPM Jr., June 6, 1913 [LC].23. JPM Jr. to NT, June 11, 1913 [JPM].24. NT, “Open Letter to His Grace,” Electrical Magazine, March 18, 1912[JPM].25. NT to JPM Jr., June 15, 1913 [JPM].26. NT to RUJ, December 24, 1914; December 27, 1914 [LC].27. Josephson, Edison, 1959, p. 296.28. JPM Jr. to NT, September 11, 1913 [JPM].29. NT to JPM Jr., December 23, 1913 [LC].30. There is some evidence that Tesla travelled to Krasnodar, Russia, east ofthe Black Sea, before the fall of the czar, circa 1914-16, where he lectured andgave demonstrations “at the circus building where the Kuban cinema is now,”according to Semyon Kirlian (1896-1978). If he had actually seen Tesla (asopposed to a “Teslaic” demonstration by another engineer), this would mean thatTesla traveled to Europe probably right before World War I broke out. As he wasnegotiating with the king of Belgium, the kaiser of Germany, and engineers inItaly and Russia, it is possible that Tesla did indeed make a grand tour then, andif so, he would have most likely also visited his sisters in Croatia/Bosnia. Furtherevidence would be needed to support this hypothesis. Source: Victor Adamenko,“In Memory of Semyon Kirlian.” MetaScience, 4 (1980): pp. 99-103,unpublished.31. NT to JPM Jr., December 29, 1913 [LC]; NT to JPM Jr., January 6,1914 [JPM]; Ron Chernow, The House of Morgan (New York: Atlantic MonthlyPress, 1990), p. 195.32. NT to JPM Jr., March 14, 1914 [LC].33. NT to RUJ, December 27, 1914 [LC].34. Ron Chernow, House of Morgan, p. 190.35. “Tribute of Former Associates for George Westinghouse.” ElectricalWorld, March 21, 1914, p. 637.Chapter 40: Fifth Column, pp. 368-3771. FDR re: NT and wireless priority, September 14, 1916 [NAR].2. W. Jolly, Marconi, 1972.3. Niel M. Johnson, George Sylvester Viereck: German/AmericanPropagandist (Chicago: University of Illinois Press, 1972).4. “Nation to Take Over Tuckertown Plant,” New York Times, September 6,1914, II, 14:1.5. NT to JPM Jr., February 19, 1915 [JPM].6. “Germans Treble Wireless Plant,” New York Times, April 23, 1915, 1:6.7. “Tesla Sues Marconi,” New York Times, August 4, 1915, 8:1.8. NT to JPM Jr., November 23, 1914; February 19, 1915 [JPM].9. Erik Barnouw, A Tower in Babel: A History of Broadcasting in theUnited States (New York: Oxford University Press, 1966), vol. 1, pp. 35-36.10. Hammond collection, National Archives.11. Jolly, Marconi, p. 225.12. J. Ratzlaff and L. Anderson, p. 100.13. “Marconi Loses Navy Suit,” New York Sun, October 3, 1914 [NT toJPM Jr. corresp., JPM].14. “Prof. Pupin Now Claims Wireless His Invention,” Los AngelesExaminer, May 13, 1915; R & A, p. 100.15. “When Powerful High-Frequency Electrical Generators Replace theSpark-Gap,” New York Times, October 6, 1912, VI, 4:1.16. “Marconi Wireless vs. Atlantic Communications Co.,” 1915 [LA].17. NT, On His Work in A.C., 1916/1992, p. 105.18. Orin Dunlap, Radio’s 100 Men of Science (New York: Harper &Brothers, 1944); Marconi Wireless vs. United States, Cases Adjudged in theSupreme Court, October 1942, v. 320, p. 17.This feature was obviously also partof Tesla’s design, although the court eventually ruled Stone as the originator.19. Leland Anderson, ed., “John Stone Stone on Nikola Tesla’s Priority inRadio and Continuous-Wave Radiofrequency Apparatus,” The Antique WirelessReview, vol. 1, 1986.20. E. F. Sweet and FDR correspondence re: Tesla, September 14, 1916;September 16, 1916; September 26, 1916 [NAR].21. Leland Anderson, “Priority in the Invention of the Radio: Tesla vs.Marconi,” The Tesla Journal, vol. 2/3, 1982/83, pp. 17-20.22. Lawrence Lessing, Man of High Fidelity: Edwin Howard Armstrong(New York: Lippincott, 1956), pp. 42-43.23. Ibid., pp. 66-80.24. [KSP].25. Lloyd Scott, Naval Consulting Board of the United States (Washington,D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1920).26. Johnson, George Sylvester Viereck, pp. 23, 34.27. “Germany to Sink the Armenian. Navy May Seize Sayville Wireless,”New York Times, July 1, 1915, 1:4-7.28. NT to JPM Jr., July 1915 [LC].29. “JP Morgan Shot by Man Who Set the Capitol Bomb,” New York Times,July 3, 1915.30. “Wireless Controls German Air Torpedo,” New York Times, July 10,1915, 3:6, 7.31. NT, “Science and Discovery Are the Great Forces Which Will Lead tothe Consummation of the War,” New York Sun, December 20, 1914, in Lectures,Patents, Articles, pp. A-162-171.32. “Federal Agents Raid Offices Once Occupied by Telefunken. FormerEmployee Richard Pfund Charged; No Arrests Made,” New York Times, March5, 1918, 4:4.33. NT to GS, December 25, 1917 [LC].34. Royalty check to NT for $1,567 from Hochfrequenz MaschienenAktievgesell Schaft for drachlose Telegraphic, 1917 [Swezey Col.]. Tuckertownwas still owned by the Germans, although seized by the U.S. Navy, andTuckertown, with full knowledge of the “Director of Naval Communications,”had agreed to pay Tesla royalties, see NT to GS, October 12, 1917 [LC].35. Lloyd Scott, Naval Consulting Board of the U.S. (Washington, D.C.:Government Printing Office, 1920).36. Interview with A. Puharich, 1984. According to Puharich, theHammond/Tesla documents were removed from the Hammond Museum inGloucester, Mass., after Hammond’s death, and classified as top secret sometimein 1965.This author has read through many of these documents from theNational Archives through the FOIA.Chapter 41: The Invisible Audience, pp. 378-3941. RUJ to NT, March 1916 [LC].2. NT to JPM Jr. [JPM].3. Hunt and Draper, 1964/77, pp. 170-71.4. For literature: Romain Rolland, Hendrik Pontoppidan, Troeln Lund, andVerner von Heidenstam were announced; Theodor Svedberg was named forchemistry. Rolland was the only winner that year out of that group, with theothers, except for Lund, eventually also winning.5. Nobel nominations for 1915 and 1937 [Archives, Royal SwedishAcademy of Sciences]; L. Anderson corresp., 1991.6. The date of 1912 in the O’Neill book, and often echoed in variousmagazine articles, was probably a typographical error in the biography. O’Neill,1944, p. 229.7. NT to Light House Board, September 27, 1899 [NAR].8. NT to RUJ, November 10, 1915 [BLCU].9. Hunt and Draper, 1964/77, p. 167.10. RUJ to NT, March 1916 [LC].11. Probably Karl Braun who shared the 1909 Prize with Marconi; NT, OnHis Work in A.C., p. 48.12. “Tesla No Money; Wizard Swamped by Debts,” New York World,March 16, 1916.13. NT’s Fountain,” Scientific American, 1915.14. “Can’t Pay Taxes,” New York Tribune, March 18, 1916; “WardenclyffeProperty Foreclosure Proceedings,” NY Supreme Court, circa 1923 [L. Andersonfiles].15. Abraham and Savin, 1971.16. NT to GS, April 25, 1916 [LC].17. NT, My Inventions, p. 103.18. Leland Anderson, “Tesla Portrait by the Princess Vilma Lwoff-Parlaghy,” The Tesla Journal, nos. 4/5, 1986/87, pp. 72-73.19. Trbojevitch immigrated circa 1912. Interviews with William Terbo,1984-1991.20. John O’Neill to NT, February 23, 1916 (greatly condensed) [NTM].21. NT to J. O’Neill, February 26, 1916 [NTM].22. B. A. Behrend, “Edison Medal Award Speech, 1917,” in Tesla Said, p.180.23. NT to Waldorf-Astoria mgt., July 12, 1917 [LA].24. Minutes of the Annual Meeting of the AIEE, May 18, 1917, in TeslaSaid.25. O’Neill, 1944.26. Minutes of the AIEE, May 18, 1917, in Tesla Said, pp. 189.27. Lester S. Holmes was represented for the hotel as owner of said Teslaproperty. Baldwin and Hutchins to NT, July 13, 1917, from: WardenclyffeProperty Foreclosure Proceedings, New York Supreme Court, circa 1923 [LA].28. Quoted in J. B. Smiley to Frank Hutchins, July 16, 1917 [LA].29. John B. Smiley to Frank Hutchins, July 13, 1917 [LA].30. NT to Waldorf-Astoria, July 12, 1917 [LA].31. “Tesla’s New Device Like Bolts of Thor,” New York Times, December8, 1915, 8:3.32. NT to JPM Jr., April 8, 1916 [LA].33. “Reason for Seizing Wireless,” New York Times, February 9, 1917, 6:5.34. “Spies on Ship Movements,” New York Times, February 17, 1917, 8:2.35. “19 More taken as German spies,” New York Times, April 8, 1917, 1:3.36. “Navy to Take Over All Radio Stations,” Enumeration, April 7, 1917,2:2.37. F. J. Higginson to NT, May 11, 1899 [NAR].38. F. Higgenson to NT, August 8, 1900 [NAR]. For the fullcorrespondence of this event, see chapter 26; R. P. Hobson to NT, May 6, 1902[LA].39. L. S. Howeth, History of Communications-Electronics in U.S. Navy(Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1963), pp. 518-19; A.Hezlet, Electronics & Sea Power (New York: Stein & Day, 1975), p. 41.40. Howeth, History of Communications, p. 64.41. Hezlet, Electronics & Sea Power, pp. 41-42.42. Robert Sobel, p. 43; Hezlet, p. 77.43. Howeth, p. 256.44. Ibid., pp. 375-76; Scherff to NT [LC]. U.S. Navy to Tuckerton Counsel,April 29, 1919 [NA].45. Howeth, pp. 577-80.46. NT, “Electric Drive for Battleships,” New York Herald, February 25,1917; in Lectures, Patents, Articles, p. A-185.47. Patent no. 1,119,732, Apparatus for transmitting electrical energy, wasapplied for on January 16, 1902.The application was renewed on May 4, 1907and granted on December 1, 1914. This patent, in essence, contains all of Tesla’skey ideas behind the construction of Wardenclyffe.48. KJ to Mrs. Hearst, circa 1917 [BLCU].49. NT to GS, July 26, 1917 [LC].50. GS to NT, August 20, 1917 [LC].51. Howeth, p. 354.52. The breakdown was as follows: GE 30%, Westinghouse 20%, AT&T10%, United Fruit 4%, others 34%. Sobel, 1986, pp. 32-35.53. Tesla would also be cut out of a secret agreement between GE andWestinghouse to hold back production of efficient fluorescent lightingequipment, as they did not want to undermine the highly profitable sale ofnormal Edison lightbulbs or “cut too drastically the demand for current” (S. C.Gilfillan, Invention and the Patent System (Washington, D.C.: U.S. GovernmentPrinting Office, 1964), p. 100.54. “U.S. Blows Up Tesla Radio Tower,” Electrical Experimenter,September 1917, p. 293.55. “Destruction of Tesla’s Tower at Shoreham, LI Hints of Spies,” NewYork Sun, August 5, 1917.56. Howeth, pp. 359-60.57. Ibid., p. 361.58. E. M. Herr to NT, November 16, 1920 [LC].59. GW Corp. to NT, November 28, 1921 [LC].60. NT to GW Corp., November 30, 1921 [LC].Chapter 42: Transmutation, pp. 395-4031. NT, “Edison Medal Speech,” May 18, 1917, in Tesla Said, 181-82.2. Hugo Gernsback, “Nikola Tesla and His Inventions,” ElectricalExperimenter, January 1919, pp. 614-15; R. Hugo Lowndes, Gernsback: A ManWith Vision, Radio Electronics, August 1984, pp. 73-75.3. Erik Barnouw, A Tower in Babel: A History of Broadcast USA (NewYork: Oxford University Press, 1966), pp. 28-30.4. [KSP].5. H. Gernsback, “NT: The man,” Electrical Experimenter, February 1919,p. 697.6. H. Winfield Secor, “The Tesla High Frequency Oscillator,” ElectricalExperimenter, March 1916, pp. 614-15, 663; NT, “Some Personal Reflections,”Scientific American, June 5, 1915, pp. 537, 576-77.7. Lester Del Ray, Fantastic Science Fiction Art: 1926-1954 (New York:Ballantine, 1975).8. NT to JPM Jr., June 13, 1917 [LC].9. NT to GS, September 25, 1917 [LC].10. Ibid., December 25, 1917.11. Ibid.12. O’Neill, pp. 222-28.13. NT to GS, December 25, 1917.14. NT to GS, June 11, 1918 [LC].15. NT to GS, June 12, 1918 [LC].16. NT to GS, May 15, 1918; June 22, 1918 [LC].17. Leland Anderson, Nikola Tesla’s Residences, Laboratories and Offices(Denver, Colo.: 1990).18. GS to NT, March 29, 1918 [BLCU]; November 4, 1925 [LC].19. Leland Anderson to M. Seifer, April 28, 1988; see International Scienceand Tech., November 1963, pp. 44-52, 103.20. Waltham advertisements, New York Times, June 8, 1921, 36:4, 5.21. NT to GS, December 6, 1922 [LC].22. NT to GS, October 18, 1918 and circa 1925 [LC].23. RUJ to NT, December 30, 1919 [LC].24. J. Abraham and R. Savin, Elihu Thomson Correspondence (New York:Academic Press, 1971), p. 400.25. “Radio to Stars, Marconi’s Hope,” New York Times, January 19, 1919.26. NT, “Interplanetary Communication,” Electrical World, September 24,1921, p. 620.27. “Celestial Movies,” February 3, 1919, 14:3.28. H. Gernsback, “Nikola Tesla: The man,” Electrical Experimenter,February 1919, p. 697.29. Surmised in part from: “At Night and in Secret NT Lavishes Money andLove on Pigeons,” New York World, November 21, 1926, Metropolitan Sec., p.1.30. O’Neill, 1944.31. Ibid., pp. 224-26.32. L. Anderson to M. Seifer, July 29, 1991.33. C. R. Possell to Marc J. Seifer, phone interview and writtencorrespondence, May 29, 1991; June 10, 1991; Extraordinary Science, IV, 2,1992.34. Jeffery Hayes, Boundary-Layer Breakthrough (Security, Colo.: HighEnergy Enterprise, 1990).35. Interview with L. Anderson, July 29, 1988, Colorado Springs, Colo., astold to him and Inez Hunt. Also see James Caufield, “Radioed Light, Heat andPower Perfected by Tesla,” Harrisburg Telegraph, March 22, 1924, Radio Sec.,pp. 1-2: “The war was upon him and the gov’t requested that [Wardenclyffe]come down. After the war Prof. Tesla again started to prove his theory, but thistime he chose Colorado Springs as the location of his laboratory. It was while atthe ‘Springs’ that he first demonstrated power transmission without the aid ofwires.”Chapter 43: The Roaring Twenties, pp. 404-4151. Tesla quote as told to John O’Neill and Bill Lawrence, O’Neill, pp. 316-17.2. D. Wallechensky, November 1928, quoted in C. Cerf and V. Navasky,The Experts Speak (New York: Pantheon, 1984), p. 259.3. NT to Hugo Gernsback, November 30, 1921 [KSP].4. NT. “Views on Thought Transference,” Electrical Experimenter, May1911, p. 12.5. Nikola Tesla v. George C. Bold Jr. Suffolk County Supreme Court, April1921 [LA].6. KJ to NT, April 24, 1920 [NTM].7. Introduction compiled mostly from C. Daniel, ed., Chronicle of the 20thCentury (Mt. Kisco, N.Y.: Chronicle, 1987); W. Langer, ed., New IllustratedEncyclopedia of World History (New York: Harry Abrams, 1975).8. RUJ to NT, October 15, 1925 [LC].9. W. Jolly, pp. 258-60.10. Nancy Rubin, p. 25.11. Dragislav Petkovich, “A Visit to Nikola Tesla,” Politika, April 27, 1927,p. 6.12. Adrian Potter, FBI report on Friends of Soviet Russia, 1921-1923[FOIA].13. George Seldes, Witness to a Century (New York: Ballantine, 1987), pp.181-83.14. Ronald Kline, “Professionalism and the Corporate Engineer: Charles P.Steinmetz,” IEEE Transactions, August 1980, pp. 144-50.15. L. Fischer, The Life of Lenin (New York: Harper & Row, 1964), p. 630.16. There is a famous photo taken on April 3, 1921, during a trans-Atlanticwireless broadcast for RCA, GE, and AT&T. In a number of sources (M.Cheney, Tesla: Man Out of Time (Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall, 1981);M. Seifer, “The Inventor and the Corporation: Tesla, Armstrong & Jobs,” 1986Tesla Symposium Proceedings; R. G. Williams, Introducing Nikola TeslaThrough Some of His Achievements (Mokelumne Hill, Calif.: Health Research,1970) it has been suggested that the man standing between Albert Einstein andCharles Steinmetz was Nikola Tesla. Other people in the photo include IrvingLangmuir and David Sarnoff. After reviewing the original caption andconferring with Tesla expert Leland Anderson, it has been ascertained that theman is not Tesla at all, but rather John Carson of AT&T. Coincidentally, thisphoto has been used by the GE public relations people on numerous occasionswith all people but Einstein and Steinmetz airbrushed out. See Life Magazine,1965 and B. Gorowitz, ed., The Steinmetz Era: 1892-1923: The GE Story(Schenectady, N.Y.: Schenectady Elfun Society, 1977), p. 39.17. [KSP].18. “Judgment [of $3,299] Filed Against Tesla by St. Regis,” New YorkTimes, May 25, 1924, 14:1.19. “At Night and in Secret Nikola Tesla Lavishes Money and Love onPigeons,” New York World, Metropolitan Sec., November 21, 1926, 1:2-5.20. M. Cheney, p. 84. Original source, Kenneth Swezey.21. A. Nenadovic, “100 Years Since the Birth of Nikola Tesla,” Politika,July 8, 1956 [KSP].22. K. Swezey, “How Tesla Evolved Epoch-Making Discoveries,” BrooklynEagle, April 4, 1926, pp. 8-9.23. A. Nenadovic, July 8, 1956.24. John B. Kennedy, “When Woman Is Boss,” Collier’s, January 30, 1926,pp. 17, 34.25. Anne Morgan to NT, April 26, 1928 [NTM].26. “At Night and in Secret Nikola Tesla Lavishes Money and Love onPigeons,” New York World, Metropolitan sec., November 21, 1926, p. 1. Othersick birds that he could not care for, Tesla took to animal hospitals.27. C. Hedetniemi to OAP, January 29, 1943 [FOIA].28. “Dr. Tesla Picks Tunney,” New York Herald Tribune, September 27,1927, 2:3.29. Ginzelda Hull Hobson to K. Swezey, February 14, 1956 [KSP].30. Petkovich, p. 4.31. According to L. Anderson, Swezey said that the O’Neill stories of Teslawiping his plates at the dinner table were untrue, the proof beign the pigeon link.“Meticulous,” Tesla was clearly obsessed with avoiding contaminated water,phobic and fearful of germs, and so it seems likely to this researcher that he did,indeed, clean off his silverware and plates with napkins at eating establishments.Caring for pigeons, even in one’s apartment (probably in a separate room wherehe kept a lab), is quite different than eating from unclean dishes.32. NT to JPM Jr., November 21, 1924 [LC].Chapter 44: Faster Than the Speed of Light, pp. 416-4271. NT, 1960; translated from German by Edwin Gora.2. NT to Flowers, 1917-1925 [NTM].3. John B. Flowers, “Nikola Tesla’s Wireless Power System and ItsApplication to the Propulsion of Airplanes,” August 8, 1925 [Archives, TobyGrotz, Colorado Springs, Colo].4. NT, “World System of Wireless Transmission of Energy,” Telegraph &Telephone Age, October 16, 1927, pp. 457-60; in Nikola Tesla, 1981, pp. 83-86.5. “In a solar eclipse the moon comes between the sun and the earth…At agiven moment, the shadow will just touch at a mathematical point, the earth,assuming it to be a sphere…Owing to the enormous radius of the earth, [it] isnearly a plane. [Thus,] that point where the shadow falls will immediately, on theslightest motion of the shadow downward, enlarge the circle at a terrific rate, andit can be shown mathematically that this rate is infinite” (NT, On His Work withAC, pp. 137-39).6. NT to Mrs. A. Trbojevic, November 20, 1928 [Wm. Terbo archives]; NTto Nikola Trbojevich, September 13, 1928, October 3, 1928; January 28, 1929;May 29, 1929, in Correspondence with Relatives, pp. 128, 135.7. W. Terbo, Opening remarks, in S. Elswick, ed., Proceedings of the 1988Tesla Symposium, Colorado Springs, Colo., 1988, pp. 8-11.8. Myron Taylor, memorandum, September 28, 1931 [Archives, US Steel,USX Corp., Pittsburgh, PA]; Sava Kosanovic, August 30, 1952 [KSP].9. Derek Ahlers, interview with Peter Savo, September 16, 1967 [Archives,Ralph Bergstresser].10. “Beam to Kill Army at 200 Miles, Tesla’s Claim on 78th Birthday,”New York Herald Tribune, July 11, 1934, 1:15; in Solutions to Tesla’s Secrets, pp.100-12.11. Ronald Clark, Einstein: The Life & Times (New York: World Publishing—Times/Mirror, 1971).12. Fritzof Capra, The Tao of Physics (Colo.: Shambhala, 1975), pp. 64,208.13. NT, New York paper on various theories, circa 1936 [KSP].14. “Tesla Coil Used in Atom Splitting Machines,” N.Y. American,November 3, 1929; O’Neill to NT, August 1, 1935 [NTM].15. NT, “Tesla ‘Harnesses’ Cosmic Energy,” Philadelphia Public Ledger,November 2, 1933; in Solutions to Tesla’s Secrets, pp. 104-5.16. “Tesla at 75,” Time, July 20, 1931, pp. 27-28.17. [KSP].18. “Tesla, 79, Promises to Transmit Force,” New York Times, July 11,1935, 23:8.19. “Sending Messages to Planets Predicted by Dr. Tesla on Birthday,” NewYork Times, July 11, 1937, 13:2; in NT, Solutions…, pp. 132-34.20. Nancy Czito, private corresp., Washington, D.C., 1983.21. Patent numbers 685,957; 685,958, in NT, Lectures, Patents, Articles,1956, pp. P-343-51.Robert Millikan coined the term “cosmic rays” in the mid-1920s. Tesla originally referred to the rays as a form of radiant energy. Dr. JamesCorum suggested that even if the rays did not travel faster than lightspeed, thesestatements by Tesla must have been based upon some real effect that hadoccurred (interview, 1992, Colorado Springs).22. NT, “Dr. Tesla Writes of Various Phases of His Discovery,” New YorkTimes, February 6, 1932, 16:2; in Tesla Said, p. 237.23. John O’Neill, “Tesla Cosmic Ray Motor,” Brooklyn Eagle, July 10,1932, in NT, Solutions…, pp. 95-96.This may be the description of a solarenergy machine.24. Carol Bird, “Tremendous New Power Soon to Be Unleashed,” KansasCity Journal-Post, September 10, 1933; in Solutions…, pp. 101-2.25. NT, “Tesla, 79, Promises…,” New York Times, July 11, 1935, 23:8.26. NT, “Expanding Sun Will Explode Some Day Tesla Predicts,” New YorkHerald Tribune, August 18, 1935; in NT, Solutions…, pp. 130-32.27. Joseph Alsop, “Beam to Kill Army at 200 Miles, Tesla’s Claim,” NewYork Times, July 11, 1934, pp. 1, 15; in Solutions, pp. 110-12; Walter Russell,The Russell Cosmology: A New Concept of Light, Matter and Energy(Waynesboro, Va.: The W. R. Foundation, 1953).28. NT, “Expanding Sun,” August 18, 1935.29. NT, “Tesla, 79, Promises,” July 11, 1935.30. “Tesla at 78 Bares New ‘Death-Beam’,” New York Times, July 11, 1934,18:1, 2.31. H. Grindell-Mathews, “The Death Power of Diabolical Rays,” New YorkTimes, May 21, 1924, 1:2; 3:4, 5.32. H. Grindell-Mathews, “Diabolical Rays,” Popular Radio, August 8,1924, pp. 149-54.33. H. Gernsback, “The Diabolic Ray,” Practical Electrics, August 1924,pp. 554-55, 601.34. H. Grindell-Mathews, “Three Nations Seek Diabolical Ray,” New YorkTimes, May 28, 1924, 25:1,2.35. Helen Welshimer, “Dr. Tesla Visions the End of Aircraft in War,”Everyday Week Magazine, October 21, 1934, p. 3; in NT, Solutions to Tesla’sSecrets, pp. 116-18.36. L. Anderson, NT’s Residences, Labs & Offices (Denver, Colo.: 1990).(Original source, a Dr. Watson of New York.) 37. Titus deBobula, Tesla towerblueprints, circa 1934 [NTM]; FBI archives [FOIA].Chapter 45: Living on Credit, pp. 428-4351. Hugo Gernsback, “NT and His Inventions,” Electrical Experimenter,January 1919, p. 614.2. NT to GS, July 11, 1935 [LC].3. Branning, 1981, p. A-3.4. NT to Carl Laemmle, July 15, 1937, Profiles in History Archives,Beverly Hills, Calif.; Neal Gabler, An Empire of Their Own (New York: AnchorBooks, 1988), pp. 58, 205-6.5. Mark Siegel, Hugo Gernsback: Father of Modern Science Fiction (SanBernardino, Calif.: The Borgo Press, 1988).6. Lawrence Lessing, Man of High Fidelity: Edwin Howard Armstrong(New York: Lippincott, 1956).7. “Tesla Is Provider of Pigeon Relief” [KSP].8. Leland Anderson, “Nikola Tesla’s Patron Saint,” American Srbobran,August 14, 1991, p. 4; L. Anderson, NT’s Residences, Labs and Offices, 1990.9. OAP files [FOIA].10. NT to GW Co. circa Jan-July, 1930, written from the HotelPennsylvania [KSP]; $2,000 debt, OAP files [FOIA].11. O’Neill, p. 274.12. Hugo Gernsback, Westinghouse recollections [KSP].13. NT to GW Co., January 29, 1930; February 1, 1930; February 14, 1930;February 17, 1930; February 18, 1930; April 18, 1930 [LC].14. A. W. Robertson, About George Westinghouse and the PolyphaseElectric Current (New York: Newcomen Society, 1939), p. 28.15. “Nikola Tesla,” Scientific Progress, September 1934.16. TdB to NT, November 1897; December 10, 1897 [NTM].17. Ibid., July 26, 1901.18. FBI deBobula files [FOIA].19. TdB to NT, May 29, 1911; NT to TdB, May 31, 1911 [NTM].20. Telephone interview with Robert Hessen, author of The Steel Titan: TheLife Story of Charles Schwab (New York: Oxford University Press, 1975)—teaching at Stanford University; “Schwab Answers Suit of deBobula,” New YorkTimes, August 7, 1919, 15:6.21. TdB to NT, July 11, 1935 [NTM].22. NT to GS, June 17, 1937 [LC].23. TdB to NT, November 25, 1935; July 6, 1936 [NTM].24. deBobula FBI files, circa 1936-1949 [FOIA].25. FBI deBobula files [FOIA]; “Tauscher Accuses Munitions Partner,”New York Times, July 25, 1934, 36:4.26. OAP NT files [FOIA].27. Hugo Gernsback, Westinghouse recollections [KSP].28. GW Co. to NT, January 2, 1934 [LC].29. Mildred McDonald, December 1, 1952 [GWA].Chapter 46: Loose Ends, pp. 436-4451. Elmer Gertz, Odyssey of a Barbarian: The Biography of G. S. Viereck(Buffalo, NY: Prometheus Books, 1978).2. M. Pupin to K. Swezey, May 29, 1931 [KSP].3. D. Dunlap, Radio’s 100 Men of Science (New York: Harper & Brothers,1944), p. 124.4. M. Pupin, From Immigrant to Inventor (New York: Scribners, 1930).Tesla is mentioned once on p. 285 within the phrase, “Tesla’s AC motor andBradley’s rotary transformer…” (see chapter 10).5. “Dr. Pupin Inspired,” New York Times, 1927 [KSP].6. Stanko Stoilkovic, “Portrait of a Person, a Creator and a Friend,” TheTesla Journal, nos 4, 5, 1986/87, pp. 26-29.7. NT to RUJ, circa 1929-1937 [LC]; Grizelda Hull Hobson to K. Swezey,February 14, 1955; Richmond P. Hobson Jr., in “Books of the Times,” New YorkTimes, Decemer 21, 1955 [KSP].8. A brief excerpt from “The Haunted House” by G. S. Viereck, circa 1907,from Gertz, 1978.9. Niel Johnson, G. S. Viereck: German/American Propagandist (Chicago:University of Illinois Press, 1972), p. 143.10. Ibid., pp. 138-42.11. NT corresp., March 2, 1942 [LA].12. NT, as told to G. S. Viereck, “A Machine to End War,” Liberty,February 1935, pp. 5-7.13. Peter Viereck, phone interview, September 8, 1991.14. Gertz, p. 24.15. Elmer Gertz, June 1991 phone interview.16. Cheney, p. 243.17. NT to GSV, 1934 [from L. Anderson, “N. Tesla’s Patron Saint,”American Srbobran, August 14, 1991, p. 4]; NT to GSV, December 17, 1934 [inCheney, p. 244].18. “Sending of Messages to Planets Predicted by Dr. Tesla on Birthday,”New York Times, July 11, 1937, 1:2-3; 2:2-3.19. “Immigrant Society Makes Three Awards: Frankfurter, Martinelli andTesla,” New York Times, May 12, 1938, 26:1.20. N. Johnson, pp. 204-10; GSV FBI files [FOIA].21. “G. S. Viereck, 77, Pro-German Propagandist, Dies.” New York Times,March 21, 1962.22. NT, “Tesla and the Future,” Serbian Newsletter, 1943.23. O’Neill, 1944.24. L. Anderson, August 14, 1991.25. O’Neill, 1944.26. “2000 Are Present at Tesla Funeral,” New York Times, January 13, 1943.27. Hugo Gernsback, “NT: Father of Wireless, 1857-1943,” Radio Craft,February 1943, pp. 263-65, 307-10.28. Serbian Newsletter, 1943, p. 5 [BLCU].29. “NT Dead,” editorial, New York Sun, January 1943.Chapter 47: The FBI and the Tesla Papers, pp. 446-4621. January 22, 1946, OAP report [FOIA].2. J. Edgar Hoover, memorandum, January 21, 1943 [FBI, FOIA].3. Cheney, p. 258.4. M. Markovitch, personal interview, 1984.5. As I rewrite this chapter in November 1995, Yugoslavia is in the midst ofa civil war, with essentially all of the provinces having declared theirindependence. The most bellicose new nation is Serbia. It has attacked Bosniarepeatedly for over the last three years in attempts to drive out Croats andMuslims and capture as much land as possible. Many women have been raped,thousands of people have been killed, and over one million have had to flee theirhomes. At this point a solution appears to be futile.6. Cheney, 1981, pp. 260-61.7. J. Edgar Hoover, memorandum, January 21, 1943 [FBI, FOIA].8. FBI, January 21, 1943 [FOIA].9. “Floating Stretchers for Landings,” New York Times, August 27, 1944,IV, 9:6; “Company Volunteers $1,500,000 Refund,” New York Times, November19, 1944, 1:3; “France’s Honors Heaped on Spanel,” New York Times, March 3,1957, 26:5.10. F. Cornels, January 9, 1943 [FBI, FOIA].11. Fitzgerald to Tesla, March 8, 1939; December 20, 1942 [NTM]. MIT,however, had no record that Fitzgerald was a student in their school [M. Seifer toMIT, 1990]. Fitzgerald also met with Jack O’Neill to help on the biography. Healso discussed with Jack the possibility of setting up a museum in the UnitedStates, perhaps with backing from Henry Ford.12. J. O’Neill, “Tesla Tries to Prevent WWII,” TBCA News, 7, 3, 8-9/1988,p. 15.13. F. Cornels, FBI report, January 9, 1943 [FOIA].14. L. Anderson, files from Cheney, 1981, p. 264.15. D. E. Foxworth, FBI report, January 8, 1943 [FOIA].16. D. E. Foxworth, FBI report, January 8, 1943; Donegan, FBI report,November 14, 1943 [FOIA].17. Personal correspondence from Irving Jurow, Washington, D.C., July 5,1993.18. Werner Heisenberg, for instance, was in charge of the Nazis’ version ofthe Manhattan Project. According to Heisenberg’s autobiography, he knew thatGermany did not have enough heavy water to construct an atom bomb, and hewas just hoping that the war would end before such a device would be invented.Werner von Braun, of course, was also implementing the highly destructive V-2rocket, which was yet another ultimate weapon.19. Phone conversations and personal correspondence with Irving Jurow,June, July, 1993.20. OAP memorandum, January 12, 1943; January 12, 1942 [1943typographical error] [FOIA].21. Cheney, p. 270.22. W. Gorsuch, OAP report, January 13, 1943 [FOIA].23. Trump resort, January 30, 1943 [LC]; C. Hedetneimi, OAP report,January 29, 1943 [FOIA]; interview with a guard from Manhattan Storage, FBIreport, April 17, 1950 [FOIA].24. C. Hedetniemi, OAP report, January 29, 1943 [FOIA].25. Trump’s conclusion, was that since the device was similar to the Van deGraaff electrostatic generator, Soviet engineers would find no ultimate value init. This is somewhat astonishing, as Trump also enclosed an article written byTesla in 1934 in Scientific American where he states explicitly that his devicewas, operationally, completely unlike the Van de Graaff generator. As Trumpworked with Van de Graaff at MIT, it would seem that his cavalier dismissal ofthe particle-beam weapon was based on professional jealousy. To Trump’s credit,however, here we are, a half century later, and the Tesla weapon has yet to beperfected. (Trump report, FBI archives; N. Tesla, “Electrostatic Generators,”Scientific American, March 1934, pp. 132-34; 163-65.) 26. Homer Jones toLawrence Smith, February 4, 194[3] [OAP, FOIA].27. NT, “The New Art of Projecting Concentrated Non-dispersive EnergyThrough the Natural Media” (1937), in E. Raucher and T. Grotz, eds., 1984 TeslaCentennial Symposium, pp. 144-50.28. According to a letter to Sava Kosanovic, Tesla was planning on sellingeight particle beam weapons to Yugoslavia, three to Serbia, three to Croatia andtwo to Slovenia. NT to SK, March 1, 1941, Correspondence with Relatives, p.183.29. “$3,500,000 Payment by Amtorg Today.” New York Times, November15, 1932, 29:7; Amtorg and Bethlehem Steel, New York Times, April 30, 1935,30:2; “To Catch a Spy,” Newsweek, May 19, 1986, p. 7; etc., Amtorg TradingCorp. to M. Seifer, April 4, 1988.30. J. Trump, letter quoted in Cheney, p. 276.31. FBI NT memorandum, January 12, 1943 [FOIA].32. J. Alsop, “Beam to Kill Army at 200 Miles,” New York Herald Tribune,July 11, 1934, 1:15.33. J. Corum and K. Corum, “A Physical Interpretation of the ColoradoSprings Data,” in E. Raucher and T. Grotz, eds., The 1984 Tesla CentennialProceedings, pp. 50-58.34. Alcoa Aluminum Co., private corresp., December 16, 1988.35.NT, in Tesla Said, p. 278.36. H. Welshimer, “Dr. Tesla Visions the End of Aircraft in War,” EveryWeek Magazine, October 21, 1934, p. 3.37. Charlotte Muzar, “The Tesla Papers,” The Tesla Journal, 1982/83, pp.39-42.38. E. E. Conroy to J. Edgar Hoover, FBI, October 17, 1945 [FOIA].39. Ralph Doty to OAP, January 22, 1946 [FBI, FOIA].40. Cheney, p. 277.M. Duffy to OAP, November 25, 1947 [FOIA]; FBI memorandum, April17, 1950 [FOIA].42. Andrija Puharich, phone interview, 1986; Ralph Bergstresser, phoneinterview, 1986.43. “Are Soviets Testing Wireless Electric Power?” Washington Star,January 31, 1977, pp. 1, 5; “Russians Secretly Controlling World Climate,”Sunday Times, Scranton, Penn., November 6.1977, pp. 14-15.44. Tom Bearden, “Tesla’s Secret and the Soviet Tesla Weapons,” Solutionsto Tesla’s Secrets, John Ratzlaff, ed., 1981, pp. 1-35; Tom Bearden, “TheFundamental Concepts of Scalar Electromagnetics,” Tesla ConferenceProceedings, Steve Elswick, ed., 1986, pp. 7:1-20.45. C. Robinson, “Soviet Push for a Beam Weapon,” Aviation Week, May 2,1977, pp. 16-27; N. Wade, “Charged Debate Over Russian Beam Weapons,”Science, May 1977, pp. 957-59.Chapter 48: The Wizard: Legacy, pp. 463-4701. Lawrence P. Lessing, Man of High Fidelity: Edwin Howard Armstrong(New York: Lippincott, 1956, p. 286.2. II. Fantel, “Armstsrong, Tragic Hero of Radio Music,” New York Times,June 10, 1973, pp. 23-28; Lessing, 1956; Marc Seifer, “The Inventor and theCorporation: Case Studies of Innovators Nikola Tesla, Steven Jobs and EdwinArmstrong,” 1986 Tesla Symposium, S. Elswick, ed., pp. 53-74.3. W. Whyte, The Organization Man (New York: Doubleday, 1956).4. David Held, Introduction to Critical Theory (Berkeley, Calif.: Universityof California Press, 1980).5. Bill Gates; interview, Playboy, September 1994, p. 64. In 1996, Jobsreemerged as an overnight billionaire with a highly successful stock offering ofhis new computer graphics company Pixar in 1996, and, in an amazingturnabout, Jobs was further resurrected as replacement CEO of Apple in 1997.Further, IBM has agreed to produce a Macintosh compatible computer.6. Henry Aiken, corresp., phone interview, April 1986.7. Ayn Rand, Atlas Shrugged (New York: 1957), p. 236.8. M. Seifer and H. Smukler, “The Tesla/Matthews Outer SpaceConnection,” Pyramid Guide, part I, May 1978, p. 5; part II, July 1978, p. 5[FBI, FOIA].9. “Tesla in Japan,” Tesla Memorial Society Newsletter, NicholasKosanovich, ed., Fall-Winter 1995/96, pp. 2-3; David Kaplan and AndrewMarshall, “The Cult at the End of the World,” Wired, July 1996, pp. 134-37, 176-84; Tom Bearden, “Tesla’s Secret and the Soviet Tesla Weapons,” Solutions toTesla’s Secrets, John Ratzlaff, ed., 1981, pp. 1-35.10. P. O. Ouspensky, New Model of the Universe (New York: VintageBooks, 1971), pp. 29-31.11. Dane Rudyar, Occult Preparations for a New Age (Wheaton, Ill.: QuestBooks, 1975), p. 245; Robert Anton Wilson, Cosmic Trigger: The Final Secret ofthe Illumenati (New York: Pocket Books, 1975).Appendix, pp. 471-4761. J. R. Johler to Leland Anderson, August 15, 1959, in Anderson, “NikolaTesla’s Work in Wireless Power Transmission” (Denver, Colo., 1991,unpublished.2. Eric Dollard, “Representations of Electric Induction: Nikola Tesla andthe True Wireless,” In S. Elswick, ed., Proceedings of the 1986 Tesla Symposium(Colorado Springs, Colo.: International Tesla Society, 1986), pp. 2-25-2-82.3. NT, 1916/1992, p. 138.4. James Corum and A-Hamid Aidinejad, “The Transient Propagation ofELF Pulses in the Earth-Ionosphere Cavity,” 1986 International TeslaSymposium Proceedings, pp. 3-1-3-12.5. NT to KJ, April 19, 1907 [BLCU].6. NT, “Terrestrial Night Light,” New York Herald Tribune, June 5, 1935, p.38.7. NT, 1984, p. 225.8. NT, Colorado Springs Notes, pp. 180-183; patent no. 649,621 in NT,1956, p. P-293.9. NT, May 16, 1900; patent no. 787,412, in NT, 1956, pp. P-332-33.10. NT, “Tesla’s New Discovery,” 1901; in NT, 1984, p. 57.11. NT, patent no. 685,012, in NT, 1956, pp. P-327-30. It is doubtful butpossible that he considered using superconductivity, as this property of elementsinvolving the expulsion of magnetism occurs at temperatures almost twice ascold. This effect, which is an abrupt and discontinuous transition from amagnetic state to a nonmagnetic state was officially discovered a decade later in1911 by Kamerlingh Onnes (see J. Blatt, Theories of Superconductivity [NewYork: Academic Press, 1964]).12. Discussions with Stanley Seifer, February 1991.13. Tom Bearden, “Tesla’s Secret,” Planetary Association for Clean Energy,3, pp. 12-24.14. NT, 1897, in NT 1956, pp. P-293-94.15. NT, 1956, p. P-293.16. Ibid., p. P-328. ACKNOWLEDGMENTSThis book began in earnest in the late 1970s, and has continued unabated untilthis point in 1996. Along the way, there were many individuals and institutionsthat helped me in my research. The first person to thank is my former partner inthe field of consciousness research, Howard Smukler, who gave me the O’Neillbook in 1976 along with the nutty text Wall of Light: Nikola Tesla and theVenusian Space Ship. Shortly thereafter, in 1977, I wrote my first article on theinventor. The second major hurdle was accomplished in 1979, after spendingtwo years poring through the microfilm letters between Tesla and J. PierpontMorgan, George Westinghouse, George Scherff, and Robert UnderwoodJohnson, which were obtained from the Library of Congress by Roberta Dorenof the Interlibrary Loan Department at the University of Rhode Island (URI).After Roberta transferred to a different division, Vernice (Vicky) Burnett tookover helping me, and she continued to do so unabated for another dozen years. Iwould like to thank Vicky for her resourcefulness and extraordinary efforts, andthe rest of the staff at the URI library.In 1980, I began a doctoral program at Saybrook Institute, San Francisco.The work resulted in a 725-page doctoral dissertation entitled Nikola Tesla:Psychohistory of a Forgotten Inventor. Stanley Krippner was not only mymentor; he was also a keen editor who corrected and criticized the entire treatise.It was a mammoth undertaking for him, and I am most appreciative. OtherSaybrook committee members I wish to thank include Henry Alker, OctaveBaker, Jurgen Kramer, Debra White, and the outside reader William Braud of theMind Science Foundation in San Antonio, Texas. The dissertation wascompleted in 1986.In 1987, I began to work full-time on a full-blown biography. Many entirelynew avenues were revealed not covered in the doctoral dissertation. A number ofkey individuals, particularly Tesla experts, helped me enormously. From thestart, Mike Markovitch of Long Island University provided me with importantsource material and translations; William Terbo, Tesla’s grandnephew, spentendless hours over many years with me discussing various details. In Belgrade,Alexander Marincic, director of the Tesla Museum and, in particular, hisassistant, Branimir (Branko) Jovanovic, aided me in vital ways. And in theUnited States, I must also thank heartily Dr. Ljubo Vujovic, Jim and Ken Corum,and the patriarch of Tesla experts, Leland Anderson, whose cache of material,which, like the documents provided by the Tesla Museum, was indispensable increating this treatise.Other experts who helped include John Ratzlaff, of the original Tesla BookCompany, John Pettibone of Hammond Castle, Paul Baker, Nick Basura, TomBearden, Ralph Bergstresser, Zoran Bobic, Nancy Czito, Steve Elswick, UriGeller, Elmer Gertz, Robert Golka, Toby Grotz, James Hardetsky, Mrs. R. U.Johnson, Jr., John Karanfilovsky, Nicholas Kosanovich, John Langdon, J. W.McGinnis, Sanford Neuschatz, Nicholas Pribic, Dr. Andrija Puharich, SidRomero, Lynn Sevigny, Richard Vangermeersch, J. T. Walsh, Tad Wise, andJapanese inventor extraordinaire Dr. Yoshiro NakaMats. Through their works,Hugo Gernsback, Kenneth Swezey, Inez Hunt and Wanetta Draper, HerbertSatterlee, and particularly Matthew Josephson and John O’Neill.Important institutions included the Berkeley, Cornell, Harvard, MIT,Brown, and Yale University libraries, archives from the University of Prague,Columbia University Butler and Avery libraries, the New York Public Libraryand New York Historical Society, the Edison Menlo Park Archives, the J.Pierpont Morgan Library, Hammond Castle, the Westinghouse CorporationArchives, Hugo Gernsback Publications, the Library of Congress, the NationalArchives, the Smithsonian Institution, the FBI, the OAP and the instrumentknown as the Freedom of Information Act.I would also like to thank my close friend Elliott Shriftman for his wisdom,great generosity, and continuing encouragement; the late Prof. Edwin Gora forhis understanding of Tesla’s link to theoretical physics, Roger Pearson, formerdean of Providence College School of Continuing Education; and RaymondLaVertue, of Bristol Community College, for helping me put bread on my table;my sagacious agent John White, who has been with the project for over tenyears; Allan Wilson (for believing in me) and Donald Davidson of CarolPublishing Group; and my loyal and altruistic partner in the screenplay Tesla:The Lost Wizard, Tim Eaton, visual effects editor for Industrial Light & Magic ofMarin County.The treatise is dedicated to my parents, Thelma and Stanley Seifer, mysister Meri Shardin, her husband, John Keithley and their children, Devin andDara; my brother, Bruce Seifer, and his wife, Julie Davis; and my wonderful andunderstanding spouse, Lois Mary Pazienza, who has been with me throughoutthe entire twenty-year project.This book is also dedicated to the Teslarians, who seek the truth from thepast and a sane, ecologically minded technology for the future. INDEXAbafi, 11AC polyphase system, 42-43, 62, 110-11, 119, 133, 145, 149, 178, 198, 201,215, 328, 350, 393, 430, 437; builds first model, 21-26, 29-30; explained16, 22-23, 47-48Adamic, Louis, 444-45Adams, Edward Dean, 76, 133-37, 151, 159, 162, 171-72, 190, 210, 230, 245,254, 385Adamick, Jimmy, 414Akâsa (Akâsha), 164-65, 169, 239, 424Albert, Prince, 93, 326Alexander I, 95Alexanderson, Ernest, 390, 471Algemeine Elektrizitäts Gesellschaft (AEG), see Brown, Charles EugeneLancelot; Dolivo-Dobrowolski, Michael von Alley, Dickenson, 294Allis Chalmers Company, 398, 401alternating current (AC), 16, 36, 133. See also AC polyphase system AmericanInstitute of Electrical Engineers (AIEE), 44-45, 68-69Amtorg Trading Company, 455Anderson, Leland, xiv, 398, 402, 471Anthony, William, 44, 48, 71Apple Computer Company, 465Arago, François, 24Arbus, Muriel, 429Armstrong, Edwin, 348, 373-74, 390-91, 429, 444-45, 463-64artificial intelligence, see telautomatonAshara, Shoko, 469Astor, Ava Willing, 208-9, 245, 295Astor, John Jacob, xii, xv, 53, 64, 152, 174, 178-79, 190, 205, 208-11, 231, 241,243-44, 253-54, 295; contract with Tesla, 162-63, 209-11, 218, 361;correspondence with Tesla, 165, 243; science fiction author, 152-54;Spanish-American War, 194-95; aircraft, 329-30, 336, 342-43; lost at sea,342; death, 358, 361, 366Atlantic Communication Company, see Telefunken) atom (structure of), 527n.14. See also Bohr, Rutherford, Tesla theories; quantum physics atom bomb,529n. 18AUM Supreme Truth, 469avatar, xiii, xv, 466-70Ayer, James I., 110-11Baily, Walter, 25; discovers rotating magnetic field, 24Bain, Alexander, 184Bannister, Samuel, 148Barber, Charles, 171Barnes, John S., 311-12Barney, Charles, 163, 326-27Bartanian, A., 455Baruch, Bernard, 300-301, 326Batchelor, Charles, 27-28, 30, 34, 108battle of currents, 47, 55-57, 132, 135Beam, Victor, 430Bearden, Col. Tom, 461, 469Becker, Robert O., 93Beckhard, Arthur, 488n. 28Behrend, Bernard A., 421; defends Tesla, 80-81, 238; role in Edison Medal, 384-85Bell, Alexander Graham, 66, 84, 119, 149, 277, 328, 345, 346, 384, 410Belmont, August, 246, 250Berg, Ernst Julius, 79Bergmann, Sigmund, 364-66Bergstressor, Ralph, 460-61Bernarto Bros., 344Bernhardt, Sarah, 138, 164-65, 207, 440Bjerknes, Wilhelm, 62bladeless turbines, 336-41, 343, 351-53; explained, 339-40; problems, 366, 397,401-3; used to generate electricity, 419; bladeless pumps, 338Blanc, Elsie, 410Blavatsky, Madame, 63Blondel, André, 93, 391Bohr, Niels, 103, 464Boldt, George C., 204-5, 260, 293, 319, 325, 327, 381, 386, 388, 392, 405Boldt, George, Jr., 392Bonjean, M., 359Bowie, David, 468Bradley, Charles, 25, 74Bragg, William H., 377, 421Branly, Edouard, 109, 379Braun, Karl, 373, 391Breece, Jimmy, 160Brentano, Franz, 18Brisbane, Arthur, 141-43, 148Broughton, H. R., 111Brown, Alfred S., 42, 52, 67, 137, 230Brown, Charles Eugene Lancelot, 78, 134-35; Lauffen-Frankfurt transmission,63, 73-74; defends Tesla, 80Brown, H. P., 55-57Bruckner, Joseph 330Budd Manufacturing Company, 399Budisovljevic, Soka, 6Budisovljevic, Toma, 6Buitrago, Diaz, 143Bulwer-Lytton, Edward George, 63, 65, 193-94, 202Byllesby, Henry, 46, 49, 134Cameron, William E., 117-18cancer, treatment with ozone, 341Carson, John, mistaken for Tesla in Steinmetz/Einstein photo, 525-26n. 16Carnegie, Andrew, 250, 383, 410Caruso, Enrico, 338Carter, Jimmy, 462Chamber, William Astor, 161Chanute, Oliver, 332Cheiro (Count Louis Hamon), 64Cheney, M., xiv, 488n. 28Churchill, Winston, 447Clark, George, 318, 448Clemens, Samuel, see Mark TwainCockrane, W. Bourke, 57Coffin, Charles, 77, 135Colorado Springs (Colo.) laboratory, 213-36, 379; original transatlantic plan,216; observation of lightning, 219; discovery of stationary waves, 219;measuring geomagnetic pulse, 220-221; extraterrestrial encounter, 221-25Cooper, Drury W., 371Corbett, Gentleman Jim, 245, 414Corbett, John, 453Cornels, Fredrich, 448-49Conroy, Charles, 458-59Cowles, Alfred, 311Craigee, Gen. L. C., 459Crawford, Marion, 139Crookes, William, 32, 71, 85, 89, 90-92, 94, 97, 108, 209, 231, 250Crow, W. D., 262Cults of Unreason, 469Curtis, H. L., 417Curtis, Leonard E., 45, 214Czito, Colman, 231-34, 382, 422Czito, Julius, 231, 382, 422, 456Czito, Nancy, 456Dahlstrand, Hans, 398, 401Dana, Charles, 141, 146death ray, seeparticle beam weaponsdeBobula, Titus, 427, 431-34, 457DeForest, Lee, 357, 377, 389-91, 409, 421; and advances in wireless, 279-80,338, 352; diary, 275; litigation with Armstrong, 374, 390, 429; meetingwith Tesla, 182-83Dempsey, Jack, 410, 414DePew, Chauncey, 194, 245Deprez, Marcel, 24, 93Descartes, René, 15, 19, 200Dewar, James, 88-90, 231Dickson, W. L., 37direct current (DC), 16, 36, 47-48, 132Dodge, Mary Mapes, 231, 289Dolivo-Dobrowolski, Michael von, 63, 76, 78, 241; Lauffen-Frankfurttransmission, 73; claim of priority in AC system, 80-81Donegan, T. J., 450Doty, Col. Ralph E., 446, 458Dozier, Joseph, 215Draper, Wanetta, see Hunt and DraperDuffner, C. J., 236DuMaurier, George, 154Duncan, Louis, 69Dunn, Gano, 71, 421, 444Dvořák, Anton 124, 145, 208earth currents, 88, 105, 107-8, 185-86, 283-84, 372-73, 472Edison, Thomas Alva, xiv, 17, 21, 27-39, 45, 47, 55-57, 62, 64, 66, 70, 76, 84,108, 118, 122, 133, 135, 148-49, 154, 162, 170, 174-75, 183, 194, 200, 207,241, 246, 280, 328, 384-85, 400, 420, 428-29; conflicts with otherinventors, 39, 77-78, 178; first meets Tesla, 27, 30-31; Pearl Street, 36-46;Nobel Prize nomination, 379-80; on Tesla, 27, 113-14, 266, 295-96, 360,386; death, 421Edison, Thomas, Jr., 194-95Edison Electric Companies, 28, 38, 40, 77, 365Ehrenhaft, F., 379Eiffel, Alexander, 61-62Eiffel Tower, 118, 267, 338Einstein, Albert, 102-3, 197, 379, 412, 416, 418, 420-21, 440, 498n. 60, 525-26n. 16Electrical Experimenter, 34, 383, 395, 399, 405Electrical Review, 214Electrical World, 44, 70electromagnetism, 62, 75, 95-96, and light, 70. See also Hertz, Hertzian waveselectrocution, 56-58entrainment of brain waves, 461, 530nn. 43, 44ether, 20, 62, 71, 101-5, 108, 110, 168-69, 239, 420-21, 499n. 25Evans, Christopher, 469Evershed, Thomas, 132Faraday, Michael, 59, 119, 464Farmer, Moses, 31Farnsworth, Philo, 464FBI, 411, 434, 446-62, 468Fechner, Gustav-Theodor, 15Fenton, Irene, 355Ferranti, Sebastian Ziani de, 62, 133Ferraris, Galileo, 24-25, 50, 93, 120, 328, 384Fessenden, Reginald, 241-42, 280-82, 358, 377, 389-91fireballs, 232, 510n. 16Fitzgerald, Bloyce, 449-50, 458-61Flammarion, Camille, 154-56Fleming, John Ambrose, 85-86, 90, 275Flint, Charles R., 260Flowers, John B., 417-18flying machines, 17; flivver plane, 235, 334-35, 418; fuel-less plane, 324, 333-34; hovercraft (hydrofoil), 332-33, 342; reactive jet dirigible, 330-31Forbes, George, defends Tesla AC motor, 111, 135Ford, Henry, 382, 434Foxworth, D. E., 450Frank, Carl George, 361, 370, 374, 388Franklin, Benjamin, 119free energy, 65, 71, 166, 420-25, 516n. 31Freibott, G., 341frequency controversies: polyphase system, 55, 59, 60, 73-74; wireless,continuous vs. pulsed, 185, 187, 218, 229, 280, 351, 374Freud, Sigmund, 438, 464Frick, Henry Clay, 246, 250, 320, 323, 326, 410Galt, John, 468Ganz & Co.. 133, 135Gates, Bill, 465Gates, John W., 250Gaulard, Lucian, see Gaulard-GibbsGaulard-Gibbs AC transformer, 24, 37, 46, 55, 58, 101, 133Geissler, Heinrich, 71General Electric, 77-79, 118, 135-37, 148-50, 178, 394, 401, 402, 411, 444General Motors, 418Gernsback, Hugo, 34, 395-96, 399, 405, 426-30, 435Gershwin, George, 355Gertz, Elmer, 436, 440Gibbs, George, see Gaulard-GibbsGilder, Richard Watson, 36, 179, 236, 239-40, 336-37, 438Girardeau, M. E., 359Goddard, Robert, 404Goldschmidt, Rudolf, 375Golka, Robert, 471Gora, Edwin, 102Gorsuch, Walter, 451-53graphology, xv, 319, 321-23Gray, Elisha, 120-21, 183, 248Griggs, John, 390Grindell-Mathews, Harry, 426-27Guggenheim, family, 299-301, 325-26, 345, 366Gurdjieff, George, 202Gurth, Max, 402Guzman Prize, 422Hammond, John Hayes, Sr., x, xv, 178, 180, 300-301, 325, 343-46, 348, 353-56Hammond, John Hayes, Jr. (Jack), xv, 343-56, 362, 370, 372, 377, 389, 409-10,421, 429; radio guidance system, 344-48, 353-55; contract with Tesla, 345-53, 355, 364; meets Edison, 345-46; work with Bell, 346-47; marriage, 355;inventions, 346; Navy and War departments, 347-49, 353-55; death, 356Hamon, Count Louis, see CheiroHarriman, Ned, 250, 264-65, 268, 295-96Haselwander, Fredrich August, 25Hausler, Charles, 450, 456Havemeyer, H. O., 231Hawthorne, Julian, 241; Tesla/Martian signals, 224-25, 257-58Hawthorne, Nathaniel, 225, 258Hearst, William Randolph, 141, 355Heaviside, Oliver, 81, 85Hedetneimi, Charles, 453-56Heinreich, Earnest, 190, 256-57Heinze, Augustus, 326-27Heisenberg, Werner, 102, 529n. 18Helmholtz, Hermann Ludwig von, 19, 61, 68, 95, 119-20Henry, Joseph, 108, 119, 278Hering, Carl, 241, 277; opposition to Tesla, 72, 74-75, 80-81Hertz, Heinrich, 61-62, 70, 104, 109-10, 172, 184, 218, 249, 278, 372, 498n. 60;death, 126; EM theories, 96-97; meets Tesla, 95-97. See also Hertzianwaves Hertzian waves, 99, 107, 109, 344, 351, 357, 418. See also Bjerknes,Wilhelm; Hertz, Heinrich; Mach, Ernst; Stone, John Stone Hess, Victor, 423Hewitt, Peter Cooper, 160Hiergesell, David, 84Higginson, Adm. Francis J., 206, 226-28, 238, 389-90Hitler, Adolf, 436-39, 442, 447-48Hoadley, Joseph, 341Hobart, Ganet, 194Holland, John P., 205-6, 237Hobson, Grizelda, 319, 414, 437-38Hobson, Richmond Pearson, 206, 212-13, 258, 319-20, 414-15, 437-38Holliday, Col., 459Holt, Frank, see Erich MuenterHoover, J. Edgar, 433-34, 448, 455, 458-59, 468Hosier, H. M., 187Houle, P. E., 459House, William, 377Houston, Edwin, 101Huart, M., 196-97Hume, David, 19Hunt, Inez, see Hunt and DraperHunt and Draper, xiv, 378, 380Hutchins, Frank, 386, 405-8Hyde, Henry, 298International Tesla Society, xvi, 464, 471Inventions (Tesla): amplifier 21; antigermicide, 158; arc lamp, 40; artificialintelligence, 202-3, 317; automaton, see telautomaton; button lamp, 87,425; clock, 121; crow catcher, 8; death ray, see particle beam weapons; DCmotors, 37; electric bath, 158; electric railroad, 150; electronic radio tubes,231, 280; electrotherapeutic machines, 128, 139, 158, 382; to enhanceintelligence, 357-58; fertilizer machine, 186-87, 211, 329-35; fluorescentand neon lights, 71, 85, 111, 114, 119, 137, 209-11, 218, 253, 290, 319,328, 336; free energy machine, 423-24; fuel-less automobile, 419; inductionmotor, 23-34, 37, 59-60, 77-78, 121, 238; interplanetary communicator,416; laser beams (precursor work in), 87-88, 422, 425, 456; ozonemachines, 83, 187, 341-342; pump, 338; purifying ore, 419; radio tube, 188,374; radar, 407; refrigeration devices, 311-12; rotating magnetic field, 22-26, 30, 42, 49, 121; scrambler, 193, 218, 348; speedometer, 381, 399;telegeodynamics, 191-92, 416, 461, 469; Tesla coil, 73; torpedo, 338;turbines (other than bladeless), 13; valvular conduit, 398; weather control,263; X rays, 167-70, 173, 388, 425. See also AC polyphase system,bladeless turbines, flying machines, magnifying transmitter, particle beamweapons, telautomaton, wireless transmission ionosphere, 508n. 13;Heaviside-Kennelly layer, 105Jobs, Steven, 465Johnson, Agnes (Holden), 163, 259, 287, 413, 438Johnson, Katharine, xv, 123-31, 159, 198, 258, 284, 321, 324, 327, 364, 385,409; illness, 401, 408; death, 410, 414; letters with Tesla, 164, 173, 180,206-7, 211-12, 234-35, 243, 259, 272, 287-88, 303, 472-73; romanticconnection, 123, 163, 415Johnson, Robert Underwood, xv, 123-31, 145, 159-61, 163, 178, 180, 189, 198,204, 232, 235, 242, 256, 258, 266-67, 284, 287, 295, 321, 336-37, 362, 364,366, 379-80, 385, 392, 399-400, 405, 410, 413-14, 437-38; edits Teslaarticle, 239-40; letters with Tesla, 173-74, 179, 236, 259, 273, 319; meetsEdison, 122; “Luka Filipov” (poem), 125; death, 438Johnson, Owen, 163, 208, 259, 266, 342Johnson, Walter, 237Johnston, W. J., 44, 81Jones, Homer, 453Josika, see AbafiJung, Carl, 154-55Jurow, Irving, 450-52Kaempffert, Waldemar, 352, 377Kapp, Gisbert, 80-81, 134Karadjich, Vuk, 4, 6Kara-George (George Petrovich), 3Keegen, Gen. George, 462Keely, John Ernst Worell, 61, 63-65, 162, 165, 198, 425Keene, James, 251Kelvin, Lord (William Thomson), 68, 85, 89-90, 102, 134-35, 156, 231, 250,278, 407Kemmler, William, 56-58Kennelly, Arthur, 57, 68, 74, 132, 375, 385Kerr, E. M., 50Kerr, Page & Cooper. 311-12Kierkegaard, Søren, 168King, George, 468King, Joseph, 452Kipling, Rudyard, 123, 128, 163, 179-80, 258Knight, Walter H., 341Korn, Arthur, 184-85Kosanovic, Sava, 7, 294, 442-43, 445-48, 450, 452, 457-61Krsinic, Franco, 464Krueger, Paul, 345Kulishich, Kosta, 15, 18Kussner, Amatia, 208Küster, Mr., 184Labine, Jerry, 402laboratories: Edison Waterside Station, 349, 351, 363-64, 366; 59th StreetBridge, 427, 429, 457; Grand Street, 61, 256, 371-72; Houston Street, 158,161, 182, 213-15, 217, 281; Liberty Street, 42-43; Orange, New Jersey,148; South Fifth Avenue, 66, 99, 127-28, 146-47, 281, 443. See alsoColorado Springs; Wardenclyffe Laemmle, Carl, 428Lamme, Benjamin, 59-60, 65, 78, 100, 377Langley, Samuel, 309, 332Langmuir, Irving, 377, 525-26n. 16Lathrop, George, 154Lawrence, William, 460lawsuits: Boldt, 405-8; Fessenden, 280-82; Marconi, 358-59, 366, 369, 370-73,388, 398; Warden, 324; Westinghouse, 359-60lectures: AIEE (1888), 45-48; Columbia College (1891), 70-73; Royal Society,London (1892), 83-90; 143; Paris (1892), 84, 92-93; Philadelphia (1893),101-7; St. Louis (1893), 101, 110-13; Chicago Electrical Congress (1893),120-21; Niagara Falls (1897), 174-77; New York Academy of Sciences(1897), 188; NELA, New York (1911), 350-51Lenard, Philip, 175, 231Leonardo da Vinci, 332Ley, Willy, 156Light House Board, 226-28, 379-80, 389-92Lilienthal, Otto, 332Lindbergh, Charles, 330Livor, Harry, 38Locke, Richard Adams, 19, 155Lockheed Martin X-33, 333Lodge, Oliver, 70, 85, 91, 109-10, 187, 337, 373, 377, 390, 421Long, John D., 389, 391Loomis, Mahlon, early work in wireless, 107-8Lowenstein, Fritz, 217-19, 231, 281, 397-98, 347-48, 352, 357-58, 370, 375, 382Lowell, Perceival, 152-53, 155-56, 216, 327, 465Lund, Troeln, 378Lusitania, 340, 375Lwoff-Parlaghy, Princess Vilna, 382-83, 410Mach, Ernst, 15, 18, 200; acoustical waves, 19-20; Buddhist influence, 201;Mach’s principle 20, 104-5, 201-2, 425McKay, Clarence, 209, 211McKim, Charles, 311, 392McKim, Mead & White, 98, 159, 261McKinley, William, 195, 270, 390McNamara, Charles, 458magnifying transmitter, 188-89, 216, 227, 281, 327, 347-48, 372-73, 407-8, 417-18, 471-76; radio tube (brush light), 86, 102-5; oscillators, 83-84, 99, 115-17, 137, 143, 165, 183, 209-11, 218, 232, 261, 281, 290, 295, 318, 328,373, 390, 419. See also Wardenclyffe; tuned circuits Man, Albion, seeSawyer-ManMan Who Fell to Earth, 468Mannheim, Karl, 307Mandic, Djouka, see Tesla, DjoukaMandic, Nikola, 7Mandic, Pajo, 20, 66-67, 128Mandic, Petar, 7, 66, 93, 294Marconi, Guglielmo, x, xiv, 109, 172-73, 183, 185-87, 194-96, 368-75, 388, 410,421, 429; litigation, 227, 249, 284, 288, 309, 358-63, 358; Martian signals,224, 400-1, 404; meeting with Tesla, 236-37; New York speeches, 275-79,337; Nobel prize, 374, 379; successful wireless experiments, 189, 223;Hammond connection, 345, 347, 355; in U.S. Court, 371; pirates Teslaoscillator, 262-63, 285, 326-27, 359, 372-73; transatlantic wirelesstransmission, 274-79; work with Preece, 172-73, 186-87, 275Marconi Wireless Co., 390-91Marincic, Alexander, 471, 509n. 20Markovitch, Michael, 447Mars, 242, 258, 327, 337, 404, 465; canals of, 153, 155-56; belief in life on, 152-57, 216, 220-26, 318Martin, Thomas Commerford, xii, xv, 29, 43-45,67-69, 84,97,116, 137,139-41,147,150, 170, 178, 321,349, 410; editor of Tesla, 79, 110, 138, 190;disagreements, 196, 200, 214, 257, 289, 381; and Marconi extravaganza,275-78; and Johnsons, 121-22,126, 128Mashevkief, Ivan, 410-411Matthews, Arthur, 468Maxim, Hiram, 31, 76Maxwell, James Clerk, 68, 96, 119Meissner, Benjamin Franklin, 348Merrick, F. A., 435Merrington, Marguerite, 208, 260, 385Meyers, Emil, 361, 377Michaelson-Morley experiment, 102Mill, John Stewart, 299Millikan, Robert, 71, 377, 421, 423Mills, Darius Ogden, 162, 178, 209, 211, 245, 300, 343Morgan, Anne, 361, 448; and Tesla, 246, 260; woman’s movement, 301-2, 405,413-14Morgan, J. Pierpont, xiv, xv, 33, 42, 76-77, 98, 134, 161-62, 245-56, 307, 325,343, 384, 443, 464-65; and G.E., 136; Niagara Falls, 174; US Steel, 250-251; and Panic of 1901, 264-65, 267-68, 304, 310; and Panic of 1907, 326-27; and Frick, 320-21, 323; and Guggenheim, 299-301; and Ryan, 298-99,301, 305, 323; and Tesla, 247-50, 252-54, 260, 268-73, 284-86, 293, 297,301-23, 349, 363; contract disputes, 285, 315-16; death, 361, 366Morgan, J. P. (Jack), xv, 361-66, 369, 378, 381, 396-97, 415; funds Tesla turbine,363, 388, 434-35; attempted assassination, 376; and RCA 393Moore, D. McFarlan, 138, 277, 421Moore, John C., 42Morse, Samuel, 108Muenter, Erich (a.k.a. Frank Holt), 375-76Muir, John, 163, 180-81, 366Musak, Charlotte, 458NakaMats, Yoshiro, 468Naval Intelligence, 389Nesbit, Evelyn, 258, 269-70, 310, 322Newton, Isaac, 19, 154, 202Nietzsche, Friedrich, 239Nobel Prize, 71, 84, 378-80, 387, 409, 420, 464Office of Alien property, 446, 450-60O’Neill, John (Jack), xiv, xvi, 30-31, 260, 300, 401, 413, 423, 439-40, 452, 460;first meets Tesla, 328-29; ode to Tesla, 383-84; saves Tesla’s papers, 443Paderewski, Ignace, 123, 178-79, 189, 409Page, Parker W., 185, 281-82Palmer, Edward, 453particle beam weapons, 470, 86, 168-69, 387-88, 416, 425-27, 431, 434-35, 439-40, 447-62; explained, 454, 469-70Paul, Frank R., 396, 399, 405Payne, Oliver, 310-12Peck, Charles, 42, 52Perry, Comdr. T., 226-28Peter, King, 441, 447-48Pfund, Richard, 361, 377Pickering, William, 152-53, 156, 337, 404plurality of worlds, 155. See also Mars; Tesla Poeschl, Prof., 15-16, 201Possell, C. R., 402-3Potter, Adrian, 411Poulsen, Valdemar, 328, 421Pratt, David, 459Preece, William, 84-85, 88, 108, 120, 172-73, 186-87, 275Pribic, Nikola, 18Price, Charles W., 214Prodigal Genius, xivProject Seafarer, 476Pulitzer, Joseph 141Puharich, Andrija (Henry), 300, 355, 461Pupin, Michael, 68-70, 74-76, 238, 373-74, 377, 383, 421; befriends ElihuThomson, 72; befriends Marconi, 236-37, 263, 276-79, 309; litigationtestimony, 371; telephone patent, 144-45, 236-37; dispute with Tesla, 130-31; obfuscation of Tesla’s name, 80, 167, 437; reconciliation, 436-37Purkyne,Jan, 19Puskas, Ferenc, 20, 27-28Puskas, Tivadar, 20, 27Pyle National Co., 392, 397-99quantum physics, 103, 168-69, 424, 498n. 60radiant energy, 168Radosavljevich, Paul (Rado), 429, 442Rand, Ayn, 467-68Rankine, William B., 137, 151, 171-72, 230, 245, 305-6Rasquin, William J., 405-8Ratzlaff, John, xivRau, Louis, 29Rayleigh, Lord, 90-91, 112, 175RCA, 354, 358, 392-94, 409, 429, 444, 455, 460Reagan, Ronald, 197Redfield, James, 468Reis, Philip, 328remote control, see telautomaton, tuned circuits, wireless transmission Rhodes,Cecil, 180, 345Rickenbacker, Eddie, 404Righi, A., 372, 379Ritchen, H. B., 452Robinson, Corinne (Mrs. Douglas Robinson), 241, 245, 247Robertson, Andrew W., 430-31Rockefeller, John D., 295, 296, 310, 325-26Roeg, Nicholas, 468Roentgen, William, 167-70, 173, 175, 178, 209, 231, 388, 410Roosevelt, Franklin Delano, 381, 409, 434, 442, 447-48; assistant sec’y of navy,368, 377, 388, 409; Farragut Letter, 309; RCA, 392-93; use of Tesla priorityin wireless; against Marconi, 368Roosevelt, Theodore, 163, 195, 266, 326, 369, 383, 392, 438; meets Tesla, 245Ross, Harvey, 459Royal Academy of Science (Sweden), 378-79Rudyar, Dane, 469-70Russell, Walter, 424Rutherford, Ernest, 103, 377Ryan, Thomas Fortune, 312, 320, 326; negotiations with Tesla, 296-297, 323;and J. P. Morgan, 298, 301, 305Sarnoff, David, 354, 358, 374-75, 444, 463, 525-26n. 16Satterlee, Herbert, 160, 245-46, 355, 361Savo, Peter, 419Sawyer, William, 31-32, 36, 70, 147scalar waves, 96, 461, 498n. 60Scherff, George, 189-90, 217, 237-38, 281, 289, 292, 294, 309, 312, 319, 322,327, 393, 397; first meets Tesla, 161; correspondence, 219, 230-31;financial support of Tesla, 324, 340-41; ozone therapy for wife, 341-42Schiaparalli, Giovanni, 155Schiff, Jacob, 246, 250, 265, 298, 320, 323, 325, 351Schley, Winfield Scott, 215Schmid, Albert, 54, 59, 65, 78, 99, 100, 148Schuman cavity resonance, 472Schwab, Charles, 250-51, 432-34Schwarz, Mrs. F. A. O., 289, 340-41Scott, Charles, 53, 54, 59-60, 65, 78, 100, 133, 342, 360, 377, 385, 421, 430Sekulic, Martin, 13Sellers, Coleman, 134Serrell, Lemuel, 40Seymour, John (patent commissioner), disputes with Pupin, 144, 236; chastisesMarconi, 373Shallenberger, Oliver, 101, 133, 384; AC meter invention, 49, 54; disputes withTesla, 59, 78Sheep, George, 84Sherman, Thomas G., 325Shindo, Masaki, 469Simpson & Crawford, 211Slaby, Adolf, 231, 250, 361, 389, 391Smiley, J. B., 386Smith, Lawrence M. C., 454space-time, 102, 420, 461Spanel, Abraham N., 448-49, 458-59Spanish American War, 190, 194-95, 205-6, 208-13, 414Sperry, Elmer, 71, 377Sprague, Frank, 132, 175, 279, 358, 377Stallo, Edmund, 325, 359standing waves, 99, 230Stanley, William, 24-25, 46, 49-50, 54, 63, 71, 147, 430Stanton, Desire (a.k.a. Mrs. G. McClurg), 214, 216Steinmetz, Charles, 78-79, 81, 135-36, 241, 276, 357, 384, 464; defense of TeslaAC system, 76; obfuscation of Tesla’s name, 73, 79-81; doctoredEinstein/Steinmetz photo, 525-26n. 16; socialist-capitalist conflict, 75, 277,411-12Stetson, Francis Lynde, 135, 174-75, 178Stillwell, Lewis B., 54, 78, 133-35, 241, 384Stockbridge, Frank Parker, 339-40Stoilkovic, Stanko, 436-37, 440Stokowski, Leopold, 355Stone, John Stone, 372-73, 375, 377Storm, Margaret, xiii, 468Strickfadden, Kenneth, 428Strong, F. Finch, 158Stumpf, Carl, 18-19, 200Swezey, Kenneth, 412-13, 448, 450, 458Szigety, Anthony, 20-22, 43, 66tachyon, 418, 423-25Tate, Alfred O., 38Tauscher, Hans, 433-34Taylor, Myron, 419telautomaton, 19, 193-203, 239-42, 317, 349, 407Telefunken, 360, 368, 374, 377, 381; pays Tesla royalties, 361, 369, 397;increases size of Sayville, 369-70; subpoenas Marconi, 371; wirelessspying, 375, principals arrested, 377, 388telepathy, 91, 94, 355telluric currents, 188-89. See also earth currents Terbo, William, ix-xii, 7, 418Tesla, Angelina (Trbojevich), 6-7, 13, 93, 190, 293Tesla, Dane, 7, 10-11, 441, 465-67, 488n. 28Tesla, Djouka (Mandic), 6-7, 10, 93, 98, 415, 441, 465-67Tesla, Josip, 6-7, 13Tesla, Marica (Kosanovic), 7, 93, 95, 190, 293Tesla, Milka (Glumicic), 7, 93, 293Tesla, Milutin, 6-7, 10, 16, 18Tesla, Nikola: 289; autobiography, 399-400; beliefs concerning life after death,165, 385-86; birth, 1, 7; birthday celebrations, 383, 421, 441, 464; body,sends electricity through, 89-90, 112-113, 120, 142, 325; Buddhistinfluence, see Buddhism, Akâsa, Vivekananda; celibacy, 207-8; ColoradoSprings notebook, 219-20, 283, 508-09nn. 19, 20; cult figure, xiii, 428-29,467-70; death, 444-51, 448; Descartes, influence, 19, 202; as ditch digger,40-42; at Paris Edison Works, 27-30; Pearl Street Station, 33-39; salarycontroversy, 34-35, 38-39; Edison Medal, 384-86, 396, 458, 463; eideticimagery, 11, 509n. 20; and ESP, 91, 94, 382, 400, 439; extraterrestrialconnection, 152, 154-55, 157, 216, 220-26, 241, 318, 351, 404, 416, 422,465, 467-68, 509n. 17; gambling, 17, 466; heritage, 1-4; honorarydoctorate, 130-31; honors, 441-42, 464; hotel bills unpaid, 292, 301, 405-8,412, 430, 434; illnesses, 13-14, 22, 29, 93-95, 169; laboratory fire, 146-47;nervous collapse, 314, 319, 321-25; obfuscation of his name: see Hering,Pupin, Steinmetz, E. Thomson; Kline: 490n. 47; Hughes: 490n. 52;personality, 11-12, 174-77, 188-90, 197-98, 207, 228, 307-8, 328, 337, 385-86, 412-13, 440-11; psychoanalysis, 440-41, 465-67; pool playing ability,28, 141; revelation, 22-23; sexuality, 17, 412, 465-67; pigeons, 325, 381,385, 404, 412, 414, 429-30, 440-43, 466-67; press attacks, 196-99, 226,241-42; secret papers, 446-62, 468-69; remark, anti-Semitic, 212;suppression of papers, 443; ship named after Tesla, 445; and quantummodel of atom 168-69; vs. relativity, 102, 418, 420-27, 461, 526n. 5; onradioactivity, 424-25tesla, 464Tesla Electric Co., 41, 43, 361Tesla Memorial Society, xiv, 464Tesla Museum, 300, 459, 471Tesla Ozone Co., 341Thaw, Harry 310, 322Thomson, Elihu, 25, 36, 38, 40, 46-48, 63, 69, 71, 74, 76, 119, 135, 241, 279,377, 381, 384; AC invention, 81; arc lighting, 40; disputes with Tesla, 48,70, 72; and Martian canals, 156, 404; and stolen AC blueprints, 78, 135-36;Thomson-Houston Co., 70, 77-78.Thomson J. J., 84, 86, 108, 377Thompson, Sylvanus P., 25, 120, 276Thomson-Houston, see Thomson, ElihuThurston, R. H., 44, 99Tito, Joseph, 447, 464Trbojevich, Nicholas, ix-xi, 294, 383, 418-19, 450-51Trump, John O., 452-57tuned circuits, 99, 109, 218, 232, 348turbines, see bladeless turbinesTwain, Mark 35, 160, 207-8, 238, 336; meeting with Tesla, 127; photographed inlab 128, 139; saves Hammond Sr., 345; Tesla deal, 197Tyndall, John, 115Uhlman, Lewis, 217, 231Upton, Francis, 36-37, 71Vail, B. A., 41Van de Graff, Robert, 454, 525-30n. 25Van Tassel, George, 468vector waves, 96, 461, 498n. 60Verne, Jules, 155Viereck, George Sylvester, 337, 369, 436, 438-42Villard, Henry, 37, 76-77, 134Vivekananda, Swami, 161-62, 164-65, 239, 257, 260Von Braun, Werner, 156, 529n. 18Vril power, 63, 193-94, 197, 202, 216VTOLs 329-35; 403Wallace, Henry, 442, 448-49Waltham Watch Company, 399War of the Worlds, 154Warden, James, 260, 291, 309, 324Wardenclyffe, 260-74, 276, 283-91, 349, 362, 464; height, 271, 313;underground construction, 283, 290-91, 407-8; cupola, 290; destruction,385, 393, 395Webb, J. Beavor, 162Weaver, Gen., 353Weilage, G. J., 443Westinghouse, George, xiv, 38, 46, 48-60, 74, 76-77, 82, 150, 171, 175, 238,255, 360, 384, 386, 400, 465; war of the currents, 47; purchases Teslapatents, 49-50, 52-53, 58-59, 190, 210; and Chicago World’s Fair, 100, 119;harnesses Niagara Falls, 134-137, 175; letter to Tesla, 238; death, 366-67.See also Westinghouse Company Westinghouse Company, 52, 100-101,119, 147-48, 151, 214, 360, 391, 401, Westinghouse Company (cont’d)430-31, 452, 455; swap with GE for Tesla patents, entente cordial, 178,190, 276-77, 393, 524n. 53; reclaims Tesla’s equipment, 291; pays Tesla’srent, 435Westinghouse Electric Tesla polyphase system, 101, 148Wetzler, Joseph, 44, 66, 70-71, 84, 277Wheeler, George, 161, 299White, Stanford, 35, 98, 122, 194, 231, 246, 310-311, 325, 343,362;assassination, 322-23; Chicago World’s Fair, 159; girl-in-the-pie party, 160;and Tesla, 158-59, 160-64, 179, 245; and Wardenclyffe, 261-62, 266-67,269-72, 301Whyte, William, 464Wilbur, Curtis, 354Williams, G., 184Wilson, Ernest, 344Wilson, Robert Anton, 470Wilson, Woodrow, 354, 364, 368-69, 377, 381, 388, 409-10; war powers actrestricting wireless, 391-92, 401wireless transmission, 83, 88, 99, 103-10, 115, 121, 126, 143, 146, 157, 165-66,187-88, 211, 213, 232-34, 239, 241, 253-54, 273, 285, 350-51, 389, 419,439; patents, 311-12, 391, 430; priority discussion, 185, 280-82, 359, 363,368, 371-72, 387-88, 391, 430; non-interferable messages, 248-49, 281,350-51; wireless telephone, 218, 232, 369; ground connection, 99, 143,219; tuned circuits, 99, 109, 166, 216, 218, 232, 281, 348, 372, 407; ofpictures, 183; stationary waves, 317, 471-74; of power, 86, 105, 107, 114,176-77, 189, 230, 318, 351, 419 telephotography (and television), 247;world telegraphy, 287. See also Colorado Springs; earth currents;magnifying transmitter; telautomaton; Wardenclyffe.Wise, Tad, xvWittenberg, Philip, 452Wright Brothers, xi, 309, 332, 345Zahm, A. F., 333.Zenneck, Jonathan, 361Zivic, Fritzie, 414Zmai, Jovan Jovanovich, 95, 119, 124-25Zoric, Milica, 13 ABOUT THE AUTHORPast editor of MetaScience, A New Age Journal on Consciousness, Marc J.Seifer presently edits the Journal of the American Society of ProfessionalGraphologists. With over seventy publications in such periodicals as RhodeIsland Business Quarterly, Rhode Island Bar Journal, Hands On Electronics,Extraordinary Science, Parapsychology Review, Lawyers Weekly and PsychiatricClinics of North America, Dr. Seifer is internationally recognized as an expert inthe field of graphology and also on the inventor Nikola Tesla (the subject of hisdoctoral dissertation). Featured in Marquis’ Who’s Who in the World, Glamour,Cosmopolitan, The Economist, Providence Journal (Sunday supplement),Niagara Falls Review (Sunday supplement), the Miami Herald and theWashington Post, he has lectured at such institutions as the United Nations,Kings College, Cambridge University, Oxford University, University ofVancouver, City College of New York, Long Island University, ColoradoCollege, Cranbrook Retreat, Kendall College, West Point Military Academy, aswell as in Boston, Chicago, Colorado Springs, Denver, Detroit, Providence, NewYork, Santa Fe, Tucson, Jerusalem and Haifa, Israel, and Zagreb, Yugoslavia.His works include Staretz Encounter (novel and screenplay), Tesla: TheLost Wizard (screenplay co-author), Handwriting & Brainwriting (collectedworks), Hail to the Chief (screenplay), The Stephen Rosati Story (true crime) andMad Scientist of the Gilded Age (video short documentary). He has also writtenarticles on such individuals as Wilhelm Reich, Gurdjieff, the Dalai Lama, UriGeller, J. Pierpont Morgan, John Hays Hammond Jr., John Muir, EdwinArmstrong, Nikola Tesla, Albert Einstein, Franklin Roosevelt, and Steven Jobs.With a B.S. from the University of Rhode Island, five semesters ofgraphology at the New School for Social Research, photography at the School ofVisual Arts, an M.A. from the University of Chicago, and a Ph.D. fromSaybrook Institute, Dr. Seifer works as a handwriting expert and testifies incourt. He is also a visiting lecturer in Psychology at Roger Williams University. CITADEL PRESS books are published byKensington Publishing Corp.850 Third AvenueNew York, NY 10022Copyright © 1998, 1996 Marc J. SeiferAll rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced in any form or by any means without the priorwritten consent of the publisher, excepting brief quotes used in reviews.All Kensington titles, imprints, and distributed lines are available at special quantity discounts for bulkpurchases for sales promotions, premiums, fund raising, educational, or institutional use. Special bookexcerpts or customized printings can also be created to fit specific needs. For details, write or phone theoffice of the Kensington special sales manager: Kensington Publishing Corp., 850 Third Avenue, NewYork, NY 10022, attn: Special Sales Department, phone 1-800-221-2647.Citadel Press logo Reg. U.S. Patent and Trademark OfficeCitadel Press is a trademark of Kensington Publishing Corp.First printing 199820 19 18 17 16 15Printed in the United States of AmericaLibrary of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication DataSeifer, Marc J.Wizard : the life and times of Nikola Tesla / Marc J. Seifer.p. cm“A Citadel Press book.”ISBN 1-8065-1960-61. Tesla, Nikola, 1856-1943. 2. Electric engineers—United States—Biography. 3. Inventors—UnitedStates—Biography. I. Title.TK140.T4S65 1996621.3′092—dc20[B]95-49919CIP 