5LIBERTY STREET (1886-88)There were many days when [I] did not know where my next meal wascoming from. But I was never afraid to work, I went to where some menwere digging a ditch…[and] said I wanted to work. The boss looked at mygood clothes and white hands and he laughed to the others…but he said,“All right. Spit on your hands. Get in the ditch.” And I worked harder thananybody. At the end of the day I had $2.NIKOLA TESLA1Although Tesla felt cheated when he departed from the Edison Machine Worksin the early months of 1885, his time spent there had enabled him to study themaster at work. Simultaneously, it allowed Tesla to begin to organize his owncompany and write up first drafts in a notebook on advances in arc-lightingdesign and on the construction of DC commutators. It also enabled him to seethat Edison was mortal and fallible and that he, Tesla, had a scheme significantlymore advanced. A new confidence began to emerge.In March 1885, Tesla met with the well-established patent attorney LemuelSerrell, a former agent of Edison’s, and Serrell’s patent artist, Raphael Netter.2Serrell taught Tesla how to break down complex inventions into individualizedimprovements, and on the thirtieth of the month they applied for Tesla’s firstpatent (no. 335,786), an improved design of the arc lamp which created auniform light and prevented flickering. In May and June they applied for otherpatents on improvements on the commutator for the prevention of sparking andfor regulating the current by means of a novel independent circuit coupled withauxiliary brushes. In July yet another arc-lighting patent was filed. This oneenabled exhausted lamps to automatically separate themselves from the circuituntil such time as the carbon filaments could be replaced. Unfortunately, thedesign had been anticipated by Elihu Thomson. Although “embarrassed” byhaving been unaware of the state of the art in America at this time, Tesla wasable to create novel refinements, and they were patentable.3During his trips to Serrell’s office, the inventor met with B. A. Vail andRobert Lane, two businessmen from New Jersey.4 With ambiguous assurancesthat they were also interested in the AC motor, Tesla agreed to form a lightingand manufacturing company with them in Tesla’s name in Vail’s town ofRahway, New Jersey. There, after nearly a year of toil working with Paul Noyes,from Gordon Press Works, he completed the installation; this, his first and onlymunicipal arc-lighting system, was used to illuminate the streets of a town andsome factories.5 The efficiency and original approach of the system attracted theattention of George Worthington, editor of Electrical Review, who “tookpleasure” in featuring the company on the front page of the August 14, 1886,issue.For the next few months, the Tesla Electric Light & ManufacturingCompany reciprocated by advertising in the journal. Vail hired the mechanicalartist Mr. Wright of New York City to draw the lamp and dynamo and at thesame time, along with Tesla’s help, created bold copy which claimed: “the mostperfect…and entirely new [arc lighting] system of…automatic self-regulat[ion]”In a display ad four times the size of most other electrical concerns, the Teslasystem guaranteed “absolute safety and great saving of power…with noflickering or hissing.”6Having obtained stock in the company and with a little money in his pocket,Tesla moved into a garden apartment in Manhattan. Decorating the grounds “inthe continental fashion with colored glass balls on sticks,” the cosmopolitan’sdelight was short-lived. “Children broke in and stole the balls, so Tesla replacedthem with metal ones. The stealing continued, however, so Tesla ordered hisgardener to bring them into the house every night.”7Unfortunately, neither Vail, who was president of the company, nor Lane,who was vice president and treasurer, cared about Tesla’s other creation. Tothem, an AC motor was a seemingly useless invention. The sensitive inventorbecame incensed, for he had postponed exploiting the AC system until theRahway project was completed under the assumption that his backers wouldsupport that quest as well. To his shock, Tesla was forced out of his own concernand handed “the hardest blow I ever received.”8 “With no other possession thana beautifully engraved certificate of stock of hypothetical value,”9 the inventorwas bankrupt. Betrayed by men he trusted, the inventor came to consider thewinter of 1886-87 a time of “terrible headaches and bitter tears, my sufferingbeing intensified by my material want.”10 He was forced to work as aditchdigger. The occupation was particularly demeaning for the self-perceivedaristocrat. “My high education in various branches of science, mechanics andliterature seemed to me like a mockery.”11Tesla’s crisis abated in the spring. Having interested the foreman in hisengineering prowess, he was introduced to Alfred S. Brown, a prominentengineer who worked for Western Union Telegraph Company. Brown, whohimself held a number of patents on arc lamps,12 had probably seen the articleand advertisements on Tesla in Electrical Review. Well aware of the limitationsof the prevailing DC apparatus, he became immediately impressed with the“merits” of Tesla’s AC inventions and thereupon contacted Charles F. Peck, “adistinguished lawyer” from Englewood, New Jersey.13 Peck “knew of thefailures in the industrial exploitation of alternating currents and was distinctlyprejudiced to a point of not caring even to witness some tests.”“I was discouraged,” Tesla recalled, “until I had an inspiration. Do youremember the ‘Egg of Columbus?’ I asked. The saying goes that at a certaindinner the great explorer asked some scoffers of his project to balance an egg onits end. They tried in vain. He then took it, and cracking the shell slightly by agentle blow, made it stand upright. This may be a myth, but the fact is that hewas granted an audience by Isabella, the Queen of Spain, and won her support.”“And you plan to balance an egg on its end?” Peck inquired.“Yes, but without cracking the shell. If I should do this, would you admitthat I had gone Columbus one better?”“All right,” he said.Having finally gained the lawyer’s attention, Tesla cut to the quick. “Andwould you be willing to go out of your way as much as Isabella?”“I have no crown jewels to pawn,” Peck retorted, “but there are a fewducats in my buckskins and I might be able to help you to an extent.”14After the meeting, Tesla rushed to the local blacksmith with a hardboiledegg and had a mate cast in iron and brass. When he returned to the lab, heconstructed a circular enclosure with polyphase circuits along the perimeter, andwhen he placed the egg in the center and turned on the current, the egg began tospin. As the egg’s speed of rotation increased, its wobbling ceased, and it stoodon its end. Not only was Tesla able to “go Columbus one better,” he was alsoeasily able to display the principles behind the idea of his rotating magneticfield. Peck was won over, and together the three men formed a new electriccompany in Tesla’s name.Peck, who had connections with John C. Moore, a banker with connectionsto J. P. Morgan, provided the bulk of the capital, and Brown provided technicalexpertise and located the laboratory at 89 Liberty Street, adjacent to what todayis the World Trade Center. In return, Tesla agreed to split his patents on a fifty-fifty basis. In actuality, the three equally shared one patent for an AC dynamo,Peck and Tesla split five more patents on commutators, motors, and powertransmission, and the balance of inventions conceived during this period wereplaced in the name of the Tesla Electric Company. Their first patent was filed onApril 30, 1887.15 Finally, Tesla had arrived. He would begin an unprecedentedexcursion into the field of invention, a flow of intense activity which wouldcontinue unabated for fifteen years.Driven by his wish to maintain priority in a variety of areas and upon therealization that new technologies could influence the course of history, Teslabegan a vigorous schedule that frightened those around him. On many occasions,he drove himself until he collapsed, working around the clock, with few breaks.“Tesla produced as rapidly as the machines could be constructed three completesystems of AC machinery—for single-phase, two-phase, and three-phasecurrents—and made experiments with fourand six-phase currents. In each of thethree principal systems he produced the dynamos for generating the currents, themotors for producing power from them, and transformers for raising andreducing the voltages as well as a variety of devices for automatically controllingthe machinery. He not only produced the three systems but provided methods bywhich they could be interconnected and modifications providing a variety ofmeans of using each of the systems.”16 He also calculated, in fundamentalfashion, the mathematics behind these inventions.On May 10, Anthony Szigeti landed in New York, and by the end of theweek he was working at Liberty Street. With Tesla as designer, Brown astechnical expert, and Szigeti as assistant, they began manufacturing their firstAC induction motors. Peck, who along with Brown would be associated withTesla for the next decade as a quiet backer, helped implement the patentapplications by seeing investors in California, Pennsylvania, and New York.Within a few weeks, Electrical World editor T. C. Martin stopped by theshop and coaxed Tesla into writing his first article on the invention. Immediatelytaken by him, Martin described the long-limbed electrician as having “eyes thatrecall all the stories one has read of keenness of vision and phenomenal ability tosee through things. He is an omnivorous reader, who never forgets; and hepossesses the peculiar facility in languages that enables the educated native ofeastern Europe to talk and write in at least half a dozen tongues. A morecongenial companion cannot be desired…the conversation, dealing at first withthings near at hand and next…reaches out and rises to the greater questions oflife, and duty, and destiny.”17T. C. Martin, with heavy emphasis in his signature on the C, was a complexperson who would come to play a significant role in Tesla’s life. In 1893 heedited the most important compilation of Tesla’s writings assembled during hislifetime. Flamboyantly mustachioed and with large, round, soulful eyes and ashaved head, Martin, now married, had been a former seminary student who hademigrated from England when he was only twenty-one. Born in the same year asTesla, Martin had worked for the Wizard of Menlo Park in the late 1870s beforemoving to the island of Jamaica. Returning to New York in 1883, he quicklybecame editor of Operator and Electrical World. Started in 1874 by the wellmanicured W. J. Johnston from a “little four-page telegraph sheet prepared andissued by Western Union operators in New York City, for circulation among theirfellows,”18 the Operator began to gain prominence after Thomas Edison startedcontributing significant pieces. As soon as Martin was hired, the paper’s namewas changed simply to Electrical World.The following year, in 1884, T. C. Martin became vice president of thenewly formed American Institute of Electrical Engineers (AIEE), and in 1886his first book appeared, The Electrical Motor and Its Applications. A few monthslater, he was elected president of the AIEE.19With his newfound prominence and very British attitude, T. C. Martin’ssense of self-worth rose to the occasion. In very deliberate fashion, he organizeda rebellion at Electrical World, with his coeditor Joseph Wetzler and a few otherworkers, against the owner, the proper, pedantic, and overbearing W. J.Johnston.20 A capable editor in his own right, Johnston was forced to fire hiseditors and work on the journal himself, “as if Martin had never existed.”Along with Wetzler, Martin gained employment with Electrical Engineer, acompeting company which gained great prominence when the duo climbedaboard. As a friend of Edison, and with his new base of operations, Martin wasprepared to seize the moment. “An industrious writer with graceful style,”21 T.C. Martin had the capability to cross over into higher social circles. He was aleader, an opportunist, egoist, and charmer. He was also one of the mostinfluential personalities in the glamorous futuristic field of electricalengineering. Having discovered this new volcano of vision in Nikola Tesla,Martin approached him with the idea of helping choreograph Tesla’s entrée intothe electrical-engineering community.The Serb was mysterious. He could rebuff lesser mortals and enjoyed thehabits of a recluse. But Thomas Commerford Martin had tact and tenacity ofpurpose. He helped arrange for the esteemed engineering professor WilliamAnthony, of Cornell University, to come to Liberty Street and test the new ACmotors for efficiency. And Tesla reciprocated by traveling to Cornell to displayhis motors to Anthony and three other professors, R. H. Thurston, EdwardNicholas, and William Ryan. Anthony, who was twenty years their senior and agraduate of both Brown and Yale universities, had just retired from Cornell afterfifteen years in order to take a position designing electrical measuringinstruments for Mather Electrical Company in Manchester, Connecticut. Soon tobe president of the AIEE himself, Anthony was pleased with his tests. Alongwith Martin, he helped coax Tesla into presenting his motor before the newlyformed electrical society.Martin had great difficulty persuading Tesla “to give any paper at all.”Martin said that “Tesla stood very much alone, [as] the majority [of theelectricians] were entirely unfamiliar with [the motor’s] value.” In haste, Teslawrote out his lecture the night before in pencil. It had not been easy for him toconstruct an efficient machine, but having finally succeeded and having passedall of Professor Anthony’s stringent tests for efficiency, “nothing now stood inthe way of [its] commercial development…except that they had to beconstructed with a view to operating on the circuits then existing which in thiscountry were all of high frequency.”22On May 15, 1888, Tesla appeared before the AIEE to read his landmarkpaper “A New Alternating Current Motor.” He had already filed for fourteen ofthe forty fundamental patents on the AC system, but he was still reluctant tofully announce his work. Realizing that the invention was worth at a minimumhundreds of thousands of dollars, Tesla and company sought investors throughthe advice of their new patent attorneys, Parker W. Page, Leonard E. Curtis, andGen. Samuel Duncan, the last a leader of the firm and respected member of theNew York Bar Association.23 By the time of the lecture, Tesla, Peck, and Brownhad already been negotiating with prospective buyers, such as Mr. Butterworth, agas manufacturer from San Francisco, and, through General Duncan, GeorgeWestinghouse of Pittsburgh,24 but nothing as yet was settled.Westinghouse was already utilizing an alternating current system developedby the “erratic” French inventor Lucien Gaulard and the “sporty” entrepreneurJohn Dixon Gibbs of England.25 In 1885 his manager of the electrical division,Guido Pantaleoni, had returned to Turin, Italy, to attend the funeral of his father.By coincidence, through his engineering professor Galileo Ferraris, whomWestinghouse himself had met while visiting Italy in 1882, Pantaleoni wasintroduced to Lucian Gaulard, who had installed his AC apparatus betweenTivoli and Rome. Gaulard and Gibbs had already made headlines two yearsearlier when they first exhibited their invention at the Royal Aquarium inLondon; but in Turin the system won a gold medal and a prize of £400 awardedby the Italian government. Westinghouse purchased the American patent rightsin late November after receiving a cable request from Pantaleoni.The Gaulard-Gibbs system, although improved by the Hungarian ZBDsystem, still had serious problems. For Westinghouse, this was furthercomplicated by the fact that Edison owned the option on the ZBD; and it wasprobably to block competitors that Edison purchased the system to begin with.26In the same year, in America, after creating the Westinghouse ElectricCompany, Westinghouse placed William Stanley in charge of the Gaulard-Gibbsmodifications. Simultaneously, he brought to America Reginald Belfield, theengineer who had helped install the Gaulard-Gibbs system at the InventionsExhibition in London two years earlier. Stanley, a frail, thin-faced temperamental“little man”27 with piercing eyes, aquiline nose, wispy mustache, and Alfalfahairdo, was a native of Brooklyn who had worked for Hiram Maxim, inventor ofthe machine gun. Although it was Westinghouse’s idea to place Stanley in chargeof the Gaulard-Gibbs apparatus, Stanley would later maintain that Westinghousenever fully understood the system until he got it in working order.28 This appearsunlikely, for it was a private joke among the upper echelon of the WestinghouseCompany that Stanley had a penchant for claiming new discoveries when theybecame such to him. In any case, Westinghouse hedged his bets by establishingnumerous DC central stations as well while research on AC was in progress.29“Nervous and agile,”30 Stanley was a hypersensitive individual who neverreally got along with Westinghouse. Due to ill health, and on the advice of thegeneral manager, Col. Henry Byllesby, who proposed that success might be moreforthcoming if Stanley separated himself from the pressures of the company, theinventor returned to his childhood summer retreat in the Berkshires in GreatBarrington, Massachusetts, to work on the Gaulard-Gibbs system in private,taking Reginald Belfield with him. Stanley converted the Gaulard-Gibbsarrangement to parallel circuitry and independent control of separate fixtures andat the same time created a transformer which stepped up the AC from 500 voltsto 3,000 when delivered along a transmission line and stepped them back downto original levels when entering households. This invention, although verysimilar to the ZBD configuration, was nevertheless patentable. It enabled AC tobe sent three-quarters of a mile, or approximately one-quarter of a mile fartherthan the lower voltages of the prevailing DC systems.31On April 6, 1886, George Westinghouse, along with Col. Henry Byllesby,traveled up to New Hampshire to witness the landmark apparatus for themselves.Prior to coming to Westinghouse, Byllesby had been employed at the EdisonMachine Works as a mechanical engineer and was one of the designers of thePearl Street station.32 “From that time on,” Byllesby said, “we progressed withamazing speed.”33 By the time of Tesla’s lecture, Westinghouse noted that hiscompany had “sold more central station[s]…on the alternating current systemthan all of the other electric companies in the country put together on the directcurrent system,”34 but few engineers understood the principles involved.In fierce competition with Westinghouse and a third player, Elihu Thomsonof Thomson-Houston Electric Company, Thomas Edison had received a reporton his own alternating current ZBD system. His engineers in Berlin indicatedthat the use of such high voltages was exceedingly dangerous.35 Thomson, whohimself had lectured at the AIEE a year before on the topic of AC, supportedEdison’s contention that AC was too risky.36 Thus, at the time Tesla spoke, thebattle of the currents had already begun, but the makeup of the contenders wascomplex. In 1886, fully two years before Tesla’s high-voltage AC systembecame manifest, Edison had written to his manager, “Just as certain as deathWestinghouse will kill a customer within six months after he puts in a system ofany size. He has got a new thing and it will require a great deal of experimentingto get it working practically. It will never be free from danger.”37Tesla’s lecture began with a brief description of the “existing diversity ofopinion regarding the relative merits of the alternate and continuous currentsystems. Great importance,” Tesla continued, “is attached to the questionwhether alternate currents can be successfully utilized in the operation ofmotors.” He followed this preamble with a lucid description of the problems ofthe prevailing technology and his elegant solution, explained in words, diagrams,and simple mathematical calculations. The lecture was so thorough that manyengineers, after studying the work, felt that they had known it all along:I have the pleasure of bringing to your notice a novel system of electricdistribution and transmission of power by means of alternate currents…which I am confident will at once establish the superior adaptability…andwill show that many results heretofore unattainable can be reached by theiruse…In our dynamo machines, it is well known, we generate alternatecurrents which we direct by means of a commutator, a complicated device,and the source of most of the troubles experienced…Now, the currents sodirected cannot be utilised in the motor, but they must be reconverted intotheir original state…In reality, therefore, all machines are alternate-currentmachines, the current appearing continuous only in the external circuitduring their transit from generator to motor.38Since Tesla’s lecture was dealing with fundamentals, it was easilyunderstood, even though his invention was so revolutionary.By demonstration in Tesla’s laboratory after the lecture, the inventorshowed that his synchronous motors could almost instantaneously be reversed.He also described, in precise mathematical calculations, how to determine thenumber of poles and speed of each motor, how to construct single-phase, two-phase, and three-phase motors, and how his system could be interlinked with DCapparatus. The lecture made use of entirely new principles.39Now electricity could be transported hundreds of miles from a singledistribution point, and not just for lighting streets or dwellings but for runningappliances in households and industrial machinery in factories.At the end of the talk, T. C. Martin called upon Professor William Anthonyto present his independent tests of the Tesla motors. He had designed dynamoshimself, which he had displayed a decade earlier at the Philadelphia Expositionof 1876. Tugging nervously at his scraggly beard, Anthony confirmed that theTesla motors he had taken back to Cornell had an efficiency comparable to thebest DC apparatus. “A little over 60%,” he said, for the larger models. Moreover,the reversal of direction that the machines could achieve took place “so quicklythat it was almost impossible to tell when the change took place.”40Boiling inside at having been anticipated by a newcomer, the persnicketyprofessor Elihu Thomson stepped forward. Wanting to reestablish that his workin AC predated Tesla’s, Thomson pointed out how their inventions differed: “Ihave been very much interested in the description given by Mr. Tesla of his newand admirable little motor,” he managed with a pert smile. “I have, as probablyyou may be aware, worked in somewhat similar directions, and towards theattainment of similar ends. The trials which I have made have been by the use ofa single alternating current circuit—not a double alternating circuit—a singlecircuit supplying a motor constructed to utilize the alternation and producerotation.”41Unbeknown to Thomson, his words at that moment would come back tohaunt him, because he had identified precisely the difference between the twocreations. Whereas Thomson’s single AC circuit had to still make use of acommutator and thus was highly inefficient, Tesla’s system utilized two or morecircuits out of phase with each other and constructed in such a way as to makethe commutator obsolete. Tesla, of course, recognized the importance ofThomson’s words and reiterated the point to establish clearly that his invention,just presented, was not analogous to Thomson’s prior work:“Gentlemen,” Tesla began, “I wish to say that the testimony of such a manas Professor Thomson flatters me very much.” Pausing with a smile and a bowof recognition, Tesla timed his coup de grâce with understated finesse. “I had amotor identically the same as that of Professor Thomson, but I was anticipatedby him…That peculiar motor represents the disadvantage that a pair of brushes[i.e., a commutator] must be employed.”42In this brief riposte Tesla claimed the high ground, and created an enemywho would fight him on this and other priority issues (e.g., the Tesla coil) for therest of their lives.Now Westinghouse had to move fast. He realized the value of the Teslapatent applications, having had nearly a month to look them over, along with thereport from Professor Anthony.43 A week after the lecture, on May 21, he sentCol. Henry Byllesby to Tesla’s laboratory. Byllesby met with fellow engineerAlfred Brown on Cortland Street, where he was introduced to Charles Peck, thelawyer and major financial backer of the Tesla Electric Company. Together witha fourth man, Mr. Humbard, they went over to Liberty Street to meet theinventor and see the machines in operation.“Mr. Tesla struck me as being a straight-forward, enthusiastic, sort of aparty,” Byllesby wrote to Westinghouse, “but his description was not of a naturewhich I was enabled, entirely, to comprehend. However, I saw several pointswhich I think are of interest. In the first place, as near as I can get at it, theunderlying principle of this motor is the principle which Mr. Shallenberger is atwork on at the present moment. The motors, as far as I could judge…are asuccess. They start from rest, and the reversion of the direction of rotation issuddenly accomplished without any shortcircuiting…In order to avoid giving theimpression that the matter was one which excited my curiosity, I made my visitshort.”44Back at Cortland Street, Brown and Peck informed Byllesby that he had tomake a decision “by ten o’clock, Friday of this week,” as the company was alsonegotiating with a Mr. Butterworth from San Francisco. They claimed thatProfessor Anthony had joined this California syndicate and was backing upButterworth’s offer of $250,000 in short-term notes and a royalty of $2.50 perwatt of horsepower. “I told them the terms were monstrous,” Byllesby said, “butthey replied that they could not possibly hold the matter over longer than thedate mentioned. I told them I thought there was no possibility of our consideringthe matter seriously, but that I would let them know before Friday.”Byllesby suggested that Westinghouse come to New York himself or sendShallenberger and another representative, but Westinghouse, who was familiarwith the San Francisco syndicate, told Byllesby instead to stall them and try tosecure more favorable terms.45During the six-week interim, Westinghouse conferred with his specialists,Oliver Shallenberger and William Stanley, and his lawyer E. M. Kerr. Just threeweeks prior to Tesla’s lecture, Shallenberger had discovered “by chance” that aloose spring spun in “a shifting magnetic field. Directly he said to his assistantStillwell who was also present…, ‘There’s a meter in that and perhaps a motor.’Within two weeks he designed and built a most successful alternating currentmeter of the induction type” which became standard for the field; and, likeTesla’s creation, his apparatus utilized a rotating magnetic field.46 Shallenberger,however, did not yet really understand the principles involved, nor had he hadtime to apply for a patent.Stanley, on the other hand, claimed that there was nothing new in Tesla’screation. He pointed out that in September 1883 he had put the idea down in anotebook that an induction coil could be excited by AC. “I have built an ACsystem on basically the same principle which allows electromotive force to betransmitted from power stations to homes for the purpose of illuminating them,”he told Westinghouse.47 But the fact of the matter was, Stanley’s system stillused a commutator. His ego had gotten in the way of his ability to reasonobjectively that his scheme was not analogous to Tesla’s.Kerr reminded Westinghouse that unless he had a competing patent ofsufficient strength, he would be powerless. Westinghouse was aware thatProfessor Ferraris of Turin, Italy, had published a paper on the rotating magneticfield one or two months prior to Tesla’s lecture. Ferraris had also constructeddiscs that rotated in AC fields in university presentations as early as 1885. Teslawillingly admitted that “Professor Ferraris not only came independently to thesame theoretical results, but in a manner identical almost to the smallestdetail,”48 but Ferraris wrongly concluded that “an apparatus founded upon thisprinciple cannot be of any commercial importance as a motor.”49 Nevertheless,Kerr realized the legal importance of Ferraris’s work. He suggested toWestinghouse that they purchase the U.S. patent options, so Pantaleoni was sentto Italy. He paid 5,000 francs, or about $1,000, for the rights.50 But time wasrunning out; the Tesla people would not wait forever. Westinghouse wrote Kerr:I have been thinking over this motor question very considerably, and am ofthe opinion that if Tesla has a number of applications pending in the PatentOffice, he will be able to cover broadly the apparatus that Shallenbergerwas experimenting with, and that Stanley thought he had invented. It ismore than likely that he will be able to carry his date of invention backsufficient time to seriously interfere with Ferraris, and that our investmentthere will probably prove a bad one.If the Tesla patents are broad enough to control the alternating motorbusiness, then the Westinghouse Electric Company cannot afford to haveothers own the patents.51Concerning the sticky point of royalties, which the Tesla syndicate placed atthe audacious figure of $2.50 per watt, Westinghouse wrote, “The price seemsrather high, but if it is the only method for operating a motor by the alternatingcurrent, and if it is applicable to street car work, we can unquestionably easilyget from the users of the apparatus whatever tax is put upon it by theinventors.”52 Thus, in no uncertain terms, Westinghouse writes here theportentous statement that royalty payments could be passed on to customers, aconcept he would be forced later to conveniently overlook. 