45LIVING ON CREDIT (1925-40)If you mean the man who really invented, in other words, originated anddiscovered—not merely improved what had already been invented byothers, then without a shade of doubt, Nikola Tesla is the world’s greatestinventor, not only at present, but in all history.HUGO GERNSBACK1Tesla was leading a double life in his later years, one as the elegant anthor ofthe electrical power system and father of the wireless and another, morelabyrinthe existence as the quintessential mad scientist whose ultimate creationswould rule not only the earth but other worlds as well.In 1935, with the help of newsreel photographers, Tesla designed andproduced an electrified extravaganza which he offered to Paramount Pictures.“Paramount said the film came out unusually good, both in respect to pictorialand sound effects,” he told George Scherff, “but they feel that the subject wastoo technical.”2 Nevertheless, Teslaic themes continued to make their way intothe mass consciousness. The most important movie person to implement theinventor’s wizardry was revolutionary movie producer Carl Laemmle and hisspecial-effects expert Kenneth Strickfadden. Together, they unleashed one ofTesla’s unforgettable coils in the Boris Karloff classic Frankenstein.(Strickfadden also resurrected the same paraphernalia forty years later when MelBrooks recreated the set for the spoof Young Frankenstein.)3 Tesla was partial toLaemmle, whom he referred to as a genius, because Laemmle, too, successfullyfought the powerful Edison clique a generation earlier when Edison held amonopoly on key movie making patents and would not allow competitors to usethem. Routing his product through Europe, Laemmle was able to withstand morethan 200 legal actions against him to create Universal Pictures and therebydefeat Edison.4Hugo Gernsback, of course, also continued to espouse Teslaic motifs inScience Wonder Stories5 with such fresh galactic escapades as “The MightiestMachine,” “Interplanetary Bridges,” and “A City on Neptune.”Other apostles, such as John Hays Hammond Jr. and Edwin Armstrong,were riding out the Great Depression living like kings. Hammond’s castle,throughout the 1930s, became a haven for Hollywood stars, corporate giants, andvirtuosos; the retreat also doubled as a top-secret military think tank.As Tesla continued to work at his hideaway by the Fifty-ninth StreetBridge, Edwin Armstrong continued to engage in a never-ending court battlewith Lee De Forest over the invention of the heterodyne. Holding eightythousand shares of RCA stock, Armstrong was powerful enough to ride out thelitigation as he continued to design a variety of new patents. Starting up his ownradio station, Armstrong unveiled his newest invention, FM radio, a novelsystem which reduced such problems as static caused by ground interference sooften encountered with AM. Little did Armstrong know that the litigation causedby this latest creation would make the De Forest trial seem like a kindergartenspat.6Getting on in years, Tesla decided to hire a few Western Union boys to feedthe pigeons for him. Dressed in their official caps and snappy uniforms, the ladscould be seen like clockwork at 9:00 A.M. and 4:00 P.M. at three differentlocations around the city: in front of the New York Public Library, in BryantPark, at the library’s rear, and at St. Patrick’s Cathedral.7 The inventor hadconstructed special wooden cages complete with a birdbath for taking care ofwounded as well as healthy feathered friends, and he befriended other dovefanciers to whom he could deliver the birds.In 1925, Tesla’s office was moved from 8 West Fortieth Street, near theNew York Public Library, to fashionable quarters at 350 Madison Avenue. Hissecretaries, Dorothy Skerrett and Muriel Arbus, during the later years, sharedduties with Slavic professor Paul (Rado) Radosavljevich, from New YorkUniversity, who edited Tesla’s articles and screened incoming visitors.8 By 1928,however, the upkeep on the office had become too burdensome, and Tesla closedit for good. All of his holdings, consisting of thirty trunks, including his pricelesscorrespondence, theoretical papers, and prototype inventions, were carted to thebasement of the Hotel Pennsylvania, and that is where they remained untilNovember 21, 1934, when he transferred them to the Manhattan StorageWarehouse, located at Fifty-second Street and Seventh Avenue.9A contented member of the cognoscenti who had lived a life full of triumphwas merely the persona, for underneath the appearance Tesla was often bitter,seeking an essentially solitary existence, displacing his anger in editorials thatlashed out at Edison and Marconi and on unfortunate hotel managers who had tocontend with the thought of throwing the grand master out on his coattails fornot paying his rent. In 1930, Tesla was escorted out of the Hotel Pennsylvaniaafter residents complained about the interminable droppings from his “flyingrats,” and because he was “$2000 behind in his rent.”10 As B. A. Behrendquietly reimbursed the hotel to the best of his abilities, the inventor hired a crewto cart his beloved avian companions to George Scherff’s home north of the city.Escaping their confinement, the pigeons returned to Manhattan just in time tomove in with Tesla at his new abode, the Hotel Governor Clinton.11Working on a variety of new fronts, Tesla entered a furtive realm whichwould put him in touch with a series of nefarious agents and heads of manygovernments. Naturally, he required funds, for he began to lag behind yet againin his rent.When he stopped by Hugo Gernsback’s office for another twenty dollars,12the science-fiction editor showed Tesla an article on Westinghouse’s new radiomachinery. Realizing that this company was essentially pirating his wirelesspatents, Tesla strode into their offices and demanded royalty payments. He metwith Victor Beam, assistant to the vice president.“It would be painful to me to resort to legal proceedings against a greatcorporation whose business is largely founded on my inventions,” the inventorstated matter-of-factly, “and I trust that you will recognize the advantage of anamicable understanding.”“Which statement do you claim to be an infringement?” Beam replied,feigning naïevté.“Statement!” Tesla shot back. “Surely you must admit that my claim is toopalpably evident to be denied.”Beam inquired as to a price for purchasing Tesla’s wireless patent no.1,119,732, but it was really a stall tactic, as no genuine offer was made. Inexasperation, Tesla went home to draft a technical letter spelling out each andevery infringement of his fundamental work and concluded: “We [Charles Scottand Tesla] have offered this revolutionary invention repeatedly virtually on yourown terms and you did not want it. You have preferred to take it by force. Youhave robbed me of the credit that is due and injured me seriously in business.Instead of showing a willingness to adjust the matter in an equitable way, yousay you want to fight. You may think you can secure an advantage by suchmatters, but we doubt it, and certainly they will not meet with public approvalwhen all the facts are published.”13One of the problems Tesla had to deal with was the continuing legacy ofresentment toward him by some members of the corporation. Unfortunately, oneof the key antagonists was Andrew W. Robertson, a Westinghouse official whowould soon become chairman of the company. Just a few years later, while Teslawas still alive, Robertson came to write a small treatise on the AC polyphasesystem for the 1939 World’s Fair. In it, he neatly sidestepped any clear mentionof Tesla’s role in the development of the system, suggesting, rather, that WilliamStanley was the inventor. Robertson even had the audacity to write thefollowing:In George Westinghouse’s time, an inventor was recognized as owner of hisideas and was given a patent to protect him in that ownership. Now we aretold that patents are evil monopolies, used to prevent people from gettingthe full benefits of an individual’s work. If we are thinking clearly, we mustdraw the conclusion that these signs all point to a common hostility againstthe…great inventor…If this hostility continues, it cannot but result in anenvironment certain to interfere with the growth and development ofindividual research and inventiveness.14Here is a classic case of the Freudian defense mechanism known asprojection, whereby one’s real feelings are attributed to others: Robertsonsuggests that common people resent the great inventor when in fact it is really hewho harbors this resentment. Tesla had first offered his wireless patents to thecompany in the early 1920s; a long time elapsed before the issue was resolved.As Tesla continued to make headlines for his invention of a diabolical ray,he also was becoming more and more adept at slipping past the manager of theGovernor Clinton. If he had to wait for Westinghouse to come through, so wouldthe hotel.Tesla was now working with the notorious architect and arms merchantTitus deBobula, whose offices were located at 10 East Forty-third Street;deBobula was hired to design the tower, power plant, and housing for theinventor’s “impenetrable shield between nations.”“We can project destructive energy in thread-like beams as far as atelescope can discern an object,” said the seventy-eight-year-old inventor. “Dr.Tesla’s death ray can annihilate an army 200 miles away. It can penetrate all butthe thickest armor plate, and a country’s whole frontier can be protected [withplants] producing these beams every 200 miles.” Dr. Tesla concluded: “Theplane is thus absolutely eliminated as a weapon; it is confined to commerce.”15Born in 1878 in Hungary, with ties to Tesla probably through the Puskasbrothers, deBobula had emigrated to the United States during the Gay Nineties.At that time, Tesla “took the youth under his protection” and aided him inobtaining passage for a boat trip back to his homeland.16 Short and stocky instature, with a brush mustache and ruddy complexion, deBobula returned to theStates a few years later to study architecture. Having borrowed the money fromTesla ostensibly because he needed medical help in Budapest, deBobula hadactually returned home to help his father out in his moving business and becausehe wanted to complete other studies at the local “polytechnic.” Neverreimbursing the inventor for his aid and having lied about his real intentions,deBobula apologized and appealed for funds once more, in 1901. Writing fromMarietta, Ohio, where he was attempting to design a church and school for aparish, he requested “$70 or $80.” Perhaps in lieu of repayment, the newarchitect offered to draw up plans for the laboratory at Wardenclyffe, but thisassignment had already been undertaken by Stanford White.17At about 1908, deBobula moved to Pittsburgh, where he met and marriedEurana Mock, niece of Bethlehem Steel czar Charles Schwab. Shortly thereafter,he designed and built Schwab’s new mansion; he also secured loans from thesteel magnate to finance a series of real estate ventures.By 1910, deBobula was back in New York, earning his way by designingchurches and constructing large apartment buildings in Manhattan and theBronx. Playing fast and loose with Schwab’s capital, deBobula returned to Ohio,where he crossed the border into West Virginia and Kentucky to purchase eleventhousand acres.18 Now well connected, the Hungarian offered to set up asyndicate of wealthy English steel men to help refinance Wardenclyffe,promising to raise a million pounds “without going to very much trouble,providing, of course, that we could demonstrate things to them satisfactorily.”But Tesla declined the offer and “resolved to fight my own battles.”19Known as a “racketeer,” having never paid taxes on the land deal, deBobulaalso reneged on a series of other loans. Naturally, Schwab became angry,particularly because he had lent deBobula additional monies to keep him out ofdebtor’s prison. Paradoxically, deBobula became interested in workers’ rights atthis time and in the growing anarchist movement.Seen as a gold digger and bully by Schwab, the wealthy financier wasreported to have said that “Bob is dishonest, and I would give a million dollars ifhe would jump out this window right now.” This event unleashed a powder kegof animosity between the two, deBobula suing Schwab for $100,000 fordefamation of character, Schwab severing connections between his niece anddeBobula and the family.20Attracted to violent activities, deBobula continued to associate with avariety of radical and paramilitary groups; he also caught the eye of the SecretService. In 1923, during a bizarre interlude, deBobula returned to his home inBudapest and aligned himself with a pro-Hitler group. There he authored a paperwhich attacked Jewish physics and espoused the developing new world order.Charged with conspiring to overthrow the Hungarian government, he escapedback to America.Throughout this entire period, deBobula would regularly correspond withTesla to discuss various ideas he had, such as how to perfect a projector bomb,which he had a patent pending on, and he also discussed his latest encounterwith a cabal of international warlords. The following letter suggests thepossibility that Tesla’s attacking Einstein may have been prompted by anti-Semitic sentiments as much as by philosophical differences:MUNITIONS INC.295 Madison Ave.New York, NYMy dear Mr. Tesla,I hugely enjoyed your comments on relativity, which we, way back in1921, attacked in my Budapest paper, as a theory of the fundamentals ofwhich, if logically developed, would inevitably lead to an anthropomorphicJehovah with all the evil trimmings in philosophy and social order.Yours sincerely,Titus deBobula21In full support of Tesla’s desire to resurrect a new Wardenclyffe, deBobulacarefully drafted for Tesla blueprints of a 120-foot-tall teleforce powerhouse andtransmission tower; at the same time, he set up a factory for his munitionscompany in New Jersey with Capt. Hans Tauscher. The tower, set up somewhatlike a high-tech Van deGraaff generator, with Van deGraaffs primitive cardboardbelt replaced by a vacuum stream of ionized air, had at its bulbous apex a turret-rotating particle-beam cannon, able to move about to attack planes and airshipswith information provided by an earth-current radar system the wizard had alsodesigned during his days at Wardenclyffe.Tauscher, a German American, was closely linked with the Fatherlandthrough his daughter, who still lived there. Through this and other channels,Tesla could be introduced to potential weapons buyers. Simultaneously, he couldalso be supplied with small amounts of dynamite, which he used to testtelegeodynamic equipment that he was trying to sell to such companies asTexaco Oil Company for geophysical exploration.22Titus deBobula was now making his living selling rifle grenades,fragmentation and gas bombs, and other armaments to both domestic policedepartments and foreign governments in Europe and South America.Unfortunately for the Hungarian, unwished-for newspaper publicity concerninga lawsuit with Tauscher drew the attention of the Internal Revenue Service(IRS). Having hid his relationship with the munitions factory, deBobula not onlyattracted the tax collectors but also the seemingly omniscient J. Edgar Hoover,who monitored his activities for the next ten years. He was accused of being aGerman agent and illegal alien involved in subversive activities, and Hoover“recommended that [deBobula] be considered for custodial detention in theevent of a national emergency.”Although they maintained their relationship during this stormy period,Tesla’s antennae were raised, especially when deBobula requested loans fromhim “in amounts you would not miss” just at the time he declared bankruptcy:DeBobula was $750,000 in debt. Hoping to make Tesla a partner in thecompany, deBobula raised Tesla’s ire when he used his name as a referencewhen working an arms deal with the minister of Paraguay. Tesla called deBobulaand stated emphatically that he was not to use the inventor’s name.23Unable to maintain his Manhattan apartment, deBobula moved to theBronx, where he was eventually arrested. A search of his apartment revealed anarsenal of hand grenades, dynamite, and tear-gas bombs. The architect claimedthat they were simply part of the inventory from his company, and he wasinterrogated and released. Presumably an anti-Semite who apparently had ties toHenry Ford, deBobula disavowed any relationship to either the Communist partyor the German-American Bund. Although he was monitored throughout theWorld War II years, the Federal Bureau of Investigation was unable to prove thathe had violated any federal statute, and deBobula was allowed to move toWashington, D.C., where he set up another munitions arsenal right in the heart ofthe city! In 1949 he wrote directly to J. Edgar Hoover to “get them off his back,”and apparently Hoover complied, as articles and references to him faded away atthat time.24As the Great Depression wore on, Tesla’s expenses continued to mount. Hewas now $400 in debt to the hotel, which, during those dreary days, was aconsiderable sum. Cornered by the management, the sly conceptualist fell backon a strategem that had worked so well when he was at the Waldorf-Astoria: hewould live on credit. He thereupon offered as collateral “a working model” ofhis death ray, which he told the establishment was worth $10,000. They askedfor a receipt in writing, and he agreed. The treacherous device and his note werecarefully placed in locker no. 103 in the hotel’s back-room vault.25Although he had solved the problem of meeting the rent, Tesla’s financeswere still in a precarious state. He was even having trouble coming up with thefifteen dollars per month storage costs at the Manhattan Storage Warehouse. In1934, with a bitter taste in his mouth, he drafted a long letter to J. P. Morgan Jr.In it the inventor revealed that he has made overtures to sell his “Chinese wall ofdefense” to war departments in America and England. “The Russians are veryanxious to render their border safe against Japanese invasion, and I have madethem a proposal which is [also] being seriously considered.” The inventor wenton to acknowledge his outstanding debt to Morgan from the turbine affair andhis willingness to pay back the sum, about $40,000, and then made an appeal. “IfI had now $25,000 to secure my property and make convincing demonstrations, Icould acquire in a short time colossal wealth.” Tesla ended the letter bylambasting FDR’s “New Deal,” which “poured out billions in public money [justso] it can remain in power indefinitely.” This “perpetual motion scheme,” inTesla’s view, was antidemocratic, “destructive to established industries, anddecidedly socialistic.”26Needless to say, Morgan did not lend Tesla any money. However, what isinteresting in this passage is Tesla’s reference to property he needed to secure inorder to make convincing demonstrations. This suggestion that he had, in fact,erected a working death ray would become important later, when the questionwas raised whether a functioning model had actually been constructed.According to Hugo Gernsback, through to his prompting, the WestinghouseCorporation agreed to help their former champion out. Gernsback stated that hehad called up the Westinghouse officials “in the late 30’s…to discuss what couldbe done. I apprised [them] of the fact that Tesla was a very proud man who,under no circumstances, would consider charity. I suggested that perhaps hecould be put on the staff in an honorary capacity as a consultant. This was agreedupon and from that time until his death…Tesla received a modest pension.”27Gernsback may certainly have called the company. However, hisinterpretation of what occurred conflicts with the timing of the contract and thereasons for the deal. Tesla had settled with Westinghouse about four years beforethe science-fiction publisher’s gracious call. On legal footing, the inventorcontinued to press his case. Finally, on January 2, 1934, the president, F. A.Merrick, acquiesced and agreed to pay Tesla “to act as a consulting engineer for$125/month for such a period as may be mutually agreeable.”28 To solve theaging patriarch’s psychological problem of refusing to pay his rent, Merrick alsoagreed to cover Tesla’s rent. The debt owed to the Hotel Governor was neversettled; rather, Tesla moved, after signing of the agreement to the Hotel NewYorker; and there he would live, so far as he was concerned, rent free to the endof his days.29 