20FALLS SPEECH (1897)Nikola Tesla said much in a notable speech at a banquet to celebrate theconveyance of power from Niagara to Buffalo. Not [just] a ploddingworkman, he is a dreamer of wise dreams, a poet, and a humanitarian,working with new tools for the benefit of all. He is a man who wonders atthe folly of men who invent guns when they might invent tools. His spirit isnaturally hopeful…He looks not so much at the world as at the universe.He finds power in the waterfall, and at the same time looks forward to atime when we may, perhaps, tap the unseen forces of the planets and use thecosmic energy that swings the stars in their courses. He looks to a timewhen power shall be so cheap, so universal, that all labor shall be done bytireless machines and every man’s life be thus so much more worth living.CHARLES BARNARD1In July 1896, Tesla journeyed to Niagara Falls for his first survey of this greatenterprise. He traveled with George Westinghouse, Edward Dean Adams,William Rankine, and Comdr. George Melville of the U.S. Navy. Also presentwas Thomas Ely, supervisor of motive power for the Pennsylvania Railroad.Tesla was important to all five for almost as many reasons.A reporter for the Niagara Gazette greeted them upon their arrival. “Tesla isan idealist,” the journalist wrote, “fully six feet tall, very dark of complexion,nervous and wirey. Impressionable maidens would fall in love with him at firstsight, but he has no time to think of impressionable maidens. In fact, he hasgiven as his opinion that inventors should never marry. Day and night he isworking away at some deep problems that fascinate him, and anyone that talkswith him for only a few minutes will get the impression that science is his onlymistress and that he cares more for her than for money and fame.”Rankine predicted that Buffalo would receive electrical power byNovember, and Westinghouse predicted that costs would be cheaper than steam.“You could say it will cost one half what steam power cost[s],” Rankine added insupport.“Mr. Tesla, what is your opinion of the effect of this development of poweron Buffalo and Niagara Falls?”“The effect will be that both cities will stretch out their arms until theymeet.”2Tesla looked up at the roaring cataract overcome with emotion as he and theothers donned their rain gear before entering the mighty wonder. He had grownup just fifty miles from the magnificent maze of cascading flumes known asPlitvice Lakes, but those were Lilliputian compared to this thundering colossus.Pride overcame the inventor as he trailed behind for a few moments to think, ashe so often did, of his mountain homeland. It had been four years since he hadseen his family, fifteen years since his first successful construction of a turbinethat could be driven by waterpower, and nearly thirty-five years since he had toldhis uncle of his dream of one day harnessing Niagara Falls. Humbled by thisawesome manifestation of nature, he sat for a moment to reflect as he watchedhis cohorts disappear along the catwalks into a mist of rainbows.“Let’s go, Mr. Tesla,” Adams called out, having waited as patiently as hecould, for the next stop on the itinerary was the Edward Dean Adams Hydro-Electric Power Station, the first of two that would be built in his name. Designedby Stanford White, the edifice housed nearly a dozen gargantuan Tesla turbines,capable of generating collectively over 35,000 kilowatts. The men appeared likedwarfs sauntering amid a lustrous gadgetry assembled as if by giants—one longrow of towering, kettleshaped engines. From this chamber, an efficient,nonpolluting, never-ending source of electrical energy was about to be generatedcapable of driving the factories and illuminating the streets and homes of nearlyone-fourth of the entire continent. The echoes of their steps faded as they stoodfor a moment in silence in the chapel of the dawning New Age.Upon his return to New York, Tesla found a letter from Sir William Preece.3A young man, half British, on his mother’s side, and half Italian, had stopped byPreece’s office with a wireless Morse-code apparatus based on the work ofHeinrich Hertz. Guglielmo Marconi, just twenty-two years old, had brought anotebook which reviewed the literature in the field (most likely the writings ofHertz, Lodge, and Tesla). Marconi had chosen wisely, as Preece was head of theBritish Post Office and had experimented himself in testing induction effectsthrough the ground from telegraph lines.4“After the experiments with the classical Hertz devices under the auspicesof the Imperial Post Office in England,” Tesla reported many years later, “Preecewrote me a letter conveying the information that the tests had been abandoned asof no value, but he believed good results [would be possible by my system]. Inreply, I offered to prepare two sets for trial and asked him to give me thetechnical particulars necessary to the design. Just then, Marconi came out withthe emphatic assertion that he had tried out my apparatus and that it did notwork. Evidently he succeeded in his purpose, for nothing was done in regard tomy proposal.”5 Tesla’s first patent specifically for wireless transmission wasfiled a year later, on September 2, 1897 (no. 650,353).The following month, in August 1896, Tesla received a histrionic plea fromKatharine, who was vacationing with her family at a cottage in Bar Harbor,Maine. Wanting desperately for Tesla to join them, she could only allude to herwish.August 6, 1896Dear Mr. Tesla,I am so troubled about you. I hear you are ill…Leave work for a while.I am haunted by the fear that you may succumb to the heat…Find a coolclimate. Do not stay in New York. That would mean the laboratory everyday…You are making a mistake my dear friend almost a fatal one. You thinkyou do not need change and rest. You are so tired you do not know whatyou need. If somebody would only pick you up and carry you bodily. Ihardly know what to expect to gain by writing you. My words have noeffect, forgotten as soon as read perhaps.But I must speak and I will. You do not send me a line? How delightedI should be if it bore an unfamiliar postmark.Sincerely yours,Katharine Johnson6Robert, having some perspective on Katharine’s sense of drama, also wroteto invite him up. “But I know it isn’t safe for you to get more than three milesaway from Delmonico’s. The rumor is that you have melted in your laboratory.”7Perhaps Katharine was right, for Tesla was unavailable to the Johnsonseven upon their return. Tesla was also ignoring letters from his sisters fromCroatia, particularly Marica, who, much like Katharine, asked him why hewould not respond. Roentgen rays had been left behind many months ago, but hewas still gaunt from illness and overwork. Now he was in a wireless race againstnewcomers like Marconi. Fearing that his invention would be pirated, Tesla’s labbecame a more mysterious place.November 7, 1896Dear Mr. Tesla,It may seem presumptuous [for] a stranger to address you, but Mrs.Johnson, (my wife) whom you may remember having met, cannot refrainfrom uniting with me in congratulating you on the success of the Buffaloexperiment…If this seems taking too great a liberty with one whom weknow so slightly, I trust you will attribute it to our interest in the progress ofhumanity.Respectively yours,Robert Underwood Johnson8Tesla’s holiday spirit prevailed, and he joined his beloved Johnsons forChristmas dinner, apologizing for being so distant by bringing Mrs. Filipov anexquisite bouquet of flowers.The celebration of the inauguration of the Niagara power station was held atthe Ellicott Club in Buffalo in the midst of winter’s most dangerous month.Fortunately, the weather was permitting, and 350 of the nation’s most prominentbusinessmen made the January trek. Hosted by Morgan’s advance man, FrancisLynde Stetson, a law partner of Grover Cleveland’s, the list of attendees includeda veritable who’s who of commerce. Curiously missing from the event, althoughinvited, were such notables as John Jacob Astor, J. Pierpont Morgan, andThomas Alva Edison.“Mr. Stetson spoke of the pall of smoke hanging over Buffalo and said thatthe day should come when power would come from Niagara and not from smokeand steam…The introduction of Nikola Tesla, the greatest electrician on earth,produced a monstrous ovation. The guests sprang to their feet and wildly wavednapkins and cheered for the famous scientist. It was three or four minutes beforequiet prevailed.”9A constellation of psychological peculiarities accompanied the wizard’slecture. He began in a self-deprecating manner: “I have scarcely had courageenough to address an audience on a few unavoidable occasions…Even now as Ispeak…the fugitive conceptions will vanish, and I shall experience certain wellknown sensations of abandonment, chill and silence. I can see already yourdisappointed countenances and can read in them the painful regret of the mistakeof your choice.”10Why did Tesla “poison the well” with this dreadful opening? A deep senseof inferiority appears evident and yet Tesla was also completely aware that thisdinner was in his honor and was therefore the pinnacle of his life to date—andthrough him an apotheosis for the whole of humanity. Why didn’t he simplycongratulate himself or accept praise well deserved? We see here the firsttangible manifestation of an overpowering feeling of inferiority, a clear-cut self-destructive element in his nature. The dark legacy of a deep-seated repressionflooded through his veins, like a hydra about to annihilate.Nevertheless, it was his inventions that would change an entire world. Itwas the name Nikola Tesla which appeared a dozen times on the patent plaque ofhis new system. It was Nikola Tesla who was praised with “wild enthusiasm” bythe corporate and engineering intellegentsia. And it was Nikola Tesla whochanged, in precise and measurable ways, the very direction humanity wastaking. This was a moment of anointment; through his specific action, theevolution of the race and the texture of an entire planet would be permanentlychanged in a positive way.Yet at this moment of the fulfillment of his greatest wish, a deep neuroticconstellation was also triggered. From the psychoanalytic perspective, Teslacould now repay his family for the death of his brother by symbolically bringingthe brother back to life—and, on the larger scale, give the world a new life, hisAC polyphase system. But the shadow had its hold, and he was simply unable toaccept the happiness of the moment without throwing a monkey wrench into it.His speech went on: “These remarks, gentleman, are not made with the selfishdesire of winning your kindness and indulgence of my shortcomings, but withthe honest intention of offering you an apology for your disappointment…But Iam hopeful that in my formless and incomplete statements…there may besomething of interest…benefiting this unique occasion.”11Tesla’s unconscious plan, the heart and soul of his neurosis, was tocompletely undermine himself by downgrading the Niagara endeavor. It ispossible that Stetson had read the speech on the train ride up to Buffalo andforesaw the tragic consequences, as it appears that he waited for a propitiousmoment to cut the tail end off.Now that Tesla had arrived, he began to see himself as more than a mereinventor. He was a creator, not of great paintings or of great musicalcompositions but of great technologies. Niagara Falls was but a steppingstone tothe larger plan. His speech went on to pay homage to the “philanthropic spirit”of the businessman, and the great contribution of the scientist. Tesla also hailedsuch individuals as arc lighting designer Charles Brush, vacuum tube inventorPhilip Lenard, and railroad engine designer Frank Sprague as well as WilhelmRoentgen, Lord Rayleigh, Elihu Thomson, Thomas Edison, and GeorgeWestinghouse. “All of these men and many more are untiringly at workinvestigating new regions and opening up unsuspected and promising fields.”Among all these many departments of research, there is one which is of thegreatest significance for the comfort and existence, of mankind, and that isthe electrical transmission of power…We have many a monument of pastages exemplif[ying] the greatness of nations, the power of men, the love ofart and religious devotion. But that monument at Niagara has something ofits own, worthy of our scientific age, a true monument of enlightenment andof peace. It signifies the subjugation of natural forces to the service of man,the discontinuance of barbarous methods, the relieving of millions fromwant and suffering…Power is our mainstay, the primary source of ourmany-sided energies.12Stetson saw his moment and returned to the stage to whisper in Tesla’s ear.“I am just informed,” Tesla suddenly announced, “that in three minutes we haveto leave…What can I say? (Cries of ‘No.’)…I can congratulate the courageouspioneers who have embarked in this enterprise and carried it to success.Buffalonians, I would say friends, let me congratulate you on the wonderfulexpanse of possibilities opened and let me wish that in no time distant your citywill be a worthy neighbor of the great cataract which is one of the great wondersof nature.”13 There was a train to catch. The rest of the speech would bepublished in the electrical journals.It was a fortuitous break. For here we see a positive statement concerningthe stupendous achievement at Niagara, and we also see the seeds of a newvision Tesla was planting for the world. He was not a mechanic but an artist.Monetary gain was not an end; in fact, the providing of cheap power for themasses was a goal. Businessmen were not greedy capitalists but noblephilanthropists. This was a utopian dream which perhaps one day might cometrue. And as we shall see, it was also a justification, maybe even arationalization, for some of the audacious ways Tesla chose to spend the“contributions” of the financiers who came to support his Promethean campaign.Playing the “Master Game” Tesla was gambling for all the stakes. His goalwas no less than the ability to transform himself into a deity. This, as O’Neillwrites, was his “superman complex.”We shall not satisfy ourselves simply with improving [present daymethods], we have a greater task to fulfill to evolve means for obtainingenergy from stores which are forever inexhaustible, to perfect methodswhich do not imply consumption and waste of any material whatever…[Ihave] examined for a long time the possibilities of operat[ing] engines onany point of the earth by the energy of the medium [and] am glad to say thatI have devised means which has given me fresh hope that I shall see thefulfillment of one of my fondest dreams; namely, the transmission of powerfrom station to station without the employment of any connecting wire.14Tesla had audaciously proclaimed in the written and published part of hisspeech that this great enterprise which they were about to usher in (and the onewe still use a century later) was already obsolete! He had a better plan. Therewas no need for the millions of telephone poles that were to be erected, no needfor the megatons of copper that would have to go into an endless array ofinterconnected power lines, no need for the enormous production of rubber forinsulation or for the tens of thousands of acres required to support the system,and no need for the workmen who were soon to be hired to maintain theequipment, for all of this, the transmission of electrical power, light, andinformation, could be achieved without wires. No wonder Stetson cut Teslashort.This speech was the pivotal moment in Tesla’s career. He set out full forceto achieve this end. Nothing but death would stop him in his attempts to realizethe dream. 