2CHILDHOOD (1856-74)Now, I must tell you of a strange experience which bore fruit in my laterlife. We had a cold [snap] drier than ever observed before. People walkingin the snow left a luminous trail. [As I stroked] Mačak’s back, [it became] asheet of light and my hand produced a shower of sparks. My fatherremarked, this is nothing but electricity, the same thing you see on the treesin a storm. My mother seemed alarmed. Stop playing with the cat, she said,he might start a fire. I was thinking abstractly. Is nature a cat? If so, whostrokes its back? It can only be God, I concluded.I cannot exaggerate the effect of this marvelous sight on my childishimagination. Day after day I asked myself what is electricity and found noanswer. Eighty years have gone by since and I still ask the same question,unable to answer it.NIKOLA TESLA1Nikola Tesla descended from a well established frontier zadruga whoseoriginal family name had been Draganic.2 By the mid-1700s the clan hadmigrated to Croatia, and the Tesla name arose. It was “a trade name like Smith…or Carpenter,” which described a woodworking ax that had a “broad cuttingblade at right angles to the handle.”3 Supposedly, the Teslas gained the namebecause their teeth resembled this instrument.The inventor’s grandfather, also named Nikola Tesla, was born about 1789and became a sergeant in Napoleon’s Illyrian army during the years 1809-13.Like other Serbs living in Croatia, Nikola Tesla, the elder, was honored byfighting for an emperor who sought to unify the Balkan states and overthrow theoppressive regime of the Austro-Hungarians. He “came from a region known asthe military frontier which stretched from the Adriatic Sea to the plains of theDanube including…the province of Lika [where the inventor was born]. This so-called ‘corpus separatum’ in the Hapsburg monarchy had its own militaryadministration different from the rest of the country, and therefore [they were]not subjects of the feudal lords.”4 Mostly Serbs, these people were warriorswhose responsibility was to protect the territory from the Turks. And in return,unlike the Croats, Serbs were able to own their own land.Shortly after Napoleon’s defeat at Waterloo in 1815, Nikola Tesla marriedAna Kalinic, the daughter of a prominent officer. After the collapse of Illyria, thegrandfather moved to Gospić, where he and his wife could raise a family in acivilized environment.5On February 3, 1819, Milutin Tesla, the inventor’s father, was born. One offive children, Milutin was educated in a German elementary school, the only oneavailable in Gospić. Like his brother Josip, Milutin tried to follow in his father’sfootsteps. In his late teens he enrolled in an Austro-Hungarian military academybut rebelled against the trivialities of regimented life. He was hypersensitive anddropped out after an officer criticized him for not keeping his brass buttonspolished.6Whereas Josip became an officer and later a professor of mathematics, firstin Gospić and then at a military academy in Austria,7 Milutin became politicallyactive, wrote poetry, and entered the priesthood. Influenced by the philosopherVuk Karadjich, Milutin promulgated the “Yugoslav idea” in editorials publishedin the local newspapers under the nom de plume Srbin Pravicich, “Man ofJustice.” Tesla wrote that his father’s “style of writing was much admired…pen[ning] sentences…full of wit and satire.” He called for social equality amongpeoples, the need for compulsory education for children, and the creation ofSerbian schools in Croatia.8Through these articles, Milutin attracted the attention of the intellectualelite. In 1847 he married Djouka Mandić, a daughter from one of the moreprominent Serbian families.9Djouka’s maternal grandfather was Toma Budisavljevic (1777-1840), aregal, white-bearded priest who was decorated with the French Medal of Honorby Napoleon himself in 1811 for providing leadership during the Frenchoccupation of Croatia. Soka Budisavljevic, one of Toma’s seven children,followed the family tradition by marrying a Serbian minister, Nikola Mandić,who himself came from a distinguished clerical and military family. Theirdaughter, Djouka, who was born in 1821, was Tesla’s mother.10Eldest daughter of eight children, Djouka’s duties increased rapidly, for hermother was stricken with failing eyesight and eventually became blind.“My mother…was a truly great woman of rare skill and courage,” Teslawrote. Probably due to the magnitude of her responsibilities, which included, atage sixteen, preparing for burial the bodies of an entire family stricken withcholera, Djouka never learned to read. Instead, she memorized the great epicSerbian poems and also long passages of the Bible.11Tesla could trace his lineage to a segment of the “educated aristocracy” ofthe Serbian community. On both sides of the family and for generations therecould be found clerical and military leaders, many of whom achieved multipledoctorates. One of Djouka’s brothers, Pajo Mandić, was a field marshal in theimperial Austro-Hungarian army. Another Mandić ran an Austrian militaryacademy.12Petar Mandić, a third brother and later favorite uncle of Nikola’s, met withtragedy as a young man when his wife passed away. In 1850, Petar entered theGomirje Monastery, where he rose in the clerical hierarchy to become theregional bishop of Bosnia.13In 1848, through the help of the Mandić name, Milutin Tesla obtained aparish at Senj,14 a northern coastal fortress located just seventy-five miles fromthe Italian port of Trieste. From the stone church, situated high on austere cliffs,Milutin and his new bride could overlook the blue-green Adriatic Sea and themountainous islands of Krk, Cres, and Rab.For eight years the Teslas lived in Senj, where they sired their first threechildren: Dane (pronounced Dah-nay), born in 1849, the first son, and twodaughters, Angelina, born the following year, who would later become thegrandmother to the current honorary head of the Tesla Memorial Society,William Terbo, and Milka, who followed two years later. As with her other twosisters and like her mother, Milka would eventually marry a Serbian Orthodoxpriest.Djouka was proud of her son, Dane, who used to sit with the fishermen onthe shore and bring back stories of great adventure. Like his younger brother,who was yet to be born, Dane was endowed with extraordinary powers of eideticimagery.15Due to a profound sermon on the subject of “labor,” as a result of whichMilutin was awarded a special red sash by the archbishop, the minister waspromoted to a congregation of forty homes in the pastoral farming village ofSmiljan,16 situated only six miles from Gospić. Milutin was returning home,where his father still lived. In 1855, the young minister, his pregnant wife, andhis three children packed their oxcart and made the fifty-mile journey over theVelebit ridge through the Lika valley to their new dwelling.In 1856, Nikola Tesla was born. He was followed three years later byMarica, mother-to-be of Sava Kasonovic, the first Yugoslavian ambassador tothe United States, and the man most responsible for creating the Tesla Museumin Belgrade.Smiljan was an ideal setting for the young boys to grow up in. Nikola,raised in large measure by his two older sisters, appears to have led an Arcadianchildhood, annoying the servants, playing with the local birds and animals on thefarm, and learning inventions from his older brother and mother.Down to the local creek the boys would go to swim or catch frogs in thespring or summer and to build dams in the autumn and early winter in vainattempts to stop the seasonal flooding of the land.17 One of their favoriterecreations was a smooth waterwheel, a device which contained inherentconcepts that would later form the basis of Tesla’s innovative bladeless steamturbines.Other inventions included a cornstalk popgun, which contained principlesthat Tesla later adapted when he fashioned particle-beam weapons, a specialfishing hook for catching frogs, snares for capturing birds, and a parasol used inan unsuccessful attempt to glide off the roof of the barn. Young Niko must havetaken quite a leap, because his fall laid him up for six weeks.18Perhaps the boy’s most ingenious creation was a propeller driven by sixteenMay bugs glued or sewn four abreast onto the wooden blades. “These creatureswere remarkably efficient, for once they were started they had no sense to stopand continued whirling for hours and hours…All went well until a strange boycame to the place. He was the son of a retired officer in the Austrian Army. Thaturchin ate May-bugs alive and enjoyed them as tho [sic] they were the finestblue-point oysters. That disgusting sight terminated my endeavors in thispromising field and I have never since been able to touch a May-bug or anyother insect for that matter.”19Some of the inventor’s earliest memories, when he was three, were recalledwhen he was an octogenarian. Many years before pigeons, Tesla showered hisaffections on the family cat, Mačak, “the fountain of my enjoyment…I wish thatI could give you an adequate idea of the depth of affection which existedbetween me and him.”After dinner, Niko and his cat would rush out of the house and frolic by thechurch. Mačak would “grab me by the trousers. He tried hard to make mebelieve he would bite, but the instant his needle sharp incisors penetrated theclothing, the pressure ceased and their contact with my skin was as gentle andtender as that of a butterfly alighting on a petal.”Tesla liked best to wallow in the grass with Mačak. “We [would] just roll…and roll…in a delirium of delight.”In this peaceful setting, young Niko was introduced to the barnyardanimals. “I would…take one or the other under my arm and hug and pet it,” hewrote, “[especially] the grand resplendent cock who liked me.”20 It was also atthis time that the boy began to study flight, a topic of interest that caused him inlater life to invent a variety of novel flying machines. His relationship with birds,however, was filled with contradictions.My childhood…would have passed blissfully if I did not have a powerfulenemy,…our gander, a monstrous ugly brute, with a neck of an ostrich,mouth of crocodile and a pair of cunning eyes radiating intelligence andunderstanding like the human…One summer day my mother had given me a bath and put me out for asun warming in Adam’s attire. When she stepped in the house, the ganderespied me and charged. The brute knew where it would hurt most andseized me by the nape almost pulling out the remnant of my umbilical cord.My mother, who came in time to prevent further injury, said to me: “Youmust know that you cannot make peace with a gander or a cock whom youhave taunted. They will fight you as long as they live.”21Tesla had run-ins with other animals as well, such as a local wolf, whofortunately turned and ran from him; the family cow, which Tesla rode and onetime fell off of; and the giant ravens, whom he claimed to have snared with hisbare hands by hiding under the bushes and leaping out at them, as a cat would.Tesla also liked to tell the story of his two homely aunts, who often visitedhis home. One, an Aunt Veva, “had two protruding teeth like the tusks of anelephant. She loved me passionately and buried them deep in my cheek inkissing me. I cried out from pain but she thought it was from pleasure and dugthem in still deeper. Nevertheless,” Tesla recalled, “I preferred her to the other…[as] she used to glue her lips to mine and suck and suck until by frantic efforts Imanaged to free myself gasping for breath.”One day when they came over and Tesla was still small enough to be heldin the arms of his mother, “they asked me who was the prettier of the two. Afterexamining their faces intently, I answered thoughtfully, pointing to one of them,‘This here is not as ugly as the other.’”22Tesla inherited his sense of humor from his father, who, for instance, oncecautioned a cross-eyed employee who was chopping wood near the minister andhis son, “For God’s sake…do not strike at what you are looking at but what youexpect to hit.”Father Tesla was known to talk to himself and even carry on conversationswith different tones in his voice, a trait also noted in the inventor, especially inhis later years.23 Milutin also trained his sons in exercises in developing memoryand their intuitive faculties. Able to recite at length works in several languages,he often remarked playfully that if some of the classics were lost he could restorethem. “My father…spoke fluently a great many languages and also ranked highas a mathematician. He was an omnivorous reader and possessed a large libraryfrom which it was my privilege to gather a great deal of information during myyears of life spent at home.”24Texts from this library included works in German by Goethe and Schiller,encyclopedic works in French by D’Alembert, and other classics, probably inEnglish, from the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries.25The inventor’s colorful autobiography remains the primary source ofinformation on his childhood. Although Dane and his parents appearprominently in the work, Tesla’s sisters are barely mentioned. Certainly he lovedthe girls—he exchanged letters with them regularly for the duration of his life—but they seemed not to have overtly influenced his upbringing. It was his motherwhose untiring work habits and proclivity toward invention influenced theinventor-to-be.Whereas Milutin ran the parish and published his articles, Djouka directedthe servants and ran the farm. She had the responsibility of growing the crops,sewing all the clothes, and designing needlework, a practice that made herfamous in the region. Tesla also ascribes his proclivity to invention to hismother; she conceived of many household appliances, including churns, looms,and “all kinds of [kitchen] tools. [My mother] descended from a long line ofinventors.” Starting before dawn, she did not quit work until eleven o’clock atnight.26In 1863 disaster struck the Tesla household.27 Dane, who “was gifted to anextraordinary degree,” was out riding the family horse, which was “of Arabianbreed, possest [sic] of almost human intelligence.” The horse may have been thetype easily spooked. The previous winter, it had thrown Milutin in the middle ofthe forest after an encounter with wolves and had run home, leaving himunconscious. The horse, however, was smart enough to bring the search partyback to the scene of the accident, and thus the father was saved. This animal,which “was cared for and petted by the whole family,” threw the brother as well,but Dane died of the injuries. The family never really recovered. “[Dane’s]premature death left my parents disconsolate…The recollection of hisattainments made every effort of mine seem dull in comparison. Anything I didthat was creditable merely caused my parents to feel their loss more keenly. So Igrew up with little confidence in myself.”28Upset by his brother’s death and the rejection by his parents, particularly hismother, the seven-year-old ran away from home and hid in an “inaccessible”mountain chapel which “was visited only once a year.” By the time he hadreached the place, it was nightfall. There was little the boy could do but force hisway in and spend the night “entombed…It was an awful experience.”29Shortly after this tragedy, Milutin was promoted and given the parish at theornate “onion bulb church” in the town of Gospić.30 The family moved the fewmiles to Gospić, where father Tesla also took a post teaching religion at the localgymnasium (high school).31 Niko was of school age, so he began his formaleducation at this time. However, he had great difficulty adjusting to city life, forhe missed the farm and the idyllic existence he had once enjoyed. “This changeof residence was like a calamity to me. It almost broke my heart to part from ourpigeons, chickens and sheep, and our magnificent flock of geese which used torise to the clouds in the morning and return from the feeding grounds at sundownin battle formation, so perfect that it would have put a squadron of the bestaviators of the present day to shame.”32The boy would wake up in the middle of the night with nightmares ofDane’s death, which he claimed to have witnessed, and of the funeral, whichprobably involved an open casket. “A vivid picture of the scene would thrustitself before my eyes and persist despite all efforts to banish it…To free myselfof these tormenting appearances, I tried to concentrate my mind on somethingelse…[by] continuously [conjuring up] new images…I was opprest [sic] bythoughts of pain in life and death and religious fear…swayed by superstitiousbeliefs and lived in constant dread of the spirit of evil, of ghosts and ogres andother unholy monsters of the dark.”33It was at this time that Tesla began to have what today are known as out-of-body experiences, although he never ascribed anything mystical or paranormalto them. “Blurred [at first]…I would [see]…on my journeys…new places, citiesand countries—live there, meet people and make friendships…and, howeverunbelievable, it is a fact that they were just as dear to me as those in actual lifeand not a bit less intense in their manifestations.”34Tesla stated he had such great powers of eidetic imagery that he sometimesneeded one of his sisters to help him tell which was hallucination and which wasnot. Like Dane, his thoughts were often interrupted with annoying flashes oflight. These psychoneurological disturbances continued throughout his life. Onthe positive side, the problem was also attributed to his inventive bent. He coulduse his powers of visualization to mold his various creations, and even run andmodify them in his mind, before committing them to paper and the materialworld.While still in grade school, Niko had obtained a post at the local library inGospić classifying the various books. But he was forbidden to read at night forfear that his eyes would be strained in dim light, and Milutin “would fly into arage” to stop him.35 Undeterred, Niko would swipe some household candles,seal up the cracks in his room, and continue reading through the night. The bookthat Tesla claimed changed his life was Abafi, a story, translated into Serbian,about the son of Aba, by the Hungarian author Josika. “Up to the age of eight,my character was weak and vacillating…This work somehow awakened mydormant powers of will and I began to practice self-control. At first myresolutions faded like snow in April, but in a little while I conquered myweakness and felt a pleasure I never knew before—that of doing as I willed.”36Thus, by the age of twelve he was successfully experimenting with acts ofself-denial and self-mastery, a paradoxical pattern which played itself outrepeatedly throughout his life. Simultaneously, Tesla began to developpeculiarities, probably stemming from the stress associated with his brother’sdeath, strained relationship with his parents, and denial of his sexual desires.37At this time he became ill and claimed that a heavy dose of Mark Twain’swritings turned his spirit and cured him. “Twenty-five years later, when I metMr. Clemens and we formed a friendship…I told him of the experience and wasamazed to see that a great man of laughter burst into tears.38 During this period Icontracted many strange…habits…I had a violent aversion against the earringsof women but other ornaments, as bracelets, pleased me…The sight of a pearlwould almost give me a fit but I was fascinated with the glitter of…objects withsharp edges…I would not touch the hair of other people except, perhaps, at thepoint of a revolver. I would get a fever by looking at a peach…Even now [at agesixty-one] I am not insensible [sic] to some of these upsetting impulses.”39The youngster, however, also undertook normal boyhood adventures,including a few near-death experiences: on one occasion “by falling headlonginto a huge kettle of boiling milk, just drawn from the paternal herds”;40 onanother occasion nearly drowning after swimming under a raft; and on a thirdoccasion by nearly being swept over a waterfall at one of the nearby dams.These were rather unpleasant experiences, but not as bad, according to theinventor, as the following: “There was a wealthy lady in town who used to cometo the church gorgeously painted up and attired with an enormous train andattendants. One Sunday I had just finished ringing the bell in the belfry andrushed downstairs when this grand dame was sweeping out and I jumped on hertrain [and] tore it. Livid, my father gave me a gentle slap on the cheek, the onlycorporal punishment he ever administered to me but I almost feel it now.”41Niko became ostracized and avoided social interaction. Fortunately, he wasable to redeem himself through his inventive mind. One day, the local firemenbrought out their new engine and started a fire to demonstrate it. To theembarrassment of the officials, the hose, which drew its water from the localriver, would not work. Intuitively, Tesla realized that there was a kink in therigging. Tearing off his Sunday best, he dived into the water, unscrambled theline, and became the hero of the day. This event became a strong inducement forthe boy to continue his interest in invention. Simultaneously, this act symbolizeda new way to obtain love and admiration not only from his parents but also fromsociety.Between the ages ten and fourteen, Niko attended the Real Gymnasium,equivalent to junior high school. (It appears that both his father and uncle taughtthere.) It was a fairly new institution, with a wellequipped physics department. “Iwas interested in electricity almost from the beginning of my educationalcareer,” he wrote. “I read all that I could find on the subject…[and]experimented with batteries and induction coils.”42Tesla also began experimenting with water turbines and motors that utilizedpower derived from differentials in air pressure. His goal, though unattainabledue to a flaw in his logic, was a perpetual-motion machine that would work bymaintaining a steady-state vacuum and harnessing, like a windmill, the rush ofincoming air. This movement, he hoped, would turn a generator endlessly.After seeing a drawing or photograph of Niagara Falls, Tesla announced tohis Uncle Josip that one day he would place a gigantic wheel under the falls andthereby harness it. Most likely, he also visited the magnificent network ofwaterfalls at Plitvice Lakes for additional inspiration, as they were only a day’sjourney away.In 1870, at the age of fourteen, Niko moved from Gospić to Karlovac(Carlstadt), where he saw a locomotive for the first time, to attend the HigherReal Gymnasium, located by a swamp on a tributary of the Sava River nearZagreb. The youth lived with his aunt Stanka, his father’s sister, and herhusband, Colonel Brankovic, “an old war-horse.”43During his stay “at Karlovac, he frequently visited his cousin, Milica Zoric,at the family estate in Tomingaj…[Niko] who would often go there forvacations…[found it to be] a sort of sanctuary…”44At Karlovac he was trained in languages and mathematics. His mostinfluential professor was Martin Sekulic, a physics teacher, who “demonstratedthe principles by apparatus of his own invention. [It was]…a freely rotatablebulb, with tinfoil coatings, which was made to spin rapidly when connected to astatic machine. It is impossible for me to convey an adequate idea of theintensity of feeling I experienced in witnessing his exhibitions of thesemysterious phenomena. Every impression produced a thousand echoes in mymind.”45Through hard work, Tesla condensed the four years of schooling into threeand began to plan a way to approach his father with his controversial decisionnot to enter the ministry but to study engineering instead. “It is not humans that Ilove, but humanity” he tried to tell his father.During his last year at Karlovac, after a day of exploration by a nearbymarsh, he caught a fever which he said was malaria. The seriousness of hiscondition may have been exacerbated by an inadequate diet. “I was fed [by myaunt] like a canary bird…When the Colonel would put something substantial onmy plate she would snatch it away and say excitedly to him: ‘Be careful, Niko isvery delicate.’ I had a voracious appetite and suffered like Tantalus. But I livedin an atmosphere of refinement and artistic taste quite unusual for those timesand conditions.”46Upon graduation, Tesla received notice from his father that he should go ona hunting expedition, as there was an epidemic in town. The youth returned toGospić, anyway. The streets were stacked with corpses, the atmosphere thickwith smoke, for the people mistakenly thought that cholera was beingtransmitted through the air rather than by drinking water. Partly due to hisweakened condition from his earlier illness, Tesla quickly became a victim.Bedridden for nine months, he nearly died. “In one of the sinking spells whichwas thought to be the last, my father rushed into the room…‘Perhaps,’ I said, ‘Imay get well if you will let me study engineering.’ ‘You will go to the besttechnical institution in the world,’ he solemnly replied, and I knew that he meantit.”47The Teslas settled on the Polytechnic School at Graz, Austria, located 175miles to the north. First, however, the boy would have to serve three years in thearmy. With a major war breaking out against the Turks, Milutin directed his sonto pack his gear and go into the hills to avoid the draft. There the youth couldmaintain a low profile and at the same time recover his health. “For most of thisterm I roamed in the mountains, loaded with a hunter’s outfit and a bundle ofbooks, and this contact with nature made me stronger in body as well as inmind…but [my] knowledge of principles was very limited.”48Misguided inventions of this period included a “submarine tube…[able] toconvey letters and packages across the seas…[and] a ring around the equator”for transporting people from one end of the globe to the other.”49 One day, whileplaying with snowballs on the side of a mountain, however, Tesla discovered theconcept of hidden trigger mechanisms able to unleash great reservoirs of energy:“One…found just the right conditions; it rolled until it was a large ball and thenspread out rolling up the snow at the sides as if it were a giant carpet, and thensuddenly it turned into an avalanche…stripping the mountainside clear of snow,trees, soil and everything else it could carry with it.”50But contact with war was unavoidable, and on occasion the youth chancedupon its ravages. Twenty-five years later, he would recall, “I have seen menhung, beaten to death, shot, quartered, stuck on a pointed stick, heads choppedoff and children on a bayonette like quails ‘en broche’ at Delmonico’s.”51Fortunately, Tesla avoided capture, and in 1875 he returned to Gospić. With anew fellowship from the Military Frontier Authority, he began school in Austriathe following semester. 