18HIGH SOCIETY (1894-97)Nikola Tesla is one of the great geniuses and most remarkable men whohave ever had anything to do with electricity…It is as much of an honor topropose him for membership as his membership would be an addition to theclub.LETTER TO THE PLAYERS’ CLUB BY STANFORD WHITE1Commuting to New Jersey was only a temporary solution, and within a fewweeks, Tesla returned to New York, where he secured a laboratory just belowGreenwich Village, near Chinatown, at 46 and 48 Houston Street. Nervous andperpetually on the brink of exhaustion, Tesla began to experiment with thehealing properties of his oscillators as reports began to filter in from around thecountry about its remarkable curative properties. These high-frequency “vitalityboosters” would generate a “universal healing agent” that, when applied, wouldenable the body to “throw off all diseases,” said Dr. F. Finch Strong. “Effectsobtained [included]…increase of strength, appetite and weight, induction ofnatural sleep, and elimination.”2 Other doctors reported the ability to curetuberculosis.“Tesla believes that electricity is the greatest of all doctors and says thatwhen his laboratory was burned, nothing but regular daily applications ofelectricity kept him from sinking into a state of melancholia.”3 “My highfrequencies,” he would say, “produce an anti-germicidal action.” Thus, as part ofhis routine for a day at the lab, the inventor would disrobe, step upon hisapparatus, and turn on the juice. A prickly corona would envelop his body andrestore it to a more pristine condition.Electricity had become the new panacea; it could cure the sick, eradicatethe criminals, and even eliminate recalcitrant undergrowth that “interfere[d] withthe running of trains…Weeding has always been considered very hard work, butwith the aid of the electrical weeder, a man has only to touch a button and theweeds vanish.”4In May 1895, Tesla and the Johnsons attended the dedication ceremony forthe new arch, situated as the gateway, looking south, to Greenwich Village atWashington Square Park and looking north to the beginning of Fifth Avenue.Designed by Stanford White, “the dashing man with the red moustache,” thelofty edifice stood taller and wider than any comparable one erected by themighty ancient Romans or Greeks. Johnson had recited one of his poems inhonor of the original wooden one which had been built in 1889.This was but one more connection between Tesla and the celebratedStanford White, whose many other monuments and buildings were rapidlyreshaping the city into a regal testament to the great and vibrant gay era. Teslawould often run into White at the offices of the Century, where the artist wouldbe commissioned to illustrate their covers, and at meetings involving the NiagaraFalls enterprise at Delmonico’s, the Waldorf, and the theater or the MadisonSquare Garden roof restaurant. Having designed the Players’ Club in Manhattanin 1887, the Tennis Club in Newport, churches, and numerous mansions, Whitewas also an interior decorator. It was said that he knew the color of the boudoirof every woman of note in the city. A trendsetter and sensualist, White becameone of the leading choreographers of the ambience of the percolating metropolis.Good friends with the inventor, White often talked with Tesla about their sharedvision of the future.Tesla had met White in 1891 when the piano virtuoso Ignace Paderewskiplayed the Garden for five breathtaking performances. Edward Dean Adams wasin the midst of courting both men, Tesla for his inventions and White for hisarchitectural prowess, and he wanted to get the two together to discuss the bestway to place Westinghouse’s behemoth electric generators in the upcomingpowerhouse.“My dear Mr. Adams,” White wrote, “I duly received the information of theCataract Construction Company and will pitch in [as soon as possible]…WithMcKim in Chicago and Mead in Canada I am here alone in a sort of maelstromof work…If it were not for the Roof Garden and the ballet girls to cheer me up, Ishould have been dead long ago.”5 By the end of the year, White had sentAdams designs for the proposed buildings. Adams reciprocated by sendingWhite a magnificent text on precious stones and a “stunning gift” (most likely aruby or emerald).6In 1893, Tesla and White crossed paths again, as both were cardinalparticipants in the Chicago World’s Fair. The following year, White, then forty,urged the inventor to become a member of the Players’ Club. “Will you not letme put you up for membership?” he inquired. “It is an inexpensive club and thecharacter of men I think you would like, and I know it would give me thegreatest pleasure to meet you there now and then.”7 Tesla requested that Johnsonbe included for membership, and White agreed.In the heart of winter, in early 1895, White invited Tesla “for a little supper[for] the artist, Ned Abbey, in my room in the Tower,” and Tesla “sharpened hisappetite for the occasion.”8 There, in White’s sanctuary, where one’s mind couldspin a thousand tales, the duo gazed out over the entire city. This momentsymbolized the pinnacle of social achievement, for only the elite could enterWhite’s chamber and only the imagination of the outsiders could discern whatmight transpire. A month later, the inventor reciprocated by asking White, hiswife, Bessie, and their son, Lawrence, to his den.March 2, 1895My dear Tesla,I cannot thank you too much for your kindness in showing all yourwonderful experiments the other day. They made a deep impression on me,as they did everyone, and I am going to see them again someday, if you willlet me.Sincerely yours,Stanford White9A fortnight later, the laboratory was in cinders, but for the electronic savant,it was almost as if he were simply shifting gears. In the spring he received arisqué invitation to White’s outrageous “Girl-in-the-Pie Banquet.” As the storygoes, and there are a number of versions, a dozen scantily clad maidens served atwenty-course meal at the notorious photography studio of Jimmy Breese at 5West Sixteenth Street, the dinners having been shipped from Sherry’s. Attendingthe clandestine affair were other friends of White’s, including artists AugustSaint-Gaudens and Robert Reid, and the inventor Peter Cooper Hewitt. At theculmination of the feast, with the band playing, the young ladies returned in evenmore provocative outfits, singing and wheeling out a pie the size of a smallautomobile. To the tune of “Four and Twenty Blackbirds,” the crust burst openwith the flutter of a flock of canaries, and out popped a topless young woman.Mum was the word until sketchy details were published in the World.10Tesla became privy to the architect’s salacious activities and may havepartaken himself in discreet entanglements, although it is just as likely that hisphobia for germs or monastic inclinations would have inhibited him. Whiteadmired Tesla, as each, in his own way, was a sculptor of the New Age. Meetingoccasionally for a round of pool at the Players’ Club or at a boxing match,perhaps with Twain, at the Garden, Tesla also accompanied White for sailingjaunts out at Southhampton with a dozen members of the clique.On one occasion, White asked Tesla to join him for an outing with Mr.William Astor Chamber, an African explorer. As usual, Tesla was busy at work,but after some tactful prodding, he relented. “I am so delighted that you havedecided to tear yourself away from your laboratory,” White said. “I wouldsooner have you on board than the Emperor of Germany or the Queen ofEngland.”11The year 1895 was a peculiar one. The U.S. government was nearingbankruptcy. In the Panic of 1893 bondholders had wished to secure gold insteadof paper money, and the mint had made good by depleting its reserves. ByJanuary 1895 the United States was within days of being unable to meet itsdebts. Quietly, President Cleveland had asked August Belmont, a wealthy Jewishbusinessman (and backer of the Westinghouse Company), to meet with theEuropean Rothschilds to secure replacement gold reserves. The reality of theday, however, included an unfortunate worldwide wave of anti-Semitism. Onlythe year before, in a famous trial in France, the Jewish captain Alfred Dreyfushad been convicted on a “trumped up charge of treason.” The Rothschilds wereJewish. How would it look to have Jewish financiers bail out an entire nation? Itwas for this reason, according to Morgan biographer George Wheeler, that J.Pierpont Morgan, an upstanding Episcopalian, was brought into the picture.12Morgan, with Belmont’s help, was able to secure $60 million in foreign goldreserves, and the country was saved from insolvency. The incident also markedthe anointment of Morgan as King of Wall Street.In October, a twenty-two-year-old, well-mannered stenographer namedGeorge Scherff walked into Tesla’s laboratory and applied for a job.13 Theinventor reviewed the secretary’s credentials and hired him. Although Scherffknew nothing about electrical engineering, Tesla was impressed with hisdemeanor and intelligence, and within a matter of days the youth was busy atwork transcribing papers and taking over the general management of the office.In the same month, Tesla forwarded a book on Buddhism to Luka, whom hehadn’t seen since the end of the summer. Johnson had traveled with his wife toItaly to receive a decoration from King Humbert for his work on securing a lawfor international copyright and during this period, Tesla had taken some time toattend lectures in Brooklyn on Buddhism by Swami Vivekananda.14. “My dearFriend and faithful stranger,” Johnson wrote back, “I am touched by yourremembrance of me in sending the book…[I’ll] drop into your laboratory someday for old acquaintance’s sake.”15“Glad to know that you are again in town and established in the beautifulJohnson Mansion,” Tesla wrote Mrs. Filipov. “I cannot say as much for mylaboratory which is [still in need of] furnishing.”16Tesla reported the local gossip, such as how Stanford had difficultydeciding between which of two beautiful sisters to spend an evening with; thegist of swami Vivekananda’s lectures on the external nature of God and thetransmigration of souls, and of his progress in netting more millionaires. He wasmeeting with railroad magnate and U.S. senator Chauncey DePew; J. BeavorWebb, a fleet captain, shipbuilder, and Morgan man; Darius Ogden Mills, a stockmarket manipulator and principal in GE; and John Jacob Astor.The wealthiest of the crew, except for Astor, was undoubtedly Mills, whohad made his fortune in San Francisco during the California gold rush. Owner ofthe New York Tribune, and a palace on Fifth Avenue “opposite St. Patrick’sCathedral…of which a Shah of Persia might have been proud,”17 Mills had beenthe second private citizen in history, after J. Pierpont Morgan, to have his abodeilluminated by electricity. As Herbert Satterlee tells the story, Mills was soimpressed with the Edison invention that he insisted on becoming a partner inthe company. “Only if for every share of Edison stock you purchase for yourself,you purchase one for me,” Morgan replied, and Mills agreed.18 Tesla had muchto tell his European traveling friends.At the end of the year, Tesla began to apply more pressure on Edward DeanAdams to influence John Jacob Astor. The Colonel, as he was now called, wasfunding, of all people, mountebank John Worrell Keely. This was a situation thathad to be changed. Keely’s motor hadn’t motored in twenty years; Tesla’s hadturned the world. Martin wrote the inventor of his astonishment at Astor’sgullibility;19 Tesla pressed Astor for a commitment.Attempting, perhaps, to capitalize on the Christmas spirit, Tesla met withAstor and his nautical counselor, J. Beavor Webb, on December 19 and pitchedhis cause. “I am impressed with your endeavor, Mr. Tesla,” Astor commented,“although, as I understand it, your latest inventions are yet to reach the point ofbeing marketed. Nevertheless, I’ll speak to Mr. Adams. By all means, let’s keepthe door open.”Tesla telephoned Adams that afternoon and wrote Astor the following day:My dear Mr. Astor,[Adams] would be only too glad to have you with us. We agreed thatwe would jointly provide from 500-1000 shares of the Parent Company foryourself and Mr. Webb at the price of $95 a share of a par value of $100each.The Parent Company owns my patents…[and rights in foreign anddomestic markets, which I believe] will profoundly affect the present stateof the mechanical and electrical arts, and will create a greater revolution intheir applications than my ideas on the transmission of power which are atpresent, generally adopted.20Christmas was drawing near, and with it the renewal of the Serb’s link tohis adopted American family. The invitation from the Johnsons waswholeheartedly welcomed. “My dear Luka,” Tesla wrote, “I am, as you know,very fond of millionaires, but the inducements you offer are so great that I shallset [them] aside…to partake in the splendid lunch which Mme. Filipov will[prepare]…[For] Christmas, I want to be at home—327 Lexington Avenue—with my friends, my dear friends—the Johnsons. If you will prepare a dinner fora half dozen and invite nobody, it will suit me…We shall talk of bless[ed] peaceand be merry until then.”21Tesla did his best to overlook the erotic tension emanating from Katharineas she directed the servants, with Agnes, to set the dinner table and Tesla talkedshop with Robert and his son, Owen. Katharine could never be part of the bondthat existed between Tesla and Robert. Her heart ached for what it could nothave and yet, simultaneously, was filled with what it now possessed.With Robert out of the room, Katharine was too intense. She claimed atelepathic link to the wizard, her breast palpitated when he was near, hormonesgushed. On one occasion she edged them to the line. He had no choice but towithdraw.On the last day of the year, Stanford dropped off a note. He wanted Tesla tohire a promising lad, the son of his friend Charley Barney, a banker with ties toWhitney and Vanderbilt. “My dear Mr. White,” Tesla wrote back, “I heartilyagree that the young fellow who has two awfully pretty sisters, ought to behelped by all means. Unfortunately,” Tesla continued, he still had theresponsibility of “carrying three superfluous [work]men” who were not reallyworking because of the delay caused by the fire.22As the relationship with the Johnsons became more intimate, there mayhave been rivalries between them over which one had the greater access to“Him.” Tesla wrote after the new year: “My dear Luka, I am glad to know youshall love me, but I am much disappointed to learn that the boil has bothered youso much. I doubt, however, that you are a hero, because heroes do not go to bedon account of a boil.”23Although Katharine had seen Tesla twice in December, it only served toignite her passion even more. Torn between loving a professorial and delightfulgentleman, who could count among his friends Mark Twain, John Muir, RudyardKipling, and Teddy Roosevelt, even if he did suffer from boils, and an exoticinternationally known virtuoso whose singular talents promised to transform anentire world, Katharine wanted “to feel herself en rapport’” with the wizard sothat she could discuss their psychic link:February 12, 1896Dear Mr. Tesla,I have had such a wonderful experience the past three years. So muchof it is already [gone?] that I sometimes fear it will all pass away with meand you of all persons ought to know something of it for you could not failto have a scientific interest in it. I call it thought transference for want of abetter word. Perhaps it is not at all that. I have often wished and meant tospeak to you of this, but when I am with you I never say the things I hadintended to say. I seem to be only capable of one thing. Do come tomorrow.Sincerely yours,Katharine JohnsonStanford may have been able to leave his wife on Long Island while hecourted young starlets at his bachelor pad at Gramercy Park or his private loftatop the Garden Tower, but “dear Mr. Tesla” was cut from different cloth. Hewould often dine with women and tantalize with his eyes, but that would have tobe the extent of a relationship.Apparently Tesla undertook a self-imposed vow of chastity, having beeninfluenced in part by Swami Vivekananda, who preached chastity as the path toself-transformation and enlightenment.Tesla met the Swami on February 13, 1896, at a dinner with SarahBernhardt after one of her performances in the play Iziel. As with the rest of theworld, Tesla had first heard of the Swami during the summer of 1893 when the“Hindoo” gained overnight prominence after speaking at the Congress of WorldReligions, which had been held at the Chicago World’s Fair. As Tesla had beenin Chicago within a month of the talk, it is conceivable that he met or saw theSwami speak at that time.Vivekananda told “the great electrician” about “Vendantic Prâna [life force]and Akâsa [ether], which according to [Tesla], are the only theories modernscience can entertain.”Having studied Madam Blavatsky’s theosophical teachings, Tesla wasalready versed in the idea of Akâsa and the Akâshic Records, which are, inessence, the records of all historical events existing in some vibratory state inthis ether.“The Brahmâ, or Universal Mind,” the Swami continued, “produces Akâsaand Prâna.”Tesla agreed with the essential premise of this Buddhist view, replying thatthe theory could be “proved mathematically by demonstrating that force andmatter are reducible to potential energy,” and then the inventor invited SwamiVivekananda, some of his devotees, and Sarah Bernhardt to his laboratory for thefollowing week to demonstrate through experiments this principle.After Tesla showed the swami some of his “creations,” the swami advisedthat pure creation, in the sense that “something” was born from “nothing” wasnot possible. To Swami Vivekananda, creation was a process of combiningexisting elements into a new synthesis. This idea of the eternal nature ofexistence with no beginning and no ending was appealing to Tesla, and he laterreferred to this and related concepts in some of his writings. Today, this theory incosmology refers to the steady-state theory of eternal creation, which wouldoppose the more generally accepted big-bang theory, which hypothesizes aparticular date for the beginning of time. The reason that the big-bang theory isthe more generally accepted one is because the universe is expanding. Workingbackward, it appears logical that all matter in the universe was together at onetime in one location. Current estimates place the big bang at about 15 billionyears ago.24How Astor could be taken in by Keely, was a mystery to Tesla, for thefinancier declined at this time to partake in the venture. He had taken a month toconsider the proposal:January 18, 1896Dear Mr. Tesla,Your letter offering me some of your oscillator stock received…95seems rather a high price; for though the inventions covered by the stockwill doubtless bring about great changes, they may not pay for some time asyet, and, of course, there are always a good many risks.Wishing the oscillator as much success as I could if financiallyinterested, and hoping soon to be able to use one myself,[I remain] Yours sincerely,John Jacob Astor25Although a rejection, the letter was not a complete denial. It was going totake one or two more go-arounds to land this big fish.The oscillators, for Tesla, of course, were never ends in and of themselves.Tesla’s goal was to send energy into the earth and use it as a conduit to transmitmessages and power. Details of the plan, however, were such a tightly heldsecret that even his workers were not completely confided in. Somewhatsurreptitiously, Tesla took a train to Colorado Springs in late February 1896 tolook over a prospective site for a new laboratory and also to conduct the kinds ofwireless experiments he had wanted to undertake before his laboratory burned tothe ground. Tesla instructed a colleague, perhaps a local engineering professor,to transmit a musical song on an autoharp through Pikes Peak to his receivingequipment, which included another autoharp, attuned to the first, four milesaway, on the other side of the mountain.The experiment was a success; the song “Ben Bolt,” played on one side ofthe mountain, was picked up by means of a resonant earth frequency on theother. Tesla, however, completely confounded the details of the instrumentationinvolved. By implying to the press that the energy utilized derived from the earthand not from one of his oscillators, Tesla also succeeded in generatinghyperbolic headlines as well.Based on this false premise, page 1 of the March 8, 1896, Sunday magazinesection of the World announced not only Tesla’s historic wireless achievementbut also the supposed experimental verification that the earth was imbued with“free energy” of essentially unlimited amounts. By tapping this reservoir, thefuture was clear: “Electricity would be as free as air…The end has come totelegraph, telephone companies…and other monopolies…with a crash.” 