29THE HOUSE OF MORGAN (1901)J. P. Morgan towered above all the Wall Street people like Samson over thePhilistines.NIKOLA TESLA1In May 1900, Gentleman Jim Corbett was KO’d by James Jeffries in achampionship bout held in Coney Island. Tesla, an avid boxing fan, probablyattended. Back at the hotel, a Serbian youth with a familiar name had left amessage. It was Anna’s son, the one and only girl Tesla had ever fallen in lovewith. Through the years they had maintained contact, so Tesla had been notifiedof the boy’s arrival. However, he was not prepared for the career that the lad hadchosen.“I want to be a boxer,” the boy proclaimed.Unnerved by this announcement, Tesla conferred with Stanford, who helpedset up the youth at a boxing school near the Garden. Every so often Tesla wouldgo down to the gym to follow the boy’s progress; finally, it was decided that hewas ready to enter the ring. Stanford had done his best to set up a reasonablematch, but the youth persisted in seeking out a tougher opponent.One blow knocked the boy unconscious, and he died shortly thereafter inthe hospital. “Tesla grieved for him as though he was his own son.”2In the fall of 1900, J. Pierpont Morgan announced the wedding of hisdaughter Louisa to Herbert Satterlee, Morgan’s latter-day biographer. It was amagnificent event with a guest list numbering twenty-four hundred. The Serbianwunderkind felt quite at home at the gala occasion, for many of his friends werethere, including John Jacob and Lady Astor, Mrs. Douglas Robinson and herbrother Teddy Roosevelt (whom Tesla had met at Mrs. Robinson’s MadisonAvenue home in March of 1899), William Rankine, Edward Dean Adams,Darius Ogden Mills, Chauncey DePew, and Stanford White. Other guestsincluded Jacob Schiff, Henry Clay Frick, Grover Cleveland, August Belmont,President William McKinley, and Thomas Edison. Morgan was in anexceedingly good mood and personally greeted each guest with a warmhandshake.3 “I read your article in the Century, Mr. Tesla, and was veryimpressed.”Coincident with Tesla’s impending liaison with the House of Morgan andrecent triumphant return from Colorado Springs, his handwriting and signaturebegan to display a frivolous abundance of ornate embellishments. Althoughthese samples were written in moments of gaiety in letters to the Johnsons,4 theynevertheless reveal a subconscious, qualitative change in his state of mind ascompared to his usual lean, bare-bones handwriting. Graphologists note that “thepaper [is] frequently treated as a substitute object…[Thus] the graphicallyexpansive [writers]…usually are the same who not only dominate the paper, butalso their environment, [just as] the graphically timid ones are also timid in otherrespects.”5One could therefore speculate that Tesla was a very visible character at theaffair. And just as Tesla adorned his signature, he adorned his body, wearing thelatest suits, top hat, cane, and white gloves. He took extreme pride in being theleader of his field and one of the best-dressed men to walk Fifth Avenue. Nowtending toward flamboyance, the inventor began to identify more heartily withthe opulence and power that surrounded him.Twenty-eight-year-old Anne Tracy Morgan, Louisa’s younger sister, wasparticularly taken with the dashing inventor, and they began a friendship.“The Thanksgiving dinner at [Morgan’s home that] year was an unusuallylarge and gay affair with its traditional four varieties of pies,”6 and Tesla wasinvited to the day-after event, held Friday evening.7 Anne may have seen this asan opportunity to extend their friendship; they would come to exchange lettersfor the duration of their lives—but Tesla saw it as a business opportunity. Thewizard brought along fascinating multicolored electric bulbs that emanateddancing spiderwebs of lightning, static-electricity devices that made a person’shair stand on end, and other wireless paraphernalia. The inventor exchangedhellos with J. P. Morgan Jr., now in his early thirties, and gave photographs ofhis work at Colorado Springs to Anne.After dinner, Morgan met Tesla privately in order to discuss a possiblepartnership. The tenor of the times is discussed by Herbert Satterlee, a man whoknew Tesla personally. Having written a virtual daily log of Morgan’s life,Satterlee deliberately deleted any reference to the Morgan-Tesla liaison; but thefollowing paragraph, which coincides precisely with this time, appears to be ajustification for the financier’s decision to back the wireless venture: “The dyingyear saw the completion of many combinations of the smaller companies in thesteel industry…They were all getting rich. Gates was speculating in Wall Street.Judge Moore began to buy fine horses…Conversely, Reid and the othersinvested in large country estates…[And Morgan gambled on an oddballinventor.] Dinners at the Waldorf-Astoria and at Sherry’s and lavishentertainments were the order of the day, and everywhere there was evidence ofrapidly accumulated wealth. They all seemed to think that there was no end toit.”8Known among the clique for his collection of mistresses, Morgan extendedhis passion to amassing an immense hoard of treasures, including ancient coins,precious stones, tapestries, carvings, rare plates, the paintings of the masters,statues, old books, and original manuscripts. Some of his most prizedpossessions included first drafts of Charles Dickens’s novels, a portrait ofNicolaes Ruts by Rembrandt, a number of eleventhcentury Byzantinemedallions, and a Gutenberg Bible.9 Hanging in the study was his latestacquisition, Christopher Columbus by Sebastiano del Piombo.10 It was hungnext to a painting of the Commodore’s threehundred-foot-long yacht, whichMorgan often preferred as a sleeping quarters to his home when it was dockednear Wall Street during the boating season. Tesla eyed the del Piombo in greatadmiration.“Mrs. Robinson has talked me into donating it to the Metropolitan Museum.Naturally I hate to part with it, but you know how persuasive she can be.”The skittish Tesla had seen Morgan at close range before, but never for longperiods in so intimate a way. Plagued from his youth by a series of skinconditions, Morgan’s beet-red and deformed proboscis, retouched out of allofficial photographs, was often swollen and coated with warts. An art dealer,encountering Morgan in a similar circumstance, was quoted as saying:I was unprepared for the meeting…I had heard of a disfigurement, but whatI saw upset me so thoroughly that for a moment I could not utter a word. IfI did not gasp I must have changed colour. Mr. Morgan noticed this, and hissmall, piercing eyes transfixed me with a malicious stare. I sensed that henoticed my feelings of pity, and for some time that seemed centuries, westood opposite each other without saying a word. I could not utter a sound,and when at last I managed to open my mouth I could produce only araucous cough. He grunted.11“I want to know, Mr. Tesla,” Morgan began, eyeing one of the inventor’sColorado photographs, “how you survived among all of this lightning.”“I didn’t,” Tesla said, avoiding a direct stare. “Those are multipleexposures.”“How clever. White tells me you want to build a wireless tower?”“I have perfected an apparatus which permits the transmission of messagesto any distance without wires, making long and expensive cables as a means ofconveying intelligence commercially obsolete. This creation also enables theproduction and manipulation of hundreds of thousands of horsepower, bringinginstruments on any point of the globe into action regardless of their distancefrom the transmitter.”“Instruments?”“Telegraph keys, phones, clocks, remote photography.”“You have a wireless means for transmitting pictures?” Morgan rebounded,raising his eyebrows.“There is nothing novel in telephotography. Edison has been working on itsince Elisha Gray’s device was presented at the 1893 Exposition. My patentssimply usurp the need for using wires.”“Don’t push my tolerance, Mr. Tesla. Your proposal as far as I understandonly deals with telegraphy. I’m a simple man who wants a way to signalincoming steamers during times of fog, to send messages to Europe, maybe getWall Street prices when I’m in England.12 Can you do this? Can you sendwireless messages such long distances?”“Indeed I can, Mr. Morgan.”“And the problem of billing? Wouldn’t anyone with a receiver have freeaccess to this information? I’m not about to subsidize my competitors, or thepublic for that matter.”“I can guarantee absolute privacy for all messages. Broad rights have beensecured which gives me a monopoly in the States and most of Europe.”“How ‘broad’ are your costs?”“Although this work concerns a decade of effort, I know that I am in thepresence of a great philanthropist, and therefore do not hesitate to leave theapportionment of my interest and compensation entirely to your generosity.”“Don’t flatter me, Mr. Tesla. Let’s get down to brass tacks. What will itcost?”“My plan requires two transmitting towers, one to transmit across theAtlantic and the other across the Pacific. The former would require anexpenditure of approximately one hundred thousand dollars, the latter about aquarter of a million.”“Let’s talk about one ocean at a time. What would I get for funding theconstruction of a wireless plant to cross the Atlantic?”“Its working capacity would equal at least four of the present ocean cablesand it would take six to eight months to complete.”13“What about Marconi? Stetson says his costs are one seventh of yourquote.”“That is so. However, there are key elements missing for his success,elements which can only be found in my patents, in apparatus universallyidentified with my name and published in writings dating back to 1890 and1893, when Marconi was still pulling his mother’s apron strings.”“He transmitted fourteen hundred words from ship to shore, right here inNew York during last year’s America’s Cup races. I know, I was there. I saw hisequipment.”“Mere child’s play. He’s using equipment designed by others, and also thewrong frequency. The slightest changes in weather will disrupt his messages, andhe has no device for creating separate channels. I have tested his Hertzianfrequencies at length, Mr. Morgan, and believe there is no commercial viabilityin them whatsoever.”“Why exactly are they so wrong?”“For one example, they do not make use of the natural electrical propertiesof the Earth. The Tesla currents on the other hand are tuned to the frequencies ofour planet. These are continuous waves, not pulsed interruptions. In short, myway is best for transmitting substantive information, and insuring totalprivacy.”14“I have a handful of articles with Marconi’s pictures all over them whichappear to disagree with you. The British Post Office is using the Hertzianmethod.—Here’s a newspaper report I picked up in England from an Admiralwho has used Marconi’s transmitters for distances exceeding 80 miles: ‘Our[ship] movements have been directed with an ease and certainty and carried outwith a confidence which, without this wonderful extension of the range ofsignalling, would have been wholly unattainable. It is a veritable triumph forSignor Marconi.”15 And I have articles which question whether you have eversent messages beyond the confines of your laboratory.”“I see that I have taken up enough of your time,” the inventor said, lookingat his watch. “I thank you very much for your hospitality.”“I’m not saying we can’t do business, Mr. Tesla, but I am going to have tothink this over.”“Very good.”Upon Tesla’s departure, Morgan took out a deck of cards and went throughhis nightly ritual of playing solitaire. Before him was another file on Tesla’spatents, but these were not in wireless: “Mr. Tesla’s discoveries do away with thecarbon filament…[He] explained that by creating an electrostatic field, [coldvacuum] tubes could be hung anywhere in the room. [They can not burn out,because there is no filament to be destroyed]…The estimated manufacture ofincandescent lamps is 50,000 a day…”16December 10, 1900Dear Mr. Morgan,Appreciating the immense value of your time…I have withdrawn moreor less hastily last Friday preferring to make a few condensed statements atlong distance which with a small effort on your part will put you in thepossession of knowledge I have gained only after a long and exhaustivestudy.This lengthy letter, one of the first of many, began with a quote fromProfessor Adolph Slaby of Germany, who referred to Tesla as “the father of thistelegraphy,” and also included quotes from Lord Kelvin and Sir William Crookeson other developments in the field, such as in the construction of his oscillatorfor generating wireless frequencies. The letter also pointed out Tesla’s legalposition, having patented all of the fundamentals of the process, in America,Australia, South Africa, and Europe, and noted the specific flaws of Marconi’ssystem (pointed out above). “Apologizing for this digression…I beg you to bearin mind that my patents in this still virgin field, should you take hold of them…will command a position which, for a number of reasons will be legally strongerthan that held by those of my own discovery in power transmission byalternating currents.”Tesla ended the letter with a rousing challenge: “Permit me to remind youthat had there been only faint-hearted and close-fisted people in the world,nothing great would ever have been done. Rafael could not have created hismarvels, Columbus could not have discovered America, the Atlantic cable couldnot have been laid. You of all should be the man to embark on this enterprise…[which will be] an act of inestimable value to mankind.”17THE FIRST BILLION-DOLLAR TRUSTPerhaps the most outrageous character living in the Waldorf was thecigarchomping robber baron and stock market manipulator, John W. (Beta-Million) Gates, co-owner of the American Steel & Wire Company. During anaverage day, Gates could win or lose $40,000 in a poker game, and on someoccasions, the swing could be ten times that much. Conferring with Henry ClayFrick, another Waldorf occupant and occasional poker companion, Gates helpedchoreograph one of the biggest deals of the century.On December 12, a dinner for the steel magnates was held in honor ofCharles Schwab at the University Club. Sponsored by Schwab’s boss, AndrewCarnegie, the attendees included J. Pierpont Morgan, Edward H. Harriman,August Belmont, Jacob Schiff, John W. Gates, and Carnegie’s first manager,Henry Clay Frick.In an unrehearsed speech after the meal, with Carnegie now absent from themeeting, Schwab expounded, in a clear and forthright manner, on the advantagesof creating a giant steel trust.18 After discussions which lasted until three in themorning, Morgan began to realize the great benefit of Schwab’s plan, and withina few months he finalized the merger, placing Schwab at the head of the new$1.4 billion steel trust, the first company ever to be capitalized at over a billiondollars. Carnegie received approximately $226 million, Frick, $60 million, andRockefeller, for his iron mines, $90 million. Gates, the “gargantuan gambler,”playing it like a poker hand, held out as long as possible, until Morganthreatened to erect a wire company without him, and so he, too, walked awaywith a hefty profit. By March 1901, with the creation of the new corporation,Morgan was able to add steel to his portfolio, which at this time includedelectrical, shipping, mining and power industries as well as telephone, railroad,and insurance conglomerates.19 Political cartoons of the day portrayed him as anAtlas with the earth on his back or as a Goliath towering over less powerfulindividuals, such as the king of England, the German Kaiser, or the president ofthe United States.In reaction to “Morganization,” anarchy started to become a viable politicalalternative. Furthermore, although Morgan stood for strength and stability inbusiness, in reality the creation of U.S. Steel was a magnificent gamble.Carnegie knew this and thus stated: “Pierpont is not an ironmaster. He knowsnothing about the business of making and selling steel. I managed my trade withhim so that I was paid…in bonds, not stocks! He will make a fizzle of thebusiness and default in payments of the interest. I will then foreclose and get myproperties back.”20Schwab also feared this. Within two years, the crafty conciliator hadresigned from the firm to take charge of Bethlehem Steel, a much smaller gemthat was sturdy and profitable.Thus, Morgan was to have his headaches with the steel monopoly partlybecause of market problems and mostly because of labor disputes, particularly astrike which nearly crippled the company. Probably the main reason why U.S.Steel succeeded was because of the invention of the automobile, which createdan enormous new market.To offset the possibility of the great conglomerate folding and to raise thepotential for more revenues, Morgan “enlisted” the famous stock manipulatorJames Keene to create an artificial interest. Keene bought and sold large blocksof U.S. Steel to bogus investors in order to create the illusion of bullishinterest.21 The sham worked, and within a few weeks the New York StockExchange experienced the most active trading days in history. “Big Steel’scommon stock, which had been offered on the market at 38, rose almostimmediately to 55 and Pierpont Morgan became the hero of the financial worldand the principal demon of those who feared and hated monopoly.”22THE TESLA DEALTesla met with Morgan in the midst of these steel negotiations in attempts tosolidify a deal. At the height of Christmas season, he took a cab to Morgan’soffice at 23 Wall Street and handed the financier some of his specifications.“Mr. Morgan, my plan, and my patents, which I offer to you, will commanda position legally stronger than that held by the owners of Bell’s telephone or bythe holders of the patents based upon my discovery in power transmission byalternating current.”“Send me the paper work, and I’ll look it over.”“Sir, in view of the intense activity in this field, it is desireable that I shouldbe placed without delay in a position enabling us to profit from my advancedknowledge.”23Morgan moved over to the window and stared down Wall Street. “If I agreeto help build your station to transmit across the Atlantic, I want it understoodthat I am,”—and then he turned to face the Serb and lowered his voice to barelya whisper—“a silent partner.24 Do you know what that means, Mr. Tesla?”“Yes, sir, I do.”“Good. I want to be frank. I do not have a good impression of you.25 Youabound in controversy, you are boastful, and aside from your deal withWestinghouse, you have yet to show a profit on any other creation. On the otherhand, I appreciate your talents, so let me put my cards on the table. If weproceed, whatever figure we decide upon shall be firm. I will not be bilked forcontinuing research funds.”26“It is not money I seek, although these inventions, in your strong hands,with your consummate knowledge of business, can be worth an incalculableamount. You know the value of scientific advancement and artistic creation.Your terms are mine.”27“That is not good enough. Give me specifics. Give me a figure.”“As I stated at our first meeting, I think a hundred thousand dollars willsuffice for the construction of a ninety-foot-high transatlantic transmitter.”28“Let’s be certain on this. Shall we say one hundred and fifty thousand forthe erection of said transmission tower and a fifty-fifty split on the company’sstock?”29 Morgan reached for his checkbook, wrote out a down payment, andhanded it to the inventor.Overawed at his good fortune and humbled in the presence of the king,Tesla could not stop himself. “Let the control be yours, Mr. Morgan. I insist thatyou take fifty-one percent and I forty-nine.”30“You are a strange man indeed. All right, it’s a deal. After the papers aredrawn up, you may draw on the House of Morgan as the need arises for the fulllimit.”31January 3, 1901My dear Colonel Astor,Hearty wishes for the new Century…Mr. Morgan’s generous backing,for which I shall be grateful all my life, secures me my triumphs in wirelesstelegraphy and telephony, but I am still unable to put my completedinventions [oscillators, fluorescent lights] on the market. I can hardlybelieve that you, my friend since years, should hesitate to join me inintroducing them when I can offer you ten times better returns on yourinvestment than anyone else.Yours sincerely,N. Tesla32The Fine PrintMarch 5, 1901Dear Mr. Tesla,I beg to acknowledge receipt of your letter of the first instant togetherwith assignments of an interest in various patents as shown upon theschedule and assignments handed me therewith and to confirm theunderstanding therein expressed.Very truly yours,J. Pierpont Morgan33The octopus was not content with creating a simple partnership in wireless.Unbeknownst to the inventor, Morgan wanted the lighting concern as well andcontrol of Tesla’s patents. Boldly, these were added to the agreement. Tesla wasnow placed in a difficult situation, since Astor was the principal backer in theother enterprise and the inventor had not planned to include the actual patents aspart of his collateral. “When I received your formal letter,” Tesla wrote threeyears later, “it specified an interest in fifty-one percent in patents on theseinventions. That was different though my share was the same. It was a simplesale. The terms were entirely immaterial to me and I said nothing, for fear ofoffending you. You have repeatedly referred to some stock, and it is justpossible, that a mistake was made.”34 Rather than confronting his newbenefactor head-on, Tesla acquiesced.February 18, 1901Dear Mr. Stedleg [Morgan’s intermediary],…I need scarcely say that I would sign any document approved by Mr.Morgan, but believe that there exists a misunderstanding in regards to mysystem of lighting which was not included in the original proposition.Rather than try to amend the agreement to remove this vital concern, which,in Tesla’s words in the same letter, “will create an industrial revolution,” theinventor pointed out the great advantages of the lighting venture and included apromotional announcement entitled “Tesla’s Artificial Daylight.” He concludedby stating that “besides myself, Col. Astor is interested…[Thus] it will benecessary for me to comply with a formality before making the assignments. Ishall attend to this matter at the earliest possible moment.”35A month before, perhaps in anticipation of this problem, Tesla had appealedonce again to his original benefactor:January 11, 1901My dear Colonel Astor,Since Mr. Adams and his associates are entirely out, I have practicallynobody but you and Mr. Morgan with me…Please let me hear from you…With me you are not with some wild syndicate, but with a man to whomyour name, credit and interest are sacred.36Astor called on the telephone a week later. He told the inventor that he wasconcerned that Tesla did not have fundamental patents and that other inventorsmight have priority, particularly on the wireless enterprise.“Do not be misled by what the papers say, Colonel, I have the controllingrights. Why not come in with Mr. Morgan and myself.”37Astor avoided making any definitive statements, and so Tesla apparentlysimply attached the lighting concern to the wireless deal with the commodore.38Now Morgan controlled the fundamentals behind two completely independentnew industries. Tesla could hardly complain; he had agreed to the proposal. Allhe had to do was succeed with the capital now provided.March 5, 1901Dear Mr. Steele [another Morgan intermediary]:Now that all dangers of conveying a wrong impression to Mr. Morganis removed by his kind acceptance of my proposal, I would call to hisattention that I consider my fundamental patents on methods and apparatusfor the wireless transmission of energy as the most valuable patents ofmodern times and as to my system of lighting, I am convinced that itconstitutes one of the most important advances and is of enormouscommercial value.Yours sincerely,N. Tesla39On the thirteenth of the month, always a favored day for the superstitiouswizard, Tesla paid Westinghouse back a note for $3,045. He was out of debt andon his way.40 