31CLASH OF THE TITANS (1901)Make a Tesla or buy a Tesla coil. I made one, find it…Get books onwireless telegraphy.FROM THE PRIVATE NOTEBOOK OF THOMAS EDISON1Throughout the late spring and summer, Tesla commuted regularly toWardenclyffe, often with a servant of Serbian extraction and a box lunch fromthe Waldorf-Astoria.2 At night he returned to the city, where he could stop in atthe Players’ Club, attend a concert, or dine at Delmonico’s or Sherry’s. In June,having to forgo yet another “Johnson blowout,” he apologized to Robert andOwen for being “unable to meet the lady who inspired the celebrated author ofthe Arrows of the Almighty.”3White was on his yearly fishing vacation in Canada,4 so Tesla was on hisown for the month. Some of the time was spent scouting out possible apartmentsto rent in Shoreham, and George Scherff also had to look for a place. In July thearchitect returned, and talks resumed concerning the construction of the tower.Having recently joined the Automobile Club of America, which had itsheadquarters in Locust Valley and counted Vice President Teddy Rooseveltamong its members,5 White would motor out from the city to the club or to St.James in his new “steam-powered Locomobile,” which required a driver, or onhis own in a fashionable “electric two-seater runabout.”6 With his estate just afew miles from Shoreham, the avid motorist could drive out past the endless flatsof potato fields, along the same road that also led to the site of Wardenclyffe tooversee the work and perhaps take the inventor for a spin. The architect’s sonrecalled: “I remember Tesla well, as he often came down to stay with us on LongIsland. He used to wander around at night in the garden in the moonlight; andwhen my mother asked him why he wasn’t asleep, he replied: ‘I never sleep.’ Ialso remember going to his laboratory [in the city] as a boy, and watching himput several million volts through his body lighting up two Crookes tubes whichhe held in his hand.”7White made Tesla realize that a six-hundred-foot-high transmitter (roughlytwo-thirds the height of the Eiffel Tower) was simply out of the question, soTesla dabbled with harmonic ratios of one-half and one-quarter that size. Withprices so unstable, it would be difficult to calculate the new costs.The Johnsons were as excited as Tesla about the purchase of Wardenclyffe.By July, with the land cleared, it became an opportune moment to visit the site—just a few miles from a lovely beach on the Sound at Wading River and also notfar from Southampton on the Atlantic side. A weekend was set aside to coaxTesla into spending some time swimming. It was a delightful moment, a time toenjoy the salt water and picnic grounds and pose for whimsical photographs oftheir heads placed in the notches of standard billboard pictures of bodies instriped bathing suits or, gaily adorned, sitting in the seats of an imitationautomobile.8In August, with the frame up on the lab and plans for the facing under way,Tesla once again refused a respite in Maine with the Johnsons, writing a teasingletter that as a member of the Four Hundred he could not meet with “peoplewhose fathers have been fruit peddlers and grocers.”9 Perhaps Katharine’s fatherhad been such.10 With the tower now planned as a much larger venture andMorgan delaying payment of promised funds, Tesla pondered a way not only toobtain owed funds but also to get Morgan to increase his investment.The monarch with the bulbous snout returned from Europe on the Fourth ofJuly. Leaving the ocean liner from the stern in order to avoid the throng ofreporters, Morgan ignored his home and moved to the Corsair, his 300-foot-longyacht, living there for the month and staying in Bar Harbor, Maine, through partof August.11 The art connoisseur was pleased with his recent acquisitions ofpaintings, gemstones, and rare manuscripts—he did not shorten his yearlyEuropean excursion on account of a Wall Street crisis—but he was irritable,irrationally perturbed with Harriman, and fearful that the press and public mightthreaten his empire, if not his life. Morgan was an opinionated man, fair-mindedmuch of the time but dangerously stubborn at other times. Having detestedHarriman for outwitting him not once but twice, he must have been furious whenthe world viewed him as the villain who had destabilized the economy becauseof a personal vendetta. A turbulent labor strike by the steel workers added to hisunhappiness and the uncertainty of the times. Headlines such as the followingcaused him to seek armed protection:The Rich Denounced by Socialist LaborThousands at Cooper UnionCheer Wordy Assaults on Capital.J. P. Morgan Accused of Trying to “Trustify the Earth.”“This is the century,” said chairman Lucien Sanial, “in which there isgoing to be social revolution.”Whoop went the audience waving hats and yelling madly for a minuteor so…Charles Knoll [followed and] said he favored the adoption of suchresolutions as would “chill and make to shiver the spinal column of thecapitalists.”12To end the Northern Pacific fiasco, Morgan and Harriman allowed investorsto settle their accounts at $150 a share. The public was not supposed to noticethat this price would yield hefty profits to the giants who had purchased theirstock for one-third less than that price only days earlier. Instead, they wereperceived as noble in their attempts to restore order and sanity to the economy.At first, the government wanted Morgan to return stocks to the original investorsat original prices. In response, Morgan was quoted as saying that it would bequite a feat to “unscramble the eggs and return them to their original hens!”When accused of avoiding his responsibility to society, Morgan responded inanger, “I owe the public nothing.” For this remark, Morgan would beinterrogated by the governmental investigative committees until his dying days,but he weathered the storm easily.Before Morgan left for Maine, he met with the inventor. In a new satchelpurchased for the occasion, Tesla brought his latest patent applications, drawingsof the half-completed laboratory, and schematics for the tower. The secretary at23 Wall Street ushered him in.“Mr. Morgan, you have raised great waves in the industrial world and somehave struck my little boat. Prices have gone up in consequence, twice, perhapsthree times higher than they were and then there were expensive delays, mostlyas a result of activities you excited.”13“We’ve all suffered, Mr. Tesla,” Morgan said, already perturbed and testybecause of the more important imbroglios he was enmeshed in.Tesla pushed on, informing Morgan that he had decided to design a largertower than agreed upon because of Marconi’s piracy. Morgan looked on, at firstin detached amazement, as Tesla continued.“Suppose a plant is constructed capable of sending signals within a givenradius, and consider an extension to twice the distance. The area being then fourtimes as large, the returns will become more valuable. Approximately computed,the average price will be tripled. This means that a plant, with a radius of activitytwice as large, will earn twelve times as much. But it will cost twice as much…The greater the distance the greater the gain until, when the plant can transmitsignals to the uttermost confines of the Earth, its earning power becomes, so tospeak, unlimited.“The way to go, [Mr. Morgan, is] to construct such a plant…It [will] givethe greatest force to my patents and ensure a monopoly…[and] offer[s]possibilities for business on a large, dignified scale commensurate with yourposition in life and mine as a pioneer in this art, who has originated all essentialprinciples.”14“Let me understand you, Mr. Tesla. You have not exploited the lightingenterprise?”“Not yet, sir.”“You have not constructed a transmitting tower, but you have just aboutcompleted the construction of a laboratory?”“Yes.”“You have purchased, is this 200 acres? with an option on 1,600 more, andyou have run out of funds?”“Only temporarily, sir. Once you supply the balance…”“And if I relinquish these funds, will that be enough for the creation of your‘model city’?”“No, as I explained…”“If we double the size of the tower, I will earn twelve times as much. Is thatit?”“Precisely.”“Get out, Mr. Tesla.”“But, sir…,”Raising his voice to a dull roar, Morgan reiterated his command. Quietly,Tesla packed his satchel and slipped away.The inventor was in shock. One can only imagine which favored swearwords Morgan, known “on Wall Street…for his gruffness and bluntexpletives,”15 unfurled upon the prima donna who had pranced into his officewith his fantastic scheme and high and mighty demands. Tesla required a fewdays to regain his composure. Morgan still legitimately owed him a significantamount of funds. The banker was upset, with the problems, with the NorthernPacific, and with the ensuing denigration by the press. It will pass, Teslareasoned. The best thing to do would be to reestablish credibility. He forwardedMorgan his most recent patent assignments and then backed off.16The following week, White telephoned to suggest that they go with a roughstone facing on the laboratory instead of brick, and the inventor agreed. “Pleasemake sure they also put in a fireproof roof,” Tesla told his architect.17“Let’s not rush the tower,” White cautioned. “I’m still calculating figuresfor you.”As White was courting during these very weeks on a daily basis EvelynNesbit and also helping Tesla recalibrate the construction of the complex, it ispossible that the tight-lipped inventor became privy to the architect’s intimateliaison.18In a financial predicament, Tesla reported to White that he had visited the“American Bridge people to ascertain whether they will be able to construct thecupola of my [tower] without much delay. As this item will consume the longesttime, it is necessary to take all the preliminary steps, so that the work may bebegun just as soon as you have passed upon the plans.“I believe that the American Bridge Company is the best concern to dealwith in this matter,” Tesla continued, “but I beg you not to pay any attention tomy suggestion, if you think otherwise. The Bethlehem Steel Company willfurnish the sheets, but I cannot give the order until we have agreed upon alldetails.”19“You must enjoy parting with your money, if you are negotiating withAmerican Bridge,” White responded. “I implore you to let me handle thecontracts. I should have the figures in a few weeks, but I can tell you right now, a300 foot tower is out of the question so we do not know what size the cupolawill be…You must also consider the extra cost for designing the tower so thateach individual strut can be replaced if need be, without toppling the entireedifice.”“[Please understand, Stanford,] I went to the American Bridge Companysimply because of my anxiety to have the work pushed through as fast aspracticable. I am only too glad to follow your advice, and beg you to consideryourself absolutely free in your choice and arrangements regarding this work.”20On Friday, September 6, 1901, President William McKinley journeyed toBuffalo to attend an exposition and see firsthand the remarkable projectinstituted at Niagara. Dwarfed by the colossal Tesla turbines, the president wovehis way back to the train station shaking hands with many of the onlookers.While waiting on the platform, a crazed anarchist lurched forward and fired atpoint-blank range. As McKinley struggled throughout the week at the edge ofdeath, Tesla decided to write to the president’s old-time friend Morgan, sendingthe appeal on the inventor’s favorite day, Friday the thirteenth, the day thepresident died. “McKinley’s passing,” Morgan cried, “is the saddest news I haveever heard.”21Beginning the letter with “I respectfully apologize for disturbing you at atime when your mind must be filled with thoughts of a more serious nature thanusual,” the inventor imprudently reiterated his recent proposal, suggesting that ifMorgan doubled his investment, Tesla would be able to send messages across thePacific as well as the Atlantic, or better yet, if Morgan tripled the amount, thewizard could send messages to any point on the globe, “no matter what thedistance.”22 On the same day, he also wrote to White, who had finally given himprecise figures on his proposed monster-sized tower.My dear Stanford,I have not been half as dumbfounded by the news of the shooting ofthe President as I have by the estimates submitted to you, which, togetherwith your kind letter of yesterday, I received last night. One thing is clearwe cannot build that tower as outlined.I cannot tell you how sorry I am, for my calculations show, that withsuch a structure, I could reach across the Pacific.Tesla told White that because of the limitations on capital, he would have to“fall back on an older design…involving the use of two, and possibly threetowers, but much smaller.” The design would be the same, only the dimensionswould be reduced. “I shall make some calculations,” the inventor concluded, “tosee how far I can reduce the height without impairing materially the efficiency ofthe apparatus, and will communicate with you as soon as practicable.”23The following day, Tesla wrote White again, agreeing to construct a towerwith a height of approximately 150 feet.24 Having worked with figures on atower 600 feet high in May, Tesla probably reduced it by half by the time he sawMorgan in August, and then in half again after White told him that the costs of a300-foot tower were prohibitive. Adding the figure of “1/6th larger,” which hementioned to White in his last letter (or 25 feet), we come to 150 + 25, or 175feet, which was just about the height of the actual tower. (After construction, itwas 187 feet.) However, Tesla also constructed a well beneath the tower, with anaccompanying spiral staircase, which ran ten stories below the ground, to a depthof 120 feet.25 Adding this figure to the total (i.e., 187 + 120), we come to alength of approximately 300 feet, or 1/2 the size of the original plan andtherefore in a harmonic relationship to it. Even this tower, however, was tooexpensive to build, given the cost of the machinery, complex design of thehousing, which required that it be fireproof, and the inflation produced by thecrash.In pondering these letters, it becomes apparent that Tesla was not tooperturbed by the assassination of the president. Self-engulfed, he was utterlyamblyopic when it came to negotiating with Morgan, a man enmeshed in twopotentially epic crises and one history-altering tragedy. Theodore Roosevelt, whonow became president, was not a man who was going to be particularly kind tobig business.To say that Tesla blundered here would be an understatement. His decisionto alter his contract without telling Morgan and his resolution to proceed with thegrand vision when he knew that his funds would be inadequate wereaddlebrained. One suspects that once Tesla had signed a contract with thegreatest financial force on the planet, a deep-seated, subconscious complex wastriggered involving an impatient egomaniacal streak that forced the inventor toplace everything on the line when he should have proceeded in a morediscerning way. Incapable of compromising and at the risk of self-obliteration,Tesla began construction of the tower after his falling out with Morgan. On thepositive side, the inventor knew that he was in a race against pirates and for whathe perceived as the “Holy Grail,” his peerless notch in history. Undaunted, thecourageous inventor moved ahead with the conviction that his path was right andthat he could not fail.Tesla’s seemingly foolhardy decision must be understood in light of the factthat fortunes had already been reaped on his former inventions by Morgan andothers. By 1901, for instance, Morgan’s General Electric Company was actuallyproducing more induction motors than the Westinghouse Corporation; Morganwas involved, along with Westinghouse, in instituting an electric subway systemin the bowels of Manhattan based on Tesla’s polyphase system; and then, ofcourse, there was Niagara Falls. Every home in the world was going to beilluminated by Tesla’s system. The revenues pouring into the electric powercompanies for this new technology were staggering, but Tesla received not acent. One way or another, he felt that Morgan should give him carte blanche.It was a bleak autumn for the inventor when the ground was broken for theeighteen-story edifice, Tesla now naming it his “magnifying transmitter.”Although mostly constructed of wood, “50 tons of iron and steel” were alsoused, along with “50,000 bolts.”26 Taking into account the amount of lumber ittook to line the well and build the staircase down, and the difficulty in digging it,one begins to visualize the enormous expenditures that were going to beinvolved. W. D. Crow stayed in charge of construction. Hoping for the best,Tesla wrote to Katharine on October 13:My dear Mrs. Johnson,13 is my lucky number and so I know you will comply with mywish…[to] come to the Waldorf. And if you do—when I transmit mywireless messages across seas and continents you will get the finest bonnetever made if it breaks me…I have already ordered a simple lunch and you must come en masse.We must exhibit Hobson…I know he likes me better than you.Nikola TeslaElectrical Engineer & Inventor27In November, the inventor tried once again to approach Morgan, setting upa meeting at 23 Wall Street and bringing a succinct list of his latest patentassignments and his report on how the construction was going.Dear Mr. Morgan,Pardon me for trespassing on your valuable time…The practicalsignificance of my system resides in the fact that the effects transmitteddiminishes only in a simple ratio with the distance whereas in all othersystems it is reduced in preportion to the square. To illustrate, if the distancebe increased 100-fold, I get 1/100th of the effect, while under the sameconditions others can obtain at the very best, 1/10,000th of the effect. Thisfeature alone bars all competition.In regard to [other advantages], there are only two ways possible ofeconomically utilizing the energy transmitted…: either storing it in dynamicform as, for instance, the energy of well timed thrusts is stored in apendulum, or by accumulating it in potential form, as for examplecompressed air is stored in a reservoir…My rights [through patents] on bothare fundamental.Referring particularly to telegraphy and telephone, I have still in thepatent office two applications [pending]…In one I describe and claimdiscoveries relating to the transmission of signals through the earth to anydistance no matter how great, and in the other a new principle whichsecures absolute privacy of messages and also enables the simultaneoustransmission of any desired number of messages up to many thousands,through the same channel, be it the earth, or a wire or a cable. On this latterprinciple I have applied for patents in the chief foreign countries. I considerthese inventions of extreme commercial importance.Hoping that I shall be able to satisfy you that your generosity andconfidence in me have not been misplaced,I remain,Yours very respectfully, N. Tesla28Morgan’s continuing mistreatment of the inventor and lack ofacknowledgment of the significance of the plans revealed were almost too muchto bear. Tesla could not face the Johnsons or anybody for Thanksgiving and sodeclined their invitation. “Dear Luka,” Tesla wrote, “Kindly excuse andremember me with kind regards,” signing the letter, “Nikola Faraway.”29NEWFOUNDLANDSignor Marconi had been commuting regularly between England and the Statesthroughout this period, looking for sites to place his wireless stations. Primelocations included the eastern tip of Long Island, Martha’s Vineyard, and CapeCod. “In September 1901, the new equipment, including the immenselypowerful transmitter, was installed at Poldhu [England] and a great 200-footdiameter ring of masts 200-feet high had risen like [a huge] skeleton…on theedge of the cliff. Test transmissions to other Marconi stations, in particular thatat Crookhaven, Ireland, over two hundred miles away, had shown that the wavesdid—at least to this extent—follow the curvature of the Earth and not fly off intospace. Across the Atlantic, at Cape Cod, the twin station was similarly nearingcompletion, and plans were made with quiet optimism for the experiment to takeplace in a few weeks’ time.”30In September, gale-force winds leveled the aerial in Poldu, and inNovember the same thing occurred on the Cape. Tenaciously, Marconi pressedon, gambling with a less powerful but sturdier transmitter in England andabandoning the idea of constructing a twin in the States. Instead, the Italianwould try simply to intercept the signals of the English transmitter by fashioningan aerial with kites, high-altitude weather balloons, and a sensitive coherer as areceiver.On December 6, he landed, with a small crew, in Newfoundland, Canada,and floated up his receiving antenna on a spot designated appropriately as SignalHill. December 12 was chosen as the day for the experiment, the beacon selecteddot dot dot, the Morse code for the letter S.On Friday the thirteenth, during a lull in a miserable storm of hail and rain,three faint taps were heard on his equipment. The world was rocked; GuglielmoMarconi’s name was irrefutably carved into the history books; the age of masscommunication had begun. 