25COLORADO SPRINGS (1899)Nikola Tesla, the Servian scientist, whose electrical discoveries are not ofone nation, but the pride of the world, has taken up his abode in ColoradoSprings…On East Pike’s Peak avenue, with limitless plains stretching to theeastward, and a panorama of mighty mountains sweeping away north andsouth, to the west—Tesla has caused to be constructed a [wireless] stationfor scientific research.DESIRE STANTON, COLORADO SPRINGS, 18991Having been invited to Colorado Springs to build his laboratory byWestinghouse patent attorney Leonard E. Curtis, a longtime adviser and friendthrough the difficult years of the “battle of the currents,” Tesla shipped hisequipment in early spring, 1899. Before he left New York and as the coup degrâce to his relationship with T. C. Martin, Tesla met with competing editorCharles W. Price of Electrical Review and professional photographer DickensonAlley to choreograph a spectacular piece on the wizard’s laboratory. Completewith a rich description of his experiments and a sensational series ofphotographs, the article ran in the March 29, 1899, issue. Starting with a full-length portrait of the inventor grasping a basketball-sized wireless vacuum lampglowing resplendently, the essay went on to describe the evolution of otherinventions, such as his high-tension transformer, which resulted in Tesla’s flat,spiral transmitting coil. This eight-foot transmitter, “easily recognizable by itsspider web appearance” was the first which efficiently enabled the inventor togenerate two individualized vibrations, or tuned circuits, simultaneously and alsoproduce many millions of volts.2 Other prints depicted the flamboyant engineertransmitting high currents through his body to illuminate a variety of vacuumtubes, such as one which he whipped around his head in a multiple exposure.With one hand seeming to pluck a refulgent rod out of the midst of a spiralgalaxy of blurred light and the other grasping a sparking, circular high-tensioncoil, “the operator’s body…[was] charged to a [great] potential.”3Tesla arrived in Colorado Springs on May 18, 1899, after stopping inChicago to display his telautomaton to the Commercial Club, a local electricalsociety. Situated at the very gateway to the Rocky Mountains, at the edge of aplain that stretched for hundreds of miles, the Colorado site would prove anexcellent choice not only for monitoring wireless energy generated from histransmitter but also for studying a common phenomenon in the region, theelectrical storms.Stepping from the station after his weeklong journey, the inventor was metby Curtis and a few dignitaries. A horse and carriage took him to his hotel, theAlta Vista, where he stayed, in room 207.4 Much like his childhood home inSmiljan, the town was situated at the foothills of a mighty chain of mountains.The Rockies arose so suddenly that they looked almost as if they were still beingformed. A view on a clear day stretched virtually to Wyoming to the north andNew Mexico to the south, and it was a common sight to witness lightning stormsin the distance while standing in sunshine.Hoping to be the “Little London” of the West, the people of “the Springs”welcomed the great inventor by honoring him with a banquet, sponsored byCurtis, at the El Paso Club. Well known throughout the region because his ACpower transmission system had been adopted at lead, silver, and gold mines insuch camps as Telluride and Cripple Creek, Tesla was happily met by societypeople, town officials, and the governor.5 A few days later, another notable alsocame to town, Admiral Schley, recently back from his victory in Santiago Bay.The entire town celebrated the hero’s visit.6 No doubt Tesla had easy access tothe admiral, and they probably discussed the potential use of his telautomaton asa weapon to help abolish war.As part of Tesla’s arrangement, with Curtis’s guarantee, the El Paso ElectricCompany provided Tesla with free electrical power to support the great quest.Local contractor Joseph Dozier was introduced to discuss construction of the lab.Off they drove down Pike’s Peak Avenue to what is now the corner of CoyoteStreet, near Prospect Lake, to look the site over. Dozier, it appears, had amystical bent, so discussions drifted to talk of life on other planets and unusualways to search for gold in the nearby hills.7The inventor had traveled west for a variety of reasons, particularly hiswish to experimentally verify that he could transmit light, information, andpower to vast distances by means of wireless. “I wanted to be free of thedisturbing influences in the city which make it very difficult to tune circuits,” theinventor added.8 Tesla had embarked on a massive plan that presupposed anunderstanding of a technology which even challenges today’s comprehension ofpower-distribution systems. Details of the work would remain secret, Tesla noteven revealing his intent to erect the station until almost the day he departed.9From the very first day of his arrival, he announced rather optimistic plans,telling town columnist Mrs. Gilbert McClurg, wife of the secretary of thechamber of commerce, who wrote under the nom de plume Desire Stanton,10“With [my] wireless telegraph oscillator, [I]…could talk to the inhabitants of theplanet Mars…if they know enough to take a message…and will talk to thepeople of the earth, at any distance away, without the assistance of wires.”11There was a popular notion and even astronomical speculation that otherplanets were inhabited and that Mars could be contacted. Growing large fieldswith flora planted in different-colored symbols or creating giant reflectingsurfaces to flicker signals were two other proposals espoused by writers in thetechnical journals that received serious consideration. With Percival Lowell’smagnificent telescope only a few hundred miles away, in Flagstaff, Arizona,reports of Martian activities were a commonplace topic of conversation.With Tesla’s arrival, in Desire’s words, “the day of ‘vril power’ is not fardistant.”“I would light whole cities and give to mere machines all the motions ofintelligence,” said Tesla. “But my first plan is to simply collect experimentaldata, mount instruments and record experiments at different atmospheric levels.”“Tesla’s plan for cabling across the Atlantic is to erect two terminal stations,one in London and one in New York, with the oscillators placed at the top ofhigh towers, communicating thence with great disks suspended in captiveballoons floating 5,000 feet above the earth to catch the strata of rarefied airthrough which electrical waves travel most easily. A message could be flashedinstantly by these lightning rays from the oscillator to the disk in the balloon,and across the thousands of miles of intervening space to the second disk…Mr.Tesla says he is ready to put his wireless system into operation as soon as thepractical details can be arranged.”12His scheme was multifaceted. He could utilize the ionosphere to act as aconduit or a reflector of the electrical waves;13 he could use the intrinsicelectrical impulses of the earth itself, that is, its geomagnetic pulse as a carrierwave, or he could transmit energy in the more conventional wireless way “withone single tuned circuit on the transmitting and receiving end,”14 such as he haddemonstrated in his public lectures in London, Paris, New York, Philadelphia,and St. Louis, that is, by using a resonant tuned circuit, comprising a transmitterand a receiver, an aerial and ground connection, or he could use conventionalcopper lines.15With Colorado Springs six thousand feet above sea level, one of his firstexperiments involved the transmission of very high frequencies up long wires toterminals situated two miles in the sky.16 Helium-filled balloons more than tenfeet long were ordered from a “balloon farm” in Germany run by ProfessorMeyers, and thousands of feet of wire and cable were shipped from the HoustonStreet lab.17Other equipment included batteries, receiving and measuring instruments,switches, transformers, vacuum pumps, and dozens of types of electronic tubesspecially prepared by a Manhattan glassblower. Also, his huge oscillators andgargantuan Tesla coils were shipped, although his novel, flat, spiral transmitter,which appears so prominently in the 1898 photographs of his New Yorklaboratory, was not sent. Louis Uhlman, one of his key engineers, was placed incharge of equipment at Houston Street, with George Scherff business managerand liaison.Tesla’s wireless experimental station was a large barnlike structureapproximately sixty feet wide and eighteen feet high, with a 200-foot-tallbulbous-topped aerial whose height could be adjusted to differing lengths.Situated on East Pike’s Peak Avenue, within walking distance of the center oftown, the building was connected by transmission lines to the El Paso ElectricalStation only “a few miles away,” From their circuit, Tesla was able “to draw,according to necessity, 100 horse-power and more.”18 Guarded by a sign whichread Great Danger, Keep Out, the lab housed a high-frequency transformer and aTesla coil with a diameter of forty-five feet.19 All of his experiments would becarefully recorded in his private Colorado notebook (which was discovered inthe 1950s among his papers at the Belgrade Museum). Theories, experiments,occasional personal observations, and highly technical mathematical equationsfilled the pages.20Tesla stated that his main reason for coming to Colorado “was to produce a[resonant transformer] which would be capable of disturbing the electricalcondition [of part], if not the entire globe…thus enabling me to transmitintelligence to great distances without wire.”21 The plan was actually quitesimple; Tesla assumed that the earth had a resonant frequency and thereforecould be measured and utilized as a gigantic carrier wave to distribute electricalpower. Since the entire earth was in a harmonic relationship with his equipment,Tesla claimed that there would be “no diminution in the intensity of thetransmitted impulses. It is even possible to make the actions increase withdistance from the plant according to an exact mathematical law.”22By regulating the height of the aerial, different wavelengths could becreated which could be measured in terms of their harmonic relationship to thenatural electrical properties of the earth.A few weeks later, Tesla summoned Fritz Lowenstein. Just twenty-fiveyears old and a recent German immigrant, Lowenstein had only been workingfor Tesla for a month. Thus, there was a question about his ability to be reticentabout the work. Nevertheless, he was, as Tesla said, “a man possessed of thehighest technical training”23 and probably the most formally educated of hiscrew.In June, Tesla experimented with a wireless telephone, although it is notknown whether he actually transmitted spoken words.24 To Astor, he wrote, thefollowing year, “There is nothing novel in telephoning without wires to adistance of five or six miles, since this has been done often before…In thisconnection, I have obtained two patents.”25Whether or not Astor was completely aware of Tesla’s plan to leave NewYork to set up an experimental station in Colorado Springs is unknown. Astorhad been in Europe during much of the planning stages of the venture, returningto New York on June 14. Certainly Tesla notified Astor of his plans, but thisauthor suspects that the financier did not find out until after their businessarrangement was solidified. As Astor was expecting progress on the oscillatorsand cold light, he probably had mixed feelings when he contacted Scherff tocheck on Tesla’s progress.26Professor Meyers’s balloons had finally arrived. “They should only beabout two-thirds inflated,” Meyers warned, “as otherwise they may burst whenthey attain some height.”27 “He has also included some kites,” Scherff wrotewith the shipment. The balloons were launched in July, “but they [are] too heavyand do not work well.”28 The scheme, although plausible, was cumbersome, asenergy would have had to be transmitted up a long wire, which weighed downthe balloon (or kite) in a somewhat haphazard fashion, and then another balloonplaced at some distance would be needed to receive the transmission and thensend it down long wires to instruments on the ground. For numerous reasons thisline of investigation was abandoned.Next on the agenda was the measurement of the electrical properties of theearth, monitoring electrical storms, and creating electromagnetic oscillations thatwould be in a harmonic relationship to terrestrial currents.Uppermost in Tesla’s mind was the problem of individualization ofmessages and protected privacy. Therefore, most of his experiments involved thecombination of two or more frequencies and the construction of receivinginstruments tuned to these specific arrangements. “The chief feature of apractical wireless telegraph system,” Tesla told Lowenstein, “is the secrecy,immunity and selectivity of the oscillating and receiving apparatus.” Theinventor thereby set about to create a variety of mechanisms to produce multiplewavelengths. Whereas Marconi and the others were using inefficient Hertzian“pulsed oscillations at very high frequencies,” Tesla worked with “continuous[undamped] oscillations in the low HF [high-frequency] range.”29“Do you understand what we are now trying to achieve?”“Yes, Mr. Tesla,” Lowenstein replied, “I understand that in this inventionthe elements of the receiving apparatus respond to the elements of thetransmitter, and that only the co-action of the responding of all these elements ofthe receiver apparatus make the registering apparatus register.”“Excellent.”30On June 16, Tesla set out to create an efficient ground connection. Hisworkers were instructed to dig a hole twelve feet deep near a water main, and acopper plate twenty feet square was buried there. “Water was kept constantlyflowing upon the ground to moisten it and improve the connection,” but the dryearth and the problem of rock formations interfered with the creation of acompletely efficient setup. Nevertheless, “purposely unsensitive receivinginstruments placed 200 feet from the shop responded when connected to theground. The action of the device was strong even though it was concluded thatthe earth resistance was still too great.”31For the next series of experiments, Lowenstein was in charge of thetransmitter, and Tesla attended to his numerous receivers. Lowenstein recalled,“I handled myself the big transmitter sending two vibrations through the groundby two separate secondary circuits…Mr. Tesla would then…go outside of thebuilding leaving me instructions for continuously switching the oscillator on andoff in certain intervals…I don’t know how far he went, but by the time he cameback again…[in] the afternoon, you may easily build an idea how far Mr. Teslacould have gone at the time I was standing at the switch.”32 In 1916, Tesla statedthat he occasionally conducted experiments as far as ten miles from the station.On the eve of July 4, one of the most stupendous electrical storms everrecorded in the region rocked Pikes Peak. “Observations made last night. Theywere not to be easily forgotten for more than one reason. First of all amagnificent sight was afforded by the extraordinary display of lightning, no lessthan 10,000-12,000 discharges being witnessed inside of two hours…Some…were of a wonderful brilliancy and showed often 10 or twice as manybranches.”33While tracking the storm with his sensitive receiving apparatus, Teslanoticed that even though the storm had passed out of sight, the instruments“began to play periodically.” This was experimental verification of “stationarywaves,” periodic electronic vibrations impressed upon the earth itself. Alsotroughs and nodal points were detected. “It is now certain that they can beproduced with an oscillator,” Tesla wrote in his notebook, and then added inbrackets, “[This is of immense importance.]”34Tesla wrote to his secretary the same day: “Dear Mr. Scherff, I havereceived messages from the clouds 100 miles away.” And two days later: “Wehave just about finished all [the] details; my work is really to begin in earnestright now.”35 