12ELECTRIC SORCERER (1893)It was known that Mr. Tesla, who enjoys a high reputation as an electrician,had been experimenting upon a practically new electric light, but it was notknown outside his laboratory that he had achieved such wonderful resultsor come so near [to] revolutionizing the theory of light. Other electricalexplorers, especially Dr. Hertz and Dr. Lodge, had evolved the theory thatthe phenomena of light were related to the electromagnetic vibrations ofether or air, but it remained for Mr. Tesla to demonstrate this fact and makethe knowledge practically available.NEW YORK RECORDER1Tesla left Philadelphia by rail at the end of February for the National ElectricLight Association convention in St. Louis. Accompanied by T. C. Martin, whowas covering both lectures for Electrical Engineer, they discussed the creation ofa textbook based on the inventor’s collected writings. The first half would bedevoted to the full range of inventions associated with the AC polyphase system,with chapters on motor design, single phase and polyphase circuits, armatures,and transformers; the second half would contain Tesla’s three discourses onhigh-frequency phenomena, which he had presented in New York, London, andPhiladelphia. With an introduction written by Martin and a few miscellaneousarticles at the end, the treatise would run almost five hundred pages. JoshWetzler would be second editor. Publication date was set for the end of the year.Martin had achieved a great coup, solidifying a deal with what many peoplewere saying was “the greatest living electrician.”2 The Inventions, Researchesand Writings of Nikola Tesla would be a landmark text, becoming a virtual biblefor the numerous electricians who read it.On February 28, Tesla arrived in St. Louis, invited to speak by James I.Ayer, general manager of the local Municipal Electric Light & Power Company.The arrival of the inventor created a jolt of excitement. His speech was billed asa replication of the London Lecture. “Over four thousand copies of the journalcontaining [a] biographical sketch were sold upon the streets…somethingunprecedented in the history of electrical journalism.”3 A procession of eightyelectrical utility wagons and metermen carts rolled down Main Street asthousands of people clamored to get tickets for the performance.4At the opening ceremony, both Tesla and Ayer were inducted into theassociation as honorary members;5 afterward, Ayer introduced Tesla to one ofhis engineers, H. P. Broughton, a recent graduate of Cornell University, who wasassigned as an assistant for the duration of the convention.6The chamber allocated proved to be too small, so the event was moved tothe Grand Music Entertainment Hall, a large auditorium with a seating capacityof over four thousand. Tickets were hawked on the steps for anywhere fromthree to five dollars. Yet even this theater proved to be inadequate, for the housewas “crowded to suffocation.”7Mr. Ayer introduced the inventor to the audience “with a sort of reverenceas one who has an almost magic power over the vast hidden secrets of nature”and presented Tesla with “a magnificent floral shield, wrought in whitecarnations and red Beauty roses.”Peering out at the sea of faces, Tesla realized that it would be wise torestrict his lecture to the more “spectacular” experiments. With Broughton, hedisplayed his invention of wireless transmission of electrical energy by lightingup wireless receiving tubes by throwing a switch from the opposite side of theroom.“Of all the many marvelous things we observe,” he said, “to me it seems, avacuum tube excited by an electric impulse from a distant source, bursting forthout of the darkness and illuminating the room with its beautiful light, is as lovelya phenomenon as can greet our eyes.”8“By way of amusement,” Tesla created sheets of electricity between twocondenser plates. He illuminated lightbulbs with and without filaments, ignitedphosphorescent globes that “threw a most dazzling light far beyond that yieldedby any ordinary phosphorescence,” and created strobe effects by whirling tubesthat “look[ed] like white spokes of a wheel of glowing moonbeams.”Tesla then approached his most powerful coil.Noticing Prof. George Forbes in the audience, the engineer from Glasgowwho had so highly recommended his AC system to the Niagara PowerCommission, the inventor bowed in respect. Acknowledging his appreciation,Tesla predicted that ere long great surges of electrical energy based on this workwould soon usher from the great waterfall.These next series of experiments are shown with some reluctance; yetforced thereto by the desire to gratify those who had shown such interestand formed so large an audience, I see I have little choice…Charg[ing] mybody with electricity from an apparatus which I have devised, I can makethe electricity vibrate at the rate of a million times a second. The moleculesof the air are then violently agitated, so violently that they becomeluminous, and streams of light then come out from the hand. In the samemanner I am able to take in the hand a bulb of glass filled with certainsubstances and make them spring into light.9 I had the pleasure ofperforming these very experiments privately before Lord Rayleigh, and Iwill always remember this distinguished scientist trembling in eagernessand excitement when he witnessed them. The appreciation I have receivedfrom such a distinguished scientist as he has repaid me fully for the pains towhich I have worked to achieve these ends.10Tesla thereupon turned to the coil and announced that due to the enormouspotentials about to be generated, he had constructed the machine with hardrubber insulation, “as even dry wood is by far too poor” for protection.11I now approach the free terminal with a metallic object held in my hand,this simply to avoid burns. The sparks cease when the metal…touches thewire. My arm is now traversed by a powerful electric current, vibrating atabout a million times a second. All around me the electrostatic force is felt,and the air molecules and particles of dust flying about are acted upon andare hammering violently against my body. So great is this agitation of theparticles, that when the lights are turned out you may see streams of feeblelight appear on some parts of my body. When such a streamer breaks out, itproduces a sensation like the pricking of a needle. Were the potentialssufficiently high and the frequency low, the skin would probably beruptured under the tremendous strain, and the blood would rush out withgreat force in the form of a fine spray.12Extending his fingers like a preening peacock, the electric sorcerer issuedflames of lightning as if he were Thor himself. “The streamers offer no particularinconvenience,” he assured the audience, “except that in the ends of the fingertips a burning sensation is felt.”With his coil still charged and flames still shooting from his head, a numberof other effects were displayed, including the running of motors by way ofenergy through his body and the lighting of a variety of colorful tubes which theinventor waved about as if they were phosphorescent rapiers. His finale includedthe stretching of a series of long cotton strings across the stage which he zappedwith a pencil-line corona of violet that etched a dazzling glow along its length,illuminating the stage in an eerie iridescence. Shouts of “Bravo” accompaniedthe thunderous applause as “the lecturer bowed again and again” in response.Shimmering from aftereffects and still “emitting ethereal flames and finehalos of splintered light”13 after the lecture, Tesla was called to the lobby so thathe could be greeted by many members of the admiring public. “So great was thedesire…to see Mr. Tesla closer…[that] several hundreds of the leading citizensseized the opportunity and Mr. Tesla’s hand in a very vigorous manner.”14Upon his return to New York, Tesla completed his citizenship requirements.No longer would his patent applications refer to him as “a subject of theEmperor of Austria,” but rather as “a citizen of the United States.” This was aproud moment. He would keep these papers safely stored away in a vault in hisroom for the rest of his life.Now a full “American,” Tesla decided once and for all to take on themighty icon Thomas Edison. Setting up one of his most provocativeexperiments, the upstart attacked head-on Edison’s carbon filament lamp. Takingtwo identical bulbs, one filled with air and the other containing a vacuum, andattaching to it “a current vibrating about one million times a second,” Teslademonstrated that the lamp filled with ordinary air did not glow but the one withthe vacuum glowed brightly. “This showed the great importance of the rarefiedgas in the heating of the conductor”; and furthermore, the new light was cool tothe touch. Brazenly, Tesla could conclude: “In incandescent lighting, a highresistance filament [Edison’s invention] does not at all constitute the reallyessential element of illumination.”15Taking the same two bulbs, Tesla then lowered the frequency, converted itto DC, and showed that the filament in the nonexhausted bulb now began toglow, though not as intensely as the other. He concluded that with DC thefilament was the essential component; with high-frequency AC, the atmospherearound the filament, and thus the vacuum, was paramount. The higher thefrequency, the more efficient the illuminant. In fact, he noted, if DC wereabandoned altogether and extremely high frequencies used, there would be noneed for a filament at all!Edison became perturbed not only because he had sent men to the Orient,Central America, and the Amazon in order to find the perfect filament but alsobecause one or two of them died in the quest.16 That pompous Serb was not onlysaying that AC was intrinsic to the development of any practical lighting system;he was also proclaiming that Edison’s most famous work would eventually befor naught.At a cottage by Edison’s rock-crushing factory in Ogden, New Jersey, alocal newspaper reporter asked the inventor about the “possibility of producinglight from electricity without heat.”17 Edison murmured that this feat had beenachieved, but the reporter pressed him. “I specifically mean with reference todiscoveries in the line taken up by Nikola Tesla.”Edison “rose from his easy chair,” spat another wad of tobacco off theporch, and barked, “It is a problem surrounded by difficulties.”“And what about Tesla?”“He has made no new discovery,” the chief wizard began, “but has shownconsiderable ingenuity in increasing vibrations. He gets his results from theinduction coil and the Geissler tube.”“Do you think it will replace your light bulb?”“Light without heat may be obtained some day, but I do not care toprophesy that it will be a pleasant light. Its biggest trouble is its quality. It is aghastly color, more like the light of lightning bugs than anything else.”Certainly, in this regard, Edison was entirely correct, as even today thelightbulb generates a more pleasant glow than fluorescent tubes. However, asanyone who has changed a lightbulb knows, Edison’s invention is constructed soas to break down within a few months, whereas Teslaic fluorescent lights canlast for years, even decades. Furthermore, according to Tesla’s view, theincandescent lamp created a harsh, bright light from a small central source. Itwas Tesla’s plan to create a pleasing light from a very large, spherical surface.Now, for the first time, Nikola Tesla was sought after by the popular press.Quoted as being “modest” by many interviewers and sometimes selfeffacing,initially Tesla avoided publicity. But his sensational accomplishments had madehim a folk hero, and it was now up to the journalists to find out why.The New York Herald was “the first” newspaper to capitalize on the risingstar. In a long feature article adorned with an etching drawn from an outdatedphotograph, the Herald described the inventor’s demeanor and his heritage anddiscussed the full range of his future plans.“Mr. Tesla is such a hard worker that he has little time for social pleasures,if indeed he has any taste in that direction. He is a bachelor, tall, very spare ofbuild, has dark, deep-set eyes, jet black hair and an expression that suggests atonce the deep thinker. Though polite and even friendly to newspaper men, he hasno desire to exploit himself in print.”Tesla described his parents and schooling, his invention of the rotatingmagnetic field, and also his new system of lighting, which he promised would be“a more practical illuminant than we have at present.” He discussed thepossibility of sending vast amounts of electricity along wires from Niagara Fallsand also the concept of wireless transmission of intelligence and power throughthe earth and air “to any distance.”“From present experimental evidence it can be quite safely concluded thatan attempt to transmit intelligible sounds through the earth from here, forinstance, to the European continent without any cable will succeed beyond adoubt…Such a result…which I have advocated for two years…if achieved,would, of course, be of incalculable value to the world and greatly advance theprogress of the human race.”The Herald ended with a question about how it felt to send hundreds ofthousands of volts through the body, and Tesla replied, “If you are prepared [forthe shock] the effect on the nerves is not nearly as great. Initially, you feel aburn, but beyond that the feeling is scarcely noticeable. I have received currentsas high as 300,000 volts, an amount which, if received in any other way, wouldinstantly kill.”18Although the travel and the lectures were digressions, Tesla accepted theengagements to solidify his place in the history of electrical science. For thecloistered conceptualist, naturally, the accolades and interaction with colleagueswere also inducements. However, it was only now, as he was being sought afterby reporters and the adoring public, that he began to realize, in a conscioussense, his latent desire for recognition. Every hour, every moment, that was notspent working on inventions was time away from his purpose. Even the intervalsspent eating and sleeping delayed progress.Although both his parents had passed away at relatively young ages, therewere other kin whose life span had traversed more than ten decades. Perhaps inpart as a defense, Tesla would exclaim that he expected to attain centenarianstatus. He had come to see the human body in its essence as a machine, one thatcould be efficiently regulated by the stern application of willpower, and so Teslaexerted his will to reduce his sleeping to a minimum and his eating to the barenecessities. Although over six feet tall, he kept his weight to a scant andunvarying 142 pounds.19 The strain was beginning to show, but the Serb was ona quest; his goal was nothing short of saving the whole of humanity through theapplication of his fertile brain.Having transmitted energy by means of wireless from one end of a room toanother, the inventor’s next task was to devise a way to extend this principle togenerate larger amounts of power and to create separate, noninterferingchannels. Tesla began to experiment with more and more powerful oscillators,ones that would not only radiate high-frequency AC but also ones capable ofengendering physical pulsations.“The first gratifying result was obtained in the spring…when I reachedtensions of about 1,000,000 volts with my conical coil. That was not much in thelight of the present art,” Tesla wrote a quarter of a century later, “but it was thenconsidered a feat.”20According to calculations performed by Professor John Tyndall, the Edisonelectric lightbulb had an efficiency of about 5 percent, meaning that 95 percentof the electricity produced went into the production of heat or was simply lost intransit. The gas flame, which was still by far the most common form of artificialluminescence, had an efficiency of “less than one percent.” As Tesla told Martin,if “we were dealing with a corrupt government, such wretched waste would notbe tolerated.” This squander was “on a par with the wanton destruction of wholeforests for the sake of a few sticks of lumber.”“The energy,” as Martin wrote, “is more or less frittered away, just as inJuly the load in an iceman’s cart crumbles and melts…along the street.” Whereas“armies of inventors had flung themselves on the difficulties involved in thesebarbaric losses occurring at every stage,” Tesla had designed an entirely originalseries of inventions which either converted electricity to rotary action orpractically the reverse, that is, converted steam power into electrical energy.21In the first instance, Tesla constructed a high-frequency oscillator whichwas immersed in a vat of oil. By modulating the frequency of an AC, he causedthe oil to flow at varying rates. Just like a waterwheel turning a turbine, this oilcaused a blade to rotate. By increasing the frequency, the flow would change,and the rotation of the turbine would be increased.In the second instance, that is, in the case of the steam generator, Teslacombined into one invention both an engine and a dynamo and created a devicethat was as much as one-fortieth the size of comparable traditional constructions.In the old-fashioned steam engine, the reciprocating back-and-forth piston actionhad to be converted to a rotary effect by way of a crankshaft and flywheel. Thisdevice, in turn, was connected to a turbine, which thereby produced electricity.In the Tesla generator, a steam driven piston attached to a condenser was madeto bob up and down within a magnetic field, cutting the lines of force, therebyproducing a current. This procedure reduced markedly the loss involved inconverting mechanical action to electrical power. There was no flywheel orcrankshaft. Martin eloquently wrote: “We note immediately the absence of allthe governing appliances of the ordinary engine. They are non-existent. Thesteam chest is the engine, bared to the skin like a prize-fighter with every ouncecounting…Denuded in this way of superfluous weight, and driven at highpressure, the engine must have an economy far beyond the common. With anabsence of friction due to the automatic cushioning of the light working parts, itis also practically indestructible. Furthermore, whereas the ordinary steampiston, “weighing, perhaps as much as a thousand pounds,” could only changeits direction, say, ten times per second, the Tesla oscillator could oscillate at “onehundred strokes a second.” Tesla hoped not only to reduce the complexity ofexisting equipment but also to create a current that would “maintain a vibrationwith perfect constancy.” He took out patents on both of these devices in thesummer.22With these various oscillators, Tesla could provide a plethora of effects.Electrically, he could generate precise frequencies that could be used to transmitinformation or electrical energy. When the oscillator was pulsating at thefrequency of light, he could manifest luminescence as well. And mechanicallyhe could create pulsations through metal bars, or pipes, and test for harmonicfrequencies and standing waves. By studying impedance phenomena, he couldtransmit electromagnetic energy through such a conduit and cause a light toilluminate at certain positions along its length but not at others, and if heincreased the vibrations and struck a harmonic frequency, he could get the ironrod to begin to vibrate with such intensity that it would crack itself in two. Thiseffect was equivalent to that produced by Joshua’s horns at Jericho or to thedanger that could be initiated by soldiers marching in lockstep across asuspension bridge. If their beat struck the resonant frequency, the bridge couldsway violently and possibly collapse. Thus, soldiers are trained to break stridewhile walking across bridges to avoid this amazing type of catastrophe.The World’s Columbian ExpositionThe Scene by NightInadequate as words have been found to convey a realizing idea of thebeauty and grandeur of the spectacle which the Exposition offers by day,they are infinitely less capable of affording the slightest conception of thedazzling spectacle which greets the eye of the visitor by night…Indescribable by language are the electric fountains. One of them,called “The Great Geyser,” rises to a height of 150 feet, above a band of“Little Geysers.” [By adding rotating colored lights, the effects created] areso bewildering no eye can find the loveliest, their vagaries of motion soentrancing no heart can keep its steady beating.W. E. Cameron23On May 1, the Chicago World’s Fair, or Columbian Exposition, opened.This auspicious occasion came at a paradoxical time for the country, for on theone hand, the United States had announced that it was the new leader in thecreation and deployment of new technology; on the other hand, it was embroiledin the Panic of 1893. Simultaneously, and for one exceptional time, the world atlarge was experiencing universal peace.The Columbian Exposition covered almost seven hundred acres, had sixtythousand exhibitors and cost $25 million. With 28 million attendees, the ChicagoFair boasted a $2.25 million profit. Whereas the Paris Exposition of 1889 hadthe stupendous 984-foot tall Eiffel Tower, the Chicago Fair boasted the Ferriswheel. Revolving on the largest one-piece axle ever forged, the wheel stood 264feet high and had a seating capacity of over two thousand.24Every day, hundreds of thousands of visitors from every corner of the globestreamed into Chicago’s “White City.” The chief architect, Chicagoan DanielHudson Burnham, along with the other planners, based their design on a city ofwaterways, much like Venice, with a “Court of Honor” centrally placed to housethe major “palaces.” With wooden façades made to resemble marble, thebuildings rivaled even the great stone achievements of the ancient Romans andGreeks. The Manufacturers & Liberal Arts Pavilion, more than twice the size ofthe others, was “by far, the largest building in the world.” Nearly a third of amile long and well over two football fields wide, the structure covered 30.5 acresand had a seating capacity of seventy-five thousand.Abutting Lake Michigan, at the far end above the Court of Honor, withcolumns extended like the arms of a mighty conductor, was the magnificentArch and Peristyle. Designed by head sculptor August Saint-Gaudens, this statuedepicted a general, representing Christopher Columbus, thunderously enteringthe fair with his mighty team of horses. Beneath this quadriga was the great,gilded sixty-five-foot Statue of the Republic, which rose from the main canallike a benevolent behemoth as it blessed not only the Manufacturer’s Pavilionbut also palaces for agriculture (designed by Stanford White), machinery,administration, and electricity.And that was just the Court of Honor.Running perpendicular to the “great quadrangle” for nearly a mile was yetanother opulently lined moat containing most of the other large-scale pavilionsand displays described in one text as “a cacophonous confusion of advancedcultures, converted heathens, peculiar tongues, and queer importations.”25 With afleet of fifty gondolas driven by brand-new electrical engines, visitors couldmotor to any pavilion they wanted.The Electricity Pavilion, adorned with a dozen elegant minarets, four ofwhich rose 169 feet above the hall, was over two football fields in length andnearly half that measure in width. Covering three and one-half acres, this“spacious and stately” structure “befit[ted] the seat of the most novel andbrilliant exhibit of the Columbian Exposition.”The ex-governor of the state of Illinois, William E. Cameron, described thepalace as housing the “magical achievements of Mr. Edison and his brotherwizards.”26 Containing the names of the forefathers of the science above aformidable statue of Benjamin Franklin launching his kite at the main vestibule,Electricity Hall presented a fascinating potpourri of advanced technologies.Foremost among the exhibitors were the megalithic corporations, such asWestinghouse and GE, from America, and the more modest sized AEG, fromGermany. Whereas AEG reproduced some of the AC equipment Brown andDobrowolsky used in their “epoch-making” 108-mile Lauffen-to-Frankfurttransmission, GE presented its own AC system. Westinghouse, having won thebid to light the fair with the only bona fide patents, was in an odd situation.Legally, it should have been able to block the competitors from advertisingpirated apparatus, but pragmaticaly, considering time limitations and otherfactors, such a tactical action was out of the question. In fact, in some ways, theyowed AEG gratitude for pointing the way. Their course was to make it clear thatthere was only one inventor. And so they erected a forty-five-foot highmonument in the center aisle of Electricity Hall which proclaimed the truth tothe world. The testimonial read in big bold letters: Westinghouse Electric &Manufacturing Co. Tesla Polyphase System. And with this method, from anannex of Machinery Hall, Westinghouse illuminated the entire World’s Fair.Having manufactured a quarter of a million Sawyer-Mann stopper lamps for theoccasion, Westinghouse generated three times more electrical energy than wasthen being utilized in the entire city of Chicago.27Not to be eclipsed, GE constructed a scintillating eighty-two-foot highTower of Light in the exact center of Electricity Hall. It comprised eighteenthousand lamps running the full length of the pedestal, capped by a singleenormous Edison lightbulb ignited at the apex.Other features within Electricity Hall included, on the second floor,electrical gadgets to cure all ills, such as charged belts, electrical hairbrushes,and body invigorators, and on the main floor, displays by the most prominentinventors of the day. Elihu Thomson, for instance, unleashed a high-frequencycoil that created sparks five feet long; Alexander Graham Bell unveiled atelephone that could transmit voice via light beams; and Elisha Gray presentedhis teleautography machine, a precursor of today’s fax machine. For a few cents,it would reproduce a person’s signature electronically at a distance.Tom Edison presented his own cornucopia of gadgets, including themultiplex telegraph, the fantastic talking machine known as the phonograph, andhis kinetescope, which for the first time in a public forum displayed “the varyinglabile movements” of a human being in motion.Tesla’s exhibit, which occupied part of the Westinghouse space, featured anumber of his early AC devices, including motors, armatures, and generators,phosphorescent signs of noted electricians, such as Helmholtz, Faraday,Maxwell, Henry, and Franklin, and a sign for his favorite Serbian poet JovanZmaj Jovanovich. Tesla also displayed vacuum tubes illuminated by means ofwireless transmission, his rotating egg of Columbus, sheets of crackling lightcreated by high-frequency discharges between two insulated plates, and otherneon signs reading Westinghouse, and Welcome Electricians. These last twodisplays “produc[ed] the effect of a modified lightning discharge…accompaniedby a similar deafening noise. This was probably one of the most novel attractionsin a sensational way seen in the building, as the noise could be heard anywherewithin Electricity Building and the flash of the miniature lightning was verybrilliant and startling.”28Tesla traveled to Chicago in August not only to visit the fair and present aweek of demonstrations but also to attend the International Electrical Congressthat was held there for that month. “At Electricity Hall, Professor Teslaannounces he will send a current of 100,000 volts through his own body withoutinjury to life, an experiment which seems all the more wonderful when we recallthe fact that the currents made use of for executing murderers at Sing Sing, N.Y.,have never exceeded 2,000 volts. Mr. Tesla also shows a number of otherinteresting experiments, some of which are so marvelous as to be almost beyonddescription.”29On August 25, Nikola Tesla spoke before “one thousand electricalengineers” at the International Electrical Congress in Agriculture Hall. Inattendance was a “galaxy of notables,” including Galileo Ferraris, Sir WilliamPreece, Silvanus Thompson, Elihu Thomson, and honorary chairman HermannLudwig von Helmholtz, whom Tesla also took on a tour of his personal exhibit.“People crowded about the doors and clamored for admittance…The greatmajority of those who came, came with the expectation of seeing Tesla pass acurrent of 250,000 volts through his body…Ten dollars was offered for a singleseat, and offered in vain. Only members of the Electrical Congress, with theirwives, were admitted, and not even they unless they were provided withcredentials.” Before the lecture, a Chicago reporter inquired of ProfessorsWilliam Preece and Silvanus Thompson as to the use of the various equipmentscattered about the hall, but they “gazed in wonder and confessed they could notguess…They [simply] lumped off the whole lot under the generic term of‘Tesla’s animals.’“Presently, white-haired Elisha Gray was seen escorting a tall, gaunt youngman towards the platform. The young man smiled with pleasure but modestlykept his eyes on the floor. His cheeks were hollow, his black eyes sunken…butsparking with animation;…Intense and continuous application of his work hassapped his energy until his friends say he has almost reached the point ofdissolution. A gentleman who dined with him a week ago says he could scarcelymake himself heard across the table, he was so worn out. He has glossy blackhair parted in the middle, a mustache, heavy under his aquiline nose, but fadingto a suggestion at the sides of his mouth…his ears are large and stand out fromhis head. He wore a neat four-button cutaway suit of brownish gray.” Gray saidto a rousing applause: “I give you the Wizard of Physics, Nikola Tesla.”“I have with great reluctance accepted these compliments, because I had noright to interrupt the flow of speech of our chairman,” Tesla began withcharacteristic humor. Appearing somewhat like a resurrected cadaver, Teslaspoke to allay the fears of all those concerned for his frail health. “A number ofscientific men urged [a group of electricians] to deliver a lecture. A great manypromised that they would come, [but] when the programme was sifted down Iwas the only healthy man left…and so I managed to take some of myapparatus…and give you a brief outline of some of my work.”30Tesla proceeded to display his new steam generators and mechanicaloscillators, some of which were so compact “that one could readily carry them inthe crown of one’s hat.” He told the audience that his goals were multifaceted.Such a device could, among other things, be used to run motors with perfectsynchrony, or electric clocks. He had also produced a continuous-wave radiotransmitter, although no one at the time understood the complete ramifications ofthe equipment. Nevertheless, when the resonant frequency was reached, wirelesslights would again illuminate, and in that way intelligence was wirelesslytransmitted.One of Tesla’s more unusual exhibits, which was similar to his egg ofColumbus, was another ring which displayed not only the principles of therotating magnetic field but also his theory of planetary motion.In this experiment one large and several small brass balls were usuallyemployed. When the field was energized all the balls would be set spinning,the large ones remaining in the center while the small ones revolved aroundit, like moons about a planet, gradually receding until they reached the outerguard and raced along the same.But the demonstration which most impres[sed] the audiences was thesimultaneous operation of numerous balls, pivoted discs and other devicesplaced in all sorts of positions and at considerable distances from therotating field. When the currents were turned on and the whole animatedwith motion, it presented an unforgettable spectacle. Mr. Tesla had manyvacuum bulbs in which small light metal discs were pivotally arranged onjewels and these would spin anywhere in the hall when the iron ring wasenergized.31Tesla returned to New York exhausted but exhilarated. 