43THE ROARING TWENTIES (1918-27)I have been feeding pigeons, thousands of them for years. But there wasone, a beautiful bird, pure white with light grey tips on its wings; that onewas different. It was a female. I had only to wish and call her and shewould come flying to me.I loved that pigeon as a man loves a women, and she loved me. As longas I had her, there was purpose to my life.NIKOLA TESLA1In November 1918, Germany signed the armistice ending the Great War.Shortly thereafter, Kaiser Wilhelm II abdicated his throne and fled to Holland;his country had incurred a debt of $33 billion to the Allies. The new heroes ofthe age were aeronauts, like Eddie Rickenbacker, hailed as the top ace withtwenty-six downed Messerschmitts. Humans were leaping continents thefollowing year, with the British propelling the sturdy Dirigible R-34 fromEdinburgh to Roosevelt Field and back to London in seven days. This first-everround-trip transatlantic airship journey was commanded by Maj. G. H. Scott ofthe Royal Air Force, complete with his thirty-man crew and Willy Ballantyne, atwenty-three-year-old stowaway. The same year, with Tesla, Thomson, Marconi,and Pickering bickering about Martian signals and lunar plant life, RobertGoddard, military rocket expert and physics professor from Clark University,proposed a seemingly outrageous trajectory for sending a man to the moon. EvenTesla thought the scheme far-fetched, for the known fuels of the day did not havesufficient “explosive power,” and even if they did, he doubted that a “rocket…would operate at 459 degrees below zero—the temperature of interplanetaryspace.”2In 1920, William Jennings Bryan led the campaign to institute Prohibition;Anne Morgan and her suffragettes gained the right to vote for women; and fourmotion-picture celebrities, Charlie Chaplin, D. W. Griffith, Mary Pickford, andher new husband, Douglas Fairbanks, formed United Artists. As the war faded,sports figures became the new heroes, the young Red Sox pitcher Babe Ruthmaking the papers after being sold to the Yankees for a whopping $125,000.Hugo Gernsback tried to put Tesla on the masthead of yet another futuristicElectrical Experimenter spin-off, but his financial offer was, in Tesla’s eyes,puny, and he rejected it. Feeling that he had been underpaid for hisautobiography, Tesla replied, “I appreciated your unusual intelligence andenterprise, but the trouble with you seems to be that you are thinking only of H.Gernsback first of all, once more, and then again.”3 Gernsback, however, neverwavered in his praise of Tesla and continued to feature Teslaic articles anddrawings in his various periodicals. On the topic of thought transference, as amaterialist, Tesla completely rejected any concept related to ESP; however, hedid think that it was possible to read out the thoughts of another person’s brainby attaching TV equipment to the rods and cones of the retina, which was, in hisview, the arena of cognitive processing.4 This invention, called the “thoughtrecorder,” provided the basis for a number of Frank Paul spectaculars, such ashis October 1929 Amazing Stories cover depicting two humans wearing thought-reading helmets.REVISITING WARDENCLYFFEThe 1920s marked a period of turmoil and revolution. Homeostasis had yetto settle in. With the Johnsons still in Europe, Tesla was forced to face thepainful Wardenclyffe fiasco once again without the solace of his close friends.With his Manhattan attorney, William Rasquin Jr., Tesla took the train out to theSupreme Court of Suffolk County to battle agents for the George C. Boldt estateand the Waldorf-Astoria, who were trying, once again, to recoup approximately$20,000 in unpaid rent. The referee was the Honorable Rowland Miles.The case dragged on for months and covered over three hundred pages oftestimony. Tesla testified that in March 1915 he had put up Wardenclyffe ascollateral against past monies owed to Francis S. Hutchins, personal counsel forGeorge C. Boldt and the Waldorf-Astoria. Hutchins and the hotel interpreted thetransaction as an outright transference of the deed. Since the hotel now thoughtthat they owned the property, they felt that it was their right to resell the land andtake down the tower to sell the lumber and other parts for salvage.When Tesla took the stand, he was asked if he remembered the day hedelivered the deed.“I distinctly remember [telling] Mr. Hutchins that the plant had cost anenormous amount of money in comparison with which this indebtedness was atrifle, and that I expected great realizations from the plant, $30,000 a day, if theplant had been completed.” Tesla assumed that if he paid the $20,000 owed, hewould have gotten back the plant. He further assumed that the Waldorf-Astoriawould take good care of the property because of its enormous value. They didnot take good care, however. Vandals broke in and stole equipment, such asexpensive lathes.“Can you describe the structures and any other equipment that was in thelaboratory,” Tesla’s counsel asked. The plaintiffs attorney tried to block thetestimony, but the judge allowed Tesla to begin.The inventor sat back, removed his white gloves, placed them on thepodium, and proceeded. “The building formed a square about one hundred feetby one hundred. It was divided into four compartments, with an office and amachine shop and two very large areas.” “The engines were located on one side,and the boilers on the other side, and in the center, the chimney rose.”When asked how big the boilers were, Tesla said that there were two 300-horsepower boilers surrounded by two 16,000 gallon water tanks that utilized theambient heat for hot water. “To the right of the boiler plant were the engines.One was a 400-horsepower Westinghouse engine, and a 35-kilowatt outfitwhich, with the engine, drove the dynamo for lighting and furnished otherconveniences.” There were high-and low-pressure compressors, various kinds ofwater pumps, and a main switchboard for operating everything.“Towards the road, on the railroad side, was the machine shop. Thatcompartment was one hundred by thirty-five feet with a door in the middle and itcontained I think eight lathes. Then there was a milling machine, a planer andshaper, a spliner, three drills, four motors, a grinder and a Blacksmith’s forge.“Now, in the compartment opposite, which was the same size as themachine shop, there was contained the real expensive apparatus. There were twospecial glass cases where I kept historical apparatus which was exhibited anddescribed in my lectures and scientific articles. There were at least a thousandbulbs and tubes each of which represented a certain phase of scientificdevelopment. Then there was also five large tanks, four of which containedspecial transformers created so as to transform the energy for the plant. Theywere about, I should say, seven feet high and about five by five feet each, andwere filled with special oil which we call transformer oil, to stand an electrictension of 60,000 volts. Then there was a fifth similar tank for special purposes.And then there were my electric generating apparatus. That apparatus wasprecious, because it could flash a message across the Atlantic, and yet it wasbuilt in 1894 or 1895.”The court sat humbled. The opposing attorney tried to block Tesla’s furthertestimony, but the judge allowed the inventor to continue.“Beyond the door of this compartment,” Tesla continued, “there were to bethe condensers, what we call electric condensers, which would store the energyand then discharge and make it go around the world. Some of these condenserswere in an advanced state of construction, and others were not. Then there was avery expensive piece of apparatus that the Westinghouse Company furnished me,only two of this kind have ever been constructed. It was developed by myselfwith their engineers. That was a steel tank which contained a very elaborateassemblage of coils, an elaborate regulating apparatus, and it was intended togive every imaginable regulation that I wanted in my measurements and controlof energy.”Tesla also described “a special 100-horsepower motor equipped withelaborate devices for rectifying the alternating currents and sending them intothe condensers. On this apparatus alone I spent thousands of dollars. Then alongthe center of the room I had a very precious piece of apparatus.” It was Tesla’sremote-controlled boat.“Was that all there was, generally speaking?”“Oh, no, nowhere near,” Tesla replied. The inventor then proceeded todescribe a series of closets that housed numerous other appliances, “eachrepresenting a different phase” of his work. There was the testing room, whichincluded precious instruments given to him by Lord Kelvin, a breach, and otherinstruments such as voltmeters, wattmeters, ampere meters. In that small spacethere was a fortune.The opposing attorney asked that the statement “there was a fortune” betaken out.“Yes, strike it out,” said the judge.Tesla then went on to discuss the tower. After describing the structure abovethe ground, he described the shaft. “You see,” Tesla said, “the underground workwas one of the most expensive parts of the tower.” He was referring particularlyto special apparatus he invented for “gripping the earth.”“The shaft, your Honor,” was first covered with timber and the inside withsteel. In the center of this there was a winding stairs going down and in thecenter of the stairs there was a big shaft again through which the current was topass, and this shaft was so figured in order to tell exactly where the nodal pointis, so that I could calculate exactly the size of the earth or the diameter of theearth and measure it exactly within four feet with that machine.“And then the real expensive work was to connect that central part with theearth, and there I had special machines rigged up which would push the ironpipes, one length after another, and I pushed, I think sixteen of them, threehundred feet. The current through these pipes [was to] take hold of the earth.Now that was a very expensive part of the work, but it does not show on thetower, but it belongs to the tower.“The primary purpose of the tower, your Honor, was to telephone, to sendthe human voice and likeness around the globe. That was my discovery, that Iannounced in 1893, and now all the wireless plants are doing that. There is noother system being used. Then, the idea was to reproduce this apparatus andconnect it just with a central station and telephone office, so that you may pickup your telephone and if you wanted to talk to a telephone subscriber inAustralia you would simply call up that plant and that plant would connect youimmediately. And I had contemplated to have press messages, stock quotations,pictures for the press and the reproductions of signatures, checks and everythingtransmitted from there, but…“And then I was going to interest people in a larger project and the Niagarapeople had given me 10,000-horse power…”“Did you have any conversation with Mr. Hutchins or anybody representingthe plaintiffs concerning the taking down of the tower or anything like that?”asked the judge.“No, sir. It came like a bolt from the blue sky.”As the deed had been transferred in a legal manner with Tesla’s fullcompliance, Judge Miles ruled in favor of the hotel. The inventor’s lawyercountered, arguing that the Waldorf-Astoria sold equipment which they did notaccount for and destroyed a property worth $350,000 to try and recoup the$20,000 owed. “The property despoiled exceeded the value of the mortgage, andtherefore the plaintiffs [the hotel management] should have been held to accountto defendant Tesla.” Precedent cases were cited.The Waldorf-Astoria, however, had the last word. “As a solace to the wildhopes of this dreamy inventor,” their lawyer wrote, “if prior to that time heshould grasp in his fingers any one of the castles in Spain which always werefloating about in his dreams, and had he paid the board bills which he owed, thiswild scrubby woodland, including the Tower of Babel thereon, would cheerfullyhave been reconveyed to him. By no fair inference or construction can [Tesla’scounterclaim make void this judgment]. It was merely a sop to the vanity of abrilliant but unpractical mind. The judgement should be affirmed with costs.”5In the summer of 1922, Robert Johnson and his ailing “ambassadress”6 returnedto the States from Italy. They arrived in time to attend Paderewski’s comebackpiano concerto with their elusive friend at Carnegie Hall in November.Robert’s autobiography, Remembered Yesterdays, which was justcompleted, highlighted not only a memorable meeting between Tesla andPaderewski in the late 1890s but also the virtuoso’s 1919 stint as president ofPoland. As the pianist had held office for only ten months, Tesla was moved tojest that it was “just long enough to gain publicity for his next tour.”“That’s a terrible thing to say, Mr. Tesla,” Kate sparkled as they steppedinto the limousine that was to take the trio to the opening. Dressed in blackcapes, canes, and silk high hats, the tall “angular” gentlemen struck a smart pairas they accompanied the suddenly recovering and radiant Mrs. Filipov.“Seeing Paderewski again is like falling in love all over,” she said betweenher men. Tesla looked down and noticed the sorrow that lay hidden beneath herbrow. His was apparent to her as well. Robert’s upper lip held them steady.The Bolsheviks were taking over in Russia; Communist and anarchistuprisings reverberated throughout the world. In the United States there were raceriots in Chicago, Negro lynchings in Minnesota, a suspicious explosion outsidethe J. P. Morgan Building, in New York, killing thirty people and wounding threehundred others, and forty thousand Klansmen marching on Washington. It wastime to do something to stop the tide, so Attorney General A. M. Palmer roundedup three hundred Communists and sixty-seven anarchists in thirty-three cities.The last group arrested faced deportation for bombing out the windows andhomes of Palmer and also Assistant Secretary of the Navy Franklin Roosevelt.Eugene V. Debs, still in prison for violating the Espionage Act, was nominatedonce again to run for president by the Socialist party; Woodrow Wilson receivedthe Nobel Peace Prize.The election of 1920 was the first to be broadcast by radio to a nationalaudience; Lee De Forest announced the wrong winner four years earlier to amuch smaller crowd. With his running mate Calvin Coolidge, Warren Hardingtrounced Democratic contender James Cox and vice presidential hopefulFranklin Roosevelt.By this time, RCA was a megacorporation, writing million-dollar checks toJohn Hays Hammond Jr. and Edwin Armstrong. Having uncovered a great newmarket, RCA had increased its radio audience in 1924 to 5 million listeners.Profits were made not only in selling air space to advertisers but also in sellingthe radios themselves. By 1928 national broadcasts would link all forty-eightstates, and soon after, regular shows featuring Buck and Will Rogers, Amos ‘n’Andy, Burns and Allen, the Shadow, Stoopnagle and Budd, and Jack Bennywould become daily fare. Such advertisers as Lucky Strike, Maxwell House,Canada Dry, Chesterfield, and Pontiac would soon insinuate themselves into themass psyche. Tesla would say that he cared not to listen to the radio because hefound it “too distracting.”Other milestones during this period included the anointment of the“Manassa Mauler,” Jack Dempsey, as world heavyweight champion, a soaringstock market, and a number of key trials, most notably, Sacco and Vanzetti’s,alleged anarchists accused of murder, the Scopes monkey trial, and the $500 fineand ten-day incarceration of Mae West for lewd improvisations during her hitBroadway play Sex. Newest crazes included speakeasies, Al Capone, flapperdresses, and such dances as the Charleston, waltzing till you dropped, and theShimmy. Although the radio was czar at home, for a night on the town, silentmovies were king. Deaths during the Roaring Twenties included T. C. Martin,Jacob Schiff, Henry Clay Frick, Andrew Carnegie, Enrico Caruso, WilliamRoentgen, Alexander Graham Bell, Woodrow Wilson, Warren Harding, and thethirty-one-year-old heartthrob Rudolf Valentino, who, along with Harry Houdini,died of a ruptured appendix, Vladimir Lenin, Sarah Bernhardt, Princess Lwoff-Parlaghy, and Katharine Johnson, who passed on during autumn 1925.7October 15, 1925Dear Tesla,It was Mrs. Johnson’s injunction that last night of her life that I shouldkeep in touch with Tesla. This is a pretty hard thing to do, but it will not bemy fault if it is not done.Yours faithfully,Luka8THE MYSTERIOUS MR. BETTINIThroughout the world, wireless inventors were becoming a preciouscommodity. In Italy, Mussolini “adroitly” redirected the Italian senate’s Fascistsalute to Guglielmo Marconi for having established a national broadcastingsystem.9 A few years later, Il Duce approached Jack Hammond to institute a“foolproof secret radio system,” which, to Jack’s later revulsion, became a toolfor killing anti-Fascists.10In the Soviet Union, Lenin contacted Tesla to ask him to come over to hiscountry to institute his AC polyphase and “regional power-distributionstations.”11 Sending emissaries to lure the Serbian nobleman. Tesla becameenmeshed in a shady organization known as the Friends of Soviet Russia. Withover 5 million people dying there of famine in 1922, the celebrated inventor hadbeen approached by Ivan Mashevkief, of the Russian Workers Club ofManhattan, and by Elsie Blanc, a Communist leader from Massachusetts, tospeak at “monster mass-meeting” at the Grange Hall in Springfield in June 1922.The purpose of the conclave, which was coorganized by a group of “Italianradicals,” was ostensibly to raise money for clothing and food for the starvingand dying people of Russia. Since a Russian “bomb factory” was discovered in awarehouse in Manhattan at that time, no doubt some of the funds were alsosiphoned off for more nefarious activities.Traveling to Springfield with Mashevkief, who described “withconsiderable imagination the manufacturing industries of Russia,” Tesla heardthe first speaker announce “that the only solution to the economic problem [inEurope] was in the hands of the working class…[which] will have charge of allmeans of production. ‘They will do this for humanity’s sake and not for profit.’The speaker prophesied that an economic collapse of the entire industrialstructure of Europe will come and when it does, the working class will thensecure full control of affairs. The speaker emphatically stated that the famine inRussia to-day is caused by counterrevolutionary forces backed by worldcapitalists and not because of the alleged poor rule of the bolshevists.”According to Adrian Potter, the FBI agent who monitored the event,“‘Nicolo Tesla’ was addressed by several Italians as ‘Bettini’…Tesla or Bettiniprophesied that Italy was soon to adopt a communist form of Government.”12Clearly, Tesla was, in some sense, a revolutionary and on the side of theworker, but more for the purpose of transforming and uplifting their station.Tesla’s inventions were purposely constructed so as to reduce consumer cost,preserve natural resources, and relieve humanity of unnecessary manual labor.The Serb believed in the profit motive and strove all his life to become whatLenin loathed, so the reader should read this FBI report with caution, as Tesla’ssupposed statement and motive for attending the meeting are not totally clear.Most likely he was concerned with the plight of the starving people in Russia(the U.S. government would send a reported $60 million in aid to feed theSoviets over the next decade),13 and he was also looking to sell his inventions tothis new regime, with an accompanying vast potential market.Where the Soviet leadership sought Tesla out, the aging gnomewizard andodd-combination capitalist-socialist Charles Steinmetz initiated his own contact,writing the Soviet premier a letter in February 1922. “Wishing Lenin success,”Steinmetz “express[ed] confidence that he would complete the astonishing workof social and industrial construction which Russia had undertaken under difficultcircumstances.”Joining a variety of Soviet organizations, Steinmetz also publicized hiscorrespondence with Lenin and “published two papers in the Electrical Worldthat described Russia’s electrification plans.” Scratching his gnarled arthriticfingernails on GE’s capitalist blackboard, the self-righteous $100,000-per-yearsupposed academic implacably “called for American capital to support theproject.”14Although Lenin’s correspondence with Tesla has not been located, hisresponse to Steinmetz is well known. “Lenin replied…that ‘to my shame’ he hadheard the name of Steinmetz only several months ago…thanked Steinmetz forhis help, but suggested that the absence of diplomatic relations between theUnited States and Soviet Russia would impede its implementation.” Lenin,however, would publish the note from the prominent engineer and sendSteinmetz an autographed photograph of himself, which he received a fewmonths later.15Just one year later, Charles Proteus Steinmetz, the four-foot giant ofelectrical engineering, bon vivant, and family man, was dead. He was fifty-eight.16Tesla was living on Fifth Avenue, two blocks from Central Park, in theHotel St. Regis, room 1607, for the years 1920-1923.17 Commuting toMilwaukee and paying an exorbitant fifteen dollars a day in rent, the inventorneglected to compensate the hotel for a seven-month period and was promptlysued for the balance, over $3,000.18 Forced to find other premises, he movedinto the Hotel Marguery on Park Avenue and Fortyeighth Street, just a fewblocks from his favorite stomping grounds: Bryant Park, behind the New YorkPublic Library, and the great commuter’s hall at Grand Central Station. Afterhours, in the dead of night, the inventor would grab his coat, cane, white gloves,and derby and prance out for a tour of the park by the library, where he cogitatedand fed his precious pigeons. Rumors began spreading about the gaunt eccentricwho fed the pigeons, as Tesla purposely kept his identity concealed. “Midnight isthe hour he chooses for his visits…Tall, well dressed, of dignified bearing [theman] whistles several times, a signal for the pigeons on the ledges of thebuilding to flutter down about his feet. With a generous hand, the man scatterspeanuts on the lawn from a bag. A proud man, yet humble in his charities—Nikola Tesla.”19According to several researchers, Tesla was a homosexual, and it wassupposedly there, in the Hotel Marguery, that he liked to meet “his specialfriends.” More likely a celibate, the inventor did have one homosexual admirer,the young journalist Kenneth Swezey.20Born in 1905 and raised in a Brooklyn apartment, where he stayed hiswhole life, Swezey had constructed his first radio at the age of thirteen, duringthe height of World War I. Shortly thereafter, forsaking secondary school, hebegan to write science articles for a number of the local newspapers andmagazines and eventually a textbook on chemistry. Able to reduce complexideas to a level understandable by the masses, Swezey was later congratulated byAlbert Einstein for explaining Archimedes’ principle.21Having sifted through the data on the wireless, Swezey came to realize thatTesla was the unsung author of the invention and sought the hermit out for aninterview.With a round, boyish face, glasses, and a quick and perceptive mind,Swezey quickly endeared himself to Tesla, who expressed surprise at the writer’syouth. Only nineteen at the time, Swezey and Tesla began a special friendshipthat would last until the end of the inventor’s life. Often they would meet inTesla’s apartment to go over some articles Swezey was writing or to discussaspects of Tesla’s work. Afterward, the youngster might join the inventor fordinner, or Tesla would walk the boy back to the gate of the subway.22 As thefriendship grew, the aging sage also came to rely on Swezey when he neededassistance, and by the time he was in his late seventies, their friendship becameso familiar that, according to Swezey, Tesla sometimes greeted him at the doorstark naked. As the years progressed, Tesla’s new publicist became virtually oneof the family, befriending Agnes Holden, Robert Johnson’s daughter, and alsoSava Kosanovic, Tesla’s nephew, who often traveled to New York from thenewly formed Yugoslavia as its first ambassador.Swezey, who himself described Tesla as “an absolute celibate,” began tocompile a large holding of articles, letters, and original manuscripts as he raced,unwittingly, Jack O’Neill, Tesla’s other journalist-compadre, to write thequintessential biography. Concerning Tesla’s habits, Swezey confirmed that theinventor rarely slept. Tesla claimed he slept less than two hours per night. Theinventor, however, did admit to “dozing” from time to time “to recharge hisbatteries.” For exercise, the inventor would walk “8-10 miles per day” and alsoloosen up in the bathtub (although he also touted a waterless bath whichinvolved charging his body with electricity in such a way as to repel all foreignparticles). Later, Tesla would add to his repertoire the squishing and unsquishingof his toes one hundred times for each foot every night. He claimed the practicestimulated his brain cells. “And how this man worked! I will tell you about alittle episode…I was sleeping in my room like one dead. It was three aftermidnight. Suddenly the telephone ring awakened me. Through my sleep I heardhis voice, “Swezey, how are you, what are you doing?” This was one of manyconversations in which I did not succeed in participating. He spoke animatedly,with pauses, [as he]…work[ed] out a problem, comparing one theory to another,commenting; and when he felt he had arrived at the solution, he suddenly closedthe telephone.”23In 1926, shortly after moving to the Hotel Pennsylvania, the inventoragreed to an interview for Colliers magazine. The sixty-eight-year-oldphilosopher chose as his topic of the evening the female of the species. Viewingthe woman’s movement as “one of the most profound portents of the future,” the“tall, thin, ascetic man” told the interviewer, “This struggle of the human femaletoward sex equality will end in a new sex order, with the female as superior.”24Happy with the article, Tesla forwarded a copy to Anne Morgan, with whom hestill kept in touch and Anne wrote back to review her own twenty-year odysseyas an advocate in the women’s movement.25During this same time period Tesla divulged in the World his unbridledattachment to the city’s pigeons. “Sometimes I feel that by not marrying I madetoo great a sacrifice to my work,” he told the reporter, “so I have decided tolavish all the affection of a man no longer young on the feathery tribe. I amsatisfied if anything I do will live for posterity. But to care for those homeless,hungry or sick birds is the delight of my life. It is my only means of playing.”In the same article, Tesla poignantly reveals a fondness for one particularpigeon that had a broken wing and leg. “Using all my mechanical knowledge, Iinvented a device by which I supported its body in comfort in order to let thebones heal.” Carrying the bird up to his suite, Tesla calculated that “it cost memore than $2,000 to cure [her].” It took over a year and one-half of daily care,and afterward Tesla hand-carried the bird to one of his favorite farms, where “itis now one of the finest and prettiest birds I have ever seen.”26Concerning his potential affinity for males, Tesla certainly displayed anaffection for muscle men, often, in the later years, inviting boxers such as HenryDoherty, Jimmy Adamick, and the Yugoslav welterweight champion FritzieZivic out to dinner or to his apartment.27 Having “made a study” of the 1892championship match between Gentleman Jim Corbett and John L. Sullivan(which had been held in New Orleans), Tesla made the sports headlines in 1927by predicting the outcome of the rematch between Gene Tunney and JackDempsey, the “Manassa Mauler” having been deposed the year before in a ten-round decision.Dr. Tesla Picks Tunney on Basis of MechanicsSitting in this suite at the Hotel Pennsylvania, the 71-year-oldinventor…did not hedge or pussyfoot, but declared that Tunney was “atleast a ten to one favorite…Tunney will hit Dempsey continuously and atwill…[In addition], he is single, and other things being equal, the singleman can always excel the married man.”Dr. Tesla smiled significantly. He is a lifelong bachelor.28With Katharine’s death came a new level of intimacy between Tesla andLuka. Often they would meet for dinner or at the cinema, and when Spanish-American War hero Richmond P. Hobson returned with his wife to live in thecity, he would join them. According to Mrs. Hobson, “these two dear friends[Tesla and Hobson], about once a month or sometimes oftener, would meet andgo to a movie and then sit in the Park, and talk till after midnight! Richmondalways came home with enthusiasm over some new invention of Tesla’s and wellI recall the night he told Richmond, ‘I can shake the world of its orbit, but Iwon’t do it, Hobson!’”29Certainly Tesla’s relationship with Katharine had been, at least at one time,provocative, and no doubt he reviewed details with Hobson, but apparently,according to his own words, he had “never touched a woman.”30 One couldmake a case for a germ phobia, although his relationship with the pigeons wouldseem to dispel that myth, magnified greatly by the O’Neill biography;31 orTesla’s aversion to sexual intimacy with women could be evaluated from apsychoanalytic perspective. In 1924, Tesla wrote in a condolence note to JackMorgan, “The mother’s loss grips one’s head more powerfully than any other sadexperience in life.”32Tesla’s reactive jet dirigible, circa 1909. This model is a forerunner of various flying wingprototypes such as the new Lockheed Martin X-33, which has been designed to replacethe Space Shuttle. (MetaScience Foundation) 