47THE FBI AND THE TESLAPAPERS (1943-56)War DepartmentMilitary Intelligence Service22 January 1946Alien Property CustodianDear Sir:This office is in receipt of a communication from Headquarters, AirTechnical Service Command, Wright Field, requesting that we ascertain thewhereabouts of the files of the late scientist, Dr. Nichola Tesla, which maycontain data of great value to the above Headquarters…In view of theextreme importance of those files…we would like to request also that we beadvised of any attempt by any other agency to obtain them.Sincerely yours,Col. Ralph E. DotyChief, Washington Branch1After Tesla’s death, the FBI, the Office of Alien Property (OAP), and factionsof the War Department conspired to impound and protect the Tesla secret-weaponry papers. The United States was in the midst of a world war, and Tesla’sties to arms merchants, Communists, through his Yugoslavian nephew, and anotorious German propagandist all helped prompt the covert agencies tosafeguard this material until it was properly analyzed. A half century later, theyhave yet to release it.Raised to the level of a national hero within the Slavic countries, Tesla wasconsidered practically of royal stock. Thus, his nephew, Sava Kosanovic, rose tobecome a representative of the newly forming Yugoslavia republic at the“Eastern European Planning Board,” which met in Czechoslovakia.2 Kosanovic,like Tesla, wanted a unified country, but their orientations were different.In 1941 the Nazis continued their policy of intimidation and deception bytrying to force a treaty with King Peter of Yugoslavia. Backed by the people,Peter refused to agree to an alliance and therefore suffered a fatal blow whenGermany masterminded a brutal invasion involving troops from Bulgaria, Italy,and Hungary and also three hundred Luftwaffe bombers.3Prof. Michael Markovitch of Long Island University, a Serb living inCroatia during World War II, has said that ninety thousand Serbs were killed bythe Croats; and when I inquired why, he said, “Because the Croats werefascists,” that is, because they had aligned themselves with the Nazis. As a youthin the midst of the war, Markovitch had watched the bodies float down the river.When asked why he survived, his reply was “sheer luck.”Concerning the Tesla mythology, Markovitch said that ever since he was achild, he was aware that Tesla was considered a great national hero. Years later,as Hitler’s invasion became imminent, Markovitch and his countrymen hadexpected Tesla himself to return to Belgrade and shield it from the Nazis byharnessing his impenetrable death shield! Unfortunately, Tesla never came.4Kosanovic was not as romantic a figure, and although a Serb, he abandonedthe exiled king in order to back the rising Croat leader, Joseph Tito (Josip Broz),and his Communist doctrine. Tito was a solid choice; although he was an ally ofthe Soviets, he was able to maintain autonomy. He also sought to unify thewarring factions; his marriage to a Serbian woman was a powerful symbol inadvancing this goal.5Since the Soviet Union was an ally, Kosanovic, as a Yugoslavianambassador, was able to travel freely to America to discuss various diplomatictactics with the new leadership. Thus, during the course of World War II, he wasable to attend to his ailing uncle in New York and also try to finalize plans to setup a museum in Belgrade in order to honor the great inventor.In 1942, Tesla became more seriously ill and suffered from palpitations andfainting spells. Although Tesla’s true commitment was to the young exiled kingPeter, Tesla’s nephew was able to coax the inventor into sending a message toTito which preached unification between Serbs and Croats. Kosanovic alsoadmitted shielding Tesla from factions of the Serbian royalty at the same time;however, when Peter arrived in New York City, he actively helped arrange ameeting between Tesla and the king.Having unsuccessfully talked with Churchill in England and Roosevelt inWashington, both of whom were reluctantly backing Tito, King Peter was atleast consoled by Eleanor Roosevelt, who attended a large party in his honor atthe Colony Club in New York. Organized by the American Friends ofYugoslavia, the king’s mother, Queen Marie, and also Anne Morgan, Pierpont’sdaughter, attended, but Tesla was too ill to come.Therefore, King Peter (with Kosanovic) took a cab to the Hotel New Yorkerto confer with the virtual patriarch of his country. Shocked by Tesla’s cadaverouscondition and upset by the terrible chain of events in his country, Peter told theinventor that he had hoped that he could have returned to Yugoslavia to free itfrom the Nazis. In his diaries, Peter also revealed that he and Tesla wept together“for all the sorrows that had torn apart [their] homeland.”6A few months later, Tesla was dead. A maid discovered his body on January8, 1943. While Hugo Gernsback rushed to make a death mask, Kenneth Swezey,Sava Kosanovic, and George Clark, director of a museum and laboratory atRCA, entered the apartment. With a locksmith and the hotel managementpresent, they removed various documents from the inventor’s safe. Although theFBI alleged that “valuable papers, electrical formulas, designs, etc., were taken,”the hotel management confirmed that Kosanovic removed only three picturesand Swezey took the 1931 testimonial autograph book created for thecommemoration of Tesla’s seventy-fifth birthday.These events were monitored by the ubiquitous surveillance mastermind J.Edgar Hoover, hard-line anti-Communist and protector of American interests.Hoover wrote in a memorandum under the heading “Espionage,” that he fearedthat Kosanovic, as heir to the Tesla estate, “might make certain materialavailable to the enemy.” Kosanovic had been identified as a member of theEastern European Planning Board, but because of the complicated condition ofthe Balkan states, there was essentially no way for Hoover to ascertain exactlywhere Kosanovic’s alliances rested. He could have been affiliated with KingPeter, the Communist Tito, Fascist factions associated with Mussolini, Hitler, theSoviet Union, or none of the above.7Consistent with his suspicious nature, Hoover also questioned Tesla’ssympathies, even though the inventor was friends with Vice President HenryWallace and Franklin Roosevelt through letters to his wife, Eleanor. One of themain reasons for Hoover’s concerns was Tesla’s address before the Friends ofSoviet Russia which he gave at the Grange Hall in Springfield, Massachusetts, in1922.8On January 8, Abraham N. Spanel, the forty-two-year-old president of theInternational Latex Corporation of Dover, Delaware (now Playtex), who wasresiding in New York City, had called FBI agent Fredrich Cornels to discussTesla’s death-ray experiments. As the inventor had just died, Spanel feared thatKosanovic would obtain the pertinent papers and pass them to the Soviets.Spanel had already begun to make a name for himself in media and militarycircles by having invented floating pontoon stretchers for soldiers wounded inamphibious landings and by turning back the million-dollar profits to thegovernment for the war effort. Born in Odessa in 1901, Spanel would laterbecame a vociferous anti-Communist who spent upward of $8 millionthroughout the 1940s and 1950s “buying space in the United States press toreprint articles that would contribute to an understanding of world problems.”Having fled to France in 1905 to escape the anti-Semitic pogroms of Russia withhis family as a child, Spanel, at the age of seven, came to the United States in1908. A graduate of the University of Rochester, Spanel had invented electricalappliances and pneumatic products in the early 1920s before starting theInternational Latex Corporation in 1929.9 Realizing the potential importance ofthe Tesla invention in the “democratic” fight for world supremacy, Spanel hadcontacted Dr. D. Lozado, adviser to Vice President Wallace, and a Mr. Bopkin ofthe Department of Justice. Bopkin agreed to contact J. Edgar Hoover regardingthe affair, and Lozado conferred with Wallace and perhaps even FDR, callingSpanel back shortly after their conversation to convey that the government was“vitally interested in Tesla’s papers.”10Spanel had also contacted one Bloyce Fitzgerald, whom the FBI hadpegged as “an electrical engineer who was a protégé of Tesla’s,” who had alsocalled Cornels. Having met Fitzgerald at an engineering meeting a few yearsearlier, Spanel became highly interested in the Tesla weapon, possibly hoping tobecome involved in a profitable business developing the death-beam device forthe U.S. military.Fitzgerald, still in his twenties, had been in postal communication withTesla since the late 1930s. He had called the inventor on his birthday in 1938 tocongratulate him and continued this practice for the next four years. In 1939,Fitzgerald tried to meet Tesla, but it appears that he did not do so at that time.Just two weeks prior to Tesla’s death, Fitzgerald proposed another meeting; itmay have taken place. He was working at the Massachusetts Institute ofTechnology with Professors Keenan, Woodruff, and Kay “in the solution ofcertain problems regarding the dissipation of energy from rapid fire weapons”and desired to discuss his “radiation problem” with the elderly inventor.11It is plausible that at this delicate time Fitzgerald was able to borrow thevarious papers in which he was interested. Coincidentally, Tesla had declaredthat “efforts had been made to steal the invention. [My] room had been enteredand [my] papers examined, but the…spies left empty handed.”12 Fitzgerald, whoalso worked for the Ordinance Department of the U.S. Army, later told Cornelsthat he “knows [that] the complete plans, specifications and explanations of thebasic theories of these things are some place in the personal effects of Tesla…[and] that there is a working model [of the death ray]…which cost more than$10,000 to build in a safety deposit box of Tesla’s at the Governor ClintonHotel.”13To corroborate this story, another acquaintance of Tesla’s, Charles Hausler,a hired hand who took care of the inventor’s pigeons, later said that Tesla “had alarge box or container in his room near the pigeon cages. He told me to be verycareful not to disturb the box as it contained something that could destroy anairplane in the sky and he had hopes for presenting it to the world.” Hausler alsoadded that the device was later stored in the basement of a hotel.14Fitzgerald reported that Tesla had claimed that he had eighty trunks indifferent locations in the city containing inventions, manuscripts, and plans ofhis various work. The young engineer reiterated the need for the government toobtain the Tesla papers “for use in war.” He was also worried about the “loyaltyand patriotism to the Allied Nations” of Sava Kosanovic and another nephew,Nicholas Trbojevich.During these same days, Cornels’s overseer, D. E. Foxworth, an assistantdirector of the FBI, assured those concerned that “this matter would be properlyhandled,” that Tesla’s “nephew, who is his heir,” would not be able to send thepapers to “the Axis Powers.”15 On the eleventh, yet another FBI agent, T. J.Donegan, brought up the possibility that the New York district attorney couldhave Kosanovic and Swezey picked up “discretely on a burglary charge.”However, this was not done. Three days later, Donegan notified Hoover that thesituation “was being handled as an enemy custodian matter and therefore weshould take no further action.”16OFFICE OF ALIEN PROPERTYWhat happened appears to be this: The FBI attempted to remove themselvesfrom the responsibility in the Tesla case, thereby allowing the OAP to takecharge. Nevertheless, because of the FBI’s initial involvement, numerous peoplecontacted them through the years in attempts to gain access to the Tesla estate.The OAP questioned the legality of their own jurisdiction, since Tesla was anaturalized citizen. However, as Kosanovic was probably legally entitled to hisuncle’s estate, the OAP had justification in considering the material alienproperty. According to Irving Jurow, who was the attorney assigned to the Teslacase at the time of his death, “the activities of the OAP were not only not‘illegal,’ it was the only government agency with statutory power to seize‘enemy assets’ without court order.”17 Because of this unique jurisdiction, it wasthe OAP and only the OAP that maintained legal control over the papers untilthey were released ten years later. Naturally, both real and imagined concernsinvolving the war situation were the key factors influencing what to theuninformed appeared to be an illegal action. The Germans still controlled a largepart of Europe, and the outcome of the war was by no means determined inJanuary 1943. Rumors that the enemy was also developing an ultimate weaponwere also well founded.18Walter Gorsuch, alien property custodian, thereupon ordered all of Tesla’sbelongings, including the safe from his apartment and other holdings in thebasement of the New Yorker, shipped to where Tesla’s other possessions were,Manhattan Storage. Gorsuch, however, was out of the office the day Tesla’s bodywas discovered, and it was the young attorney Irving Jurow who handled thecase.“At about noon, on Saturday, January 9th,” Jurow recalled, fifty years later,“I was ordered by telephone from the Washington office not to close up shop,but to wait for further instructions. I was informed that a Nikola Tesla had justdied, that he was reputed to have invented, and in the possession of a ‘death ray,’a significant military device capable of destroying incoming war planes[presumably Japanese on the West Coast] by ‘projecting’ a beam into the skiesand creating a ‘field of energy’ which would cause the planes to ‘disintegrate.’Moreover, it was suspected that German [enemy] agents were in ‘hot pursuit’ tolocate the device or the plans for its production.”With orders to impound all of Tesla’s belongings, Jurow was also instructedto “visit other hotels where Tesla had resided and to take similar action.” Jurowwas accompanied by four individuals from the Office of Naval Intelligence,army intelligence, and the FBI. Arriving at the Hotel New Yorker, “We learnedthat Tesla had been found dead by the service maid. We were told that he waslaid out in his bed…with only a pair of stockings on.” The officials were alsotold that Kosanovic had been in the room and had removed three photographs.The military officers were “concerned about the death ray model, but I wasthe only one who had authority.” Taking a taxi, Jurow and the others visited eachof the hotels, which included the St. Regis, the Waldorf-Astoria, and theGovernor Clinton, and they also visited Manhattan Storage. Tesla’s possessionswere impounded there, and the safe-deposit box at the Governor Clinton wasalso impounded.With Walter Gorsuch, Jurow went to visit Ambassador Kosanovic at hishotel on Central Park South, where they apparently also met Nikola Trbojevich,Tesla’s other nephew, and an elderly lady who did not speak English. Gorsuchand Jurow saw the photos on a table and left. “I was told later,” Jurow recalled,“probably through the staff of the OAP, that Tesla’s trunks contained mostlynewspapers and bird seed, and that the safe deposit box contained a model ofsome type of device, whether the ‘death ray’ or not, is not clear. It was alsorumored that the Soviet Union had offered Tesla $50 million to come to theUSSR and work on his ‘death ray’ but he refused.”As Jurow had never heard of Tesla before January 8, 1943, he saw theinventor as a “deadbeat” because he did not pay his hotel bills. “He may havebeen ‘disturbed’ because he spent so much time feeding pigeons,” Jurow said.But the story was too strange and too incomplete for him, so he called theWestinghouse people to try to verify who Tesla was. “They were ecstatic,” Jurowrecalled. “They said that without Tesla there would have been noWestinghouse.”19The Manhattan Storage inventory did not mention the birdseed, whichplayed so prominently in Jurow’s memory. Possessions listed included “12locked metal boxes, 1 steel cabinet, 35 metal cans, 5 barrels and 8 trunks.”Gorsuch also ordered the “large hotel box at the Hotel Governor Clinton held forover 10 years as security for unpaid bills sealed.”20 Jack O’Neill’s papers werealso confiscated,21 although they were probably returned to him, for he was ableto publish his extensive biography a year later.Although Kosanovic assured O’Neill that “there was no reason to worry”and that the OAP “conveyed full rights” to the Tesla papers to him; in fact,Kosanovic was highly concerned. He hired Philip Wittenberg, from Wittenberg,Carrington & Farnsworth, to protect his interest. Although the lawyer pleadedthe case, the government countered with advice from the War Policies Unit ofthe Department of Justice. They ruled that Kosanovic could not touch the estate.This edict was maintained throughout the 1940s. Tesla’s secret weaponry paperswere scrutinized by various divisions of the military, although the nephew wasgiven the combination to the safe and took care of the fifteen dollars-per-monthrent for the storage of the property during the entire period.Within a week of Tesla’s death, Walter Gorsuch met with his Washingtonrepresentative, Joseph King, and together with H. B. Ritchen of the AntitrustDivision of the Department of Justice, they called in Colonel Parrott of MilitaryIntelligence and “Bloyce Fitzgerald of the U.S. Army,” whom they considered “aformer employee of Tesla’s.” One key problem discussed was that Tesla was“supposed to have been working for, and in the pay of the Yugoslav government-in-exile.” Fitzgerald also discussed the supposed Tesla model held in a vault atthe Governor Clinton Hotel.22It was determined that before Tesla’s estate could be released to Kosanovic,a thorough probe of its contents should be undertaken. Prof. John O. Trump,director and founder of MIT’s High Voltage Research Laboratory and secretaryof the Microwave Committee at the National Defense Research Committee(NDRC) of the Office of Scientific Research and Development, wascommissioned to go to the warehouse and conduct the investigation of thecontents of the eighty-eight-odd trunks. They were held in rooms 5J and 5L.Trump set aside two days for the task. He was aided in the search by aninventory of the Tesla holdings compiled by Mr. O’Sullivan, one of the guards atManhattan Storage.Trump was accompanied by five individuals: two members of the OAP—John Newinton, from the New York office, and Charles Hedetneimi, chiefinvestigator from Washington—and three from Naval Intelligence—WillisGeorge, a civilian agent; John Corbett, who served as stenographer; and EdwardPalmer, who took photographs and probably microfilm copies. Both Corbett andPalmer were also listed as chief yeomen of the U.S. Marine Reserves.23As the only qualified scientist able to comprehend the work, Trump spentlittle more than half this time actually perusing the wizard’s cache. “The secondday was somewhat cursory in character,” Hedetneimi reported reluctantly, “sinceDr. Trump was confident that nothing valuable would be found. He was entirelyconvinced that it would be useless to look in the 29-odd trunks which…had…been stored since 1933.”24The Trump papers, which included a synopsis of about one dozen articlesby or about Tesla, began with an opening letter. The professor acknowledgedthat he and his colleagues investigated the Tesla trunks at Manhattan Storage onJanuary 26 and 27, summarizing first that (1) “no investigation of the Teslatrunks held for 10 years in the basement of the Hotel New Yorker wasconducted”; (2) “no scientific notes, descriptions of hitherto unrevealed methodsor devices or actual apparatus…of scientific value to this country or whichwould constitute a hazard in unfriendly hands [was found]…I can therefore seeno technical or military reason why further custody of the property should beretained.” Nevertheless, Trump “removed…a file of various written materialswhich covers typically and fairly completely the ideas which he [Tesla] wasconcerned [with] during the later years” and forwarded it or copies of it to Mr.Gorsuch of the OAP.Trump concluded in his report that the last fifteen years of Tesla’s life were“primarily of a speculative, philosophical and somewhat promotional character.”On his return to Washington, Trump met with Homer Jones, chief of theDivision of Investigation and Research. “Sir,” the MIT professor smuglyconcluded, “upon the basis of my examination, it is my opinion that the Teslapapers contain nothing of value for the war effort, and nothing which would behelpful to the enemy if it fell into enemy hands.”“Are you quite certain in this conclusion, Dr. Trump?”“I am willing to stake my professional reputation on it.”25Satisfied, Jones sent the report and Trump’s recommendations to LawrenceM. C. Smith, chief, Special War Policies Unit of the War Division of theDepartment of Justice, and that, for one faction of the government, ended thematter.26Trump drew up a report which described a number of articles by theinventor, interviews, and scientific treatises. Exhibits D, F, and Q refer to ahighly technical and heretofore underground Tesla treatise written in 1937entitled The New Art of Projecting Concentrated Non-dispersive Energy throughthe Natural Media. This article, in contradiction to Trump’s statement, containedexplicit information which had never been published describing the actualworkings of a particle-beam weapon for destroying tanks and planes and forigniting explosives. Novel features included (1) an open-ended vacuum tubesealed with a gas jet “while at the same time, permitting and facilitating the exitof the particles”; (2) a way to generate many millions of volts for chargingminute particles; (3) a method of creating and directing a non-dispersive streamof such particles with a trajectory of many miles.Written virtually as a patent application, the Tesla article presents in clearand straightforward terms the mathematical equations and schematics of hisdeath ray. Aside from the unpublished drawing and mathematical analysis of itscapability, it employed three most unusual features. The first was its mechanismfor creating a non-dispersive beam of particles. “I perfected means for increasingenormously the intensity of the effects, but was baffled in all my efforts tomaterially reduce dispersion and became fully convinced that this handicapcould only be overcome by conveying the power through the medium of smallparticles projected, at prodigious velocity, from the transmitter. Electrostaticrepulsion was the only means to this end…Since the cross section of the carriersmight be reduced to almost microscopic dimensions, an immense concentrationof energy, irrespective of distance, could be attained.”The second feature involved the creation of an open-ended vacuum tube byreplacing the walled enclosure or glass window with a “gaseous jet of highvelocity”; and the third outstanding feature was the means for generating largevoltages. Having studied the precursors in the Van de Graaff electrostaticgenerator (a device which Tesla said was all but useless for generating usableamounts of energy), Tesla replaced the circulating cardboard belt that transferredthe charge with an ionized stream of air hermetically sealed in a 220-foot-longcircular vacuum chamber. Analogous to the way a shock can be created andtransferred by rubbing one’s shoes along a carpet on a dry day, the new fluidairstream belt achieved the same end but to a degree “many times greater than abelt generator.” This charge, which apparently could be as much as 60 millionvolts, was in turn transferred to the myriad small bulbs at the top of the tower,their round shape and internal structure constructed to augment the accumulationof energy.Atop this domed citadel, which was planned to be over a hundred feet inheight, was the particle-beam weapon. Nestled in a turret as a supergun, theweapon was set up so that tungsten wire could be fed into its highvacuum firingchamber. There minute “droplets” of this metal would be sheared off andrepelled out the long barrel at velocities exceeding 400,000 feet per second.27The entire apparatus apparently was also constructed for nonmilitary purposes,such as for transmitting streams of electrical energy to distant places, much likemicrowave wireless telephone trunk lines do today.Although Trump downplayed the importance of this paper, it is, to thepresent day, classified top secret by the U.S. military, with copies at the timegoing to naval intelligence, the FBI, the OAP, the NDRC, Wright-Patterson AirForce Base, MIT, and most likely, the White House.AMTORG TRADING CORPORATIONExhibits D, F, and Q state explicitly that Tesla sold the plans for the constructionof his particle-beam weapon to A. Bartanian, a Soviet agent of the AmtorgTrading Corporation! These exhibits also specify that Tesla offered the device tothe U.S. military, Great Britain, and Yugoslavia.28Surprisingly, the FBI did not exploit this blatant Soviet connection, eventhough this was just the kind of thing that J. Edgar Hoover thrived on. Onepossible reason was that the Soviet Union was an ally at that time. Furthermore,a number of major corporations, such as Bethlehem Steel, RCA, andWestinghouse, were selling equipment to the Soviets via Amtorg, a companythat did over a billion dollars of business in America by the time of World WarII. FDR, for instance, in 1933, approved $4 million in credit to Amtorg topurchase cotton from American suppliers. Amtorg, in return, supplied thecountry with furs, caviar, oil, and precious metals. Still operating in Americatoday, Amtorg was unable “to find any mention of Mr. Tesla [in their]records.”29If Tesla really did receive $25,000 from Amtorg in 1935, which thecommuniqué with the Soviets implied, why wouldn’t he have paid off his debtsto the Hotels Pennsylvania and Governor Clinton and retrieved his secret deviceheld as collateral? An amount as large as $25,000 at the height of the GreatDepression was worth roughly twenty times that figure today, yet there is noindication that Tesla obtained great wealth during that period, although he mayhave received this amount and used it to pay off other debts and purchase otherequipment.A few days after viewing the estate, Trump went to the Governor Clinton toview the actual death ray held in their vault. Charles Hedetneimi of the OAP,reported that “officers of the hotel showed us the handwritten letter in whichTesla stated that he was leaving the equipment as security and that it was worth$10,000.” Trump later recalled the incident: “Tesla had warned the managementthat this “device” was a secret weapon, and it would detonate if opened by anunauthorized person. Upon opening the vault…the hotel manager and employeespromptly left the scene.”The Trump letter went on to describe his reluctance to remove the brownpaper covering and that before summoning his courage, he looked outside andnoticed that the day was pleasant. “Inside was a handsome wooden chest boundwith brass…[containing] a multidecade resistance box of the type used for aWheatstone bridge resistance measurements—a common standard item found inevery electric laboratory before the turn of the century!”30“At this point,” Hedetneimi concluded, “Dr. Trump indicated that he had nofurther interest in the case.”An FBI report written just two weeks prior to Trump’s visit to the hoteldescribed the managers’ assessment of the inventor somewhat differently, and itdoes not appear that they took him as seriously as Trump alleges. “The Hotelmanagers report he [Tesla] was very eccentric, if not mentally deranged duringthe past ten years and it is doubtful if he has created anything of value duringthat time, although prior to that he probably was a very brilliant inventor.”31DID TESLA ACTUALLY BUILD A PROTOTYPE OF THEDEATH RAY?The inventor appears to have told both Hausler, his pigeon caretaker, andFitzgerald, the army engineer, that he did build a working model; and in aninterview I had with Mrs. Czito, whose husband’s father and grandfather wereboth trusted Tesla employees, she recalls that her father-in-law used to recountstories of Tesla bouncing electronic beams off the moon. This is not a death ray,but it certainly supports the hypothesis that the inventor created working modelsalong these lines.The well-known columnist Joseph Alsop, who interviewed Tesla at theHotel New Yorker and who was one of the first to fully report Tesla’s work withparticle-beam weapons, described an experience Tesla had when experimentingwith cathode-ray tubes, “Sometimes a particle larger than an electron, but stillvery tiny, would break off from the cathode, pass out of the tube and hit him. Hesaid he could feel a sharp, stinging pain where it entered his body, and again atthe place where it passed out. The particles in the beam of force, [i.e., the]ammunition…will travel far faster.”32Other evidence has been reported by Corum and Corum, who assert thatthis invention was an outcropping of Tesla’s work on X-ray machines patented inthe mid-1890s. Thus, we can trace the Tesla death ray to at least three earlierinventions, his Tesla coil and work in high-frequency currents from the early1890s, his work in bombarding targets with Roentgen rays in 1896, and also his1901 ideas associated with transmitting energy by means of wireless by beamingup an ionizing ray from his magnifying transmitter and using it is a conduit toreach the ionosphere. With this mechanism, Tesla planned not only to circle theglobe with information but also to illuminate shipping lanes over the oceans andcontrol the weather.The deBobula schematic, the Corums write, having studied the plans inBelgrade, was also taken to Alcoa Aluminum, which said that it was ready tosupply the materials as soon as Tesla raised the necessary capital.33 Alcoa,however, was unable to locate any reference to Tesla in their corporate records.34At the age of eighty-one, Tesla stated at a luncheon attended by ministers ofYugoslavia and Czechoslovakia that he had constructed a number of beam-transmission devices, including the death ray, for protecting a country fromincoming invasions and a laserlike machine that could send impulses to themoon and other planets (in Exhibit I). He also said that he was going to take thedeath ray to a Geneva conference for world peace. When pressed by thecolumnists to “give a full description…Dr. Tesla said, ‘But it is not anexperiment…I have built, demonstrated and used it. Only a little time will passbefore I can give it to the world.”35Considering that Tesla had two secret laboratories throughout the 1930s inwhich no reporter ever set foot,36 we are left with a mystery. Did Tesla really“scam” the hotel by frightening the management into accepting a bogusinvention in lieu of $400 rent? Feeling that the world owed him a place in whichto live, perhaps he purposely chose not to pay for his housing. This certainly wasa compulsive and self-destructive pattern during the latter quarter of his life.Lesser mortals often fore the brunt of his repressed rage. He was known to beabrasive to maids and office secretaries. Having made it a habit to live on credit,Tesla may have derived great pleasure during those lugubrious nights when hewas forced to face his failures in thinking back to the chaps at the HotelGovernor Clinton trembling at the terrible weapon they kept protected in theirmidst.THE CONSPIRACY SCENARIOSecret agents break into Tesla’s New Yorker Hotel safe without Kasanovicknowing, remove keys to his Hotel Governor Clinton vault, and steal the death-ray prototype, substituting the equipment Trump found a week or two later. Thispotential incident would have had to have taken place between January 9 andJanuary 29, 1943, the dates of Tesla’s death, and the end of Trump’sinvestigations. The agents who performed this task, if it occurred, could havebeen Bloyce Fitzgerald and Ralph E. Doty. The evidence is as follows:Sava Kosavonic’s secretary at this time was Charlotte Muzar. She reportsthat she saw Tesla during his last days for the purpose of delivering funds that herequired and that she was also present at the opening of the safe after Tesla died.Present were Kenneth Swezey, Sava Kosanovic, and George Clark. According toher story and official reports, a locksmith was called in to change thecombination of the safe and give the new combination to Kosanovic, who wasthe only one who had it. In the safe, before he locked it again, was a set of keysand the 1917 Edison Medal. About ten years later, when the estate was finallyshipped to Belgrade and the safe opened, the Edison Medal and the keys werefound to be missing. The medal was never recovered, but the keys were foundoutside the safe “in one of the numerous cases of documents.”37A January 12, 1943, OAP memorandum states that Charles McNamara,assistant manager of the Hotel Governor Clinton, “permitted [the OAP] to sealsafety deposit box #103, which contained the $10,000 machine…Box #103 isnot a specially constructed box as Fitzgerald said. It is, however, one of thelargest boxes of the lower tiers.” The day before this, at the Hotel New Yorker,Tesla’s bedside safe was opened. Present, according to another OAPmemorandum, aside from Swezey, Clark, and Kosanovic, were two hotelpersonnel from the New Yorker, Mr. L. O. Doty, credit manager, and Mr. L. A.Fitzgerald, assistant credit manager.It strikes this researcher as a rather odd coincidence that these twoindividuals carried the same last names as a colonel from military intelligenceand the ever-present Bloyce Fitzgerald.If, in fact, these two supposed credit managers were really governmentagents, it would have been a fairly easy task for them to retrieve the key (ormake a copy) to box no. 103 and swap the device.A further investigation of the FBI files reveals that on October 17, 1945, E.E. Conroy from the New York office, sent two copies of the Trump report to J.Edgar Hoover and reviewed with him, once again, the roles played byFitzgerald, Spanel, a censored person “X” and Kosanovic. Conroy said that “X”(probably another FBI agent) suspected that Spanel was “definitely pro-Russianin attitude” and that Spanel was spreading pro-Communist propaganda in full-page ads in various newspapers and yet also suing these newspapers for libel.Conroy also reiterated that Spanel had ties to Vice President Henry Wallace, socaution was advised.It appears that Spanel had met Fitzgerald (a friend of “X”) at an engineeringmeeting in November 1942. Fitzgerald at the time was an army private at WrightField, Dayton, Ohio. He was described in the FBI report as “a brilliant 20-year-old scientist who spent endless hours with Tesla before his death…Fitzgeraldhad developed some sort of anti-tank gun.” Spanel tried to form a partnershipwith Fitzgerald in order to sell this weapon to the Remington Arms Company,but for some reason “Spanel blocked the final sale” and then tried to arrange amore lucrative deal with Eiogens Ship Building Company of New Orleans.In November 1943, Eiogens fired Fitzgerald, and a year later the youngengineer returned to the army. “Today, [1945, Fitzgerald is]…engaged in ahighly secret experimental project at Wright Field…In spite of his rank ofprivate, Fitzgerald is actually director of this research and is working with manytop young scientists…on perfection of Tesla’s ‘death ray’ which in Fitzgerald’sopinion is the only defense against offensive use by another nation of the atombomb.”38Conroy suggested cooperating with Fitzgerald in order to secure “legalpossession of Tesla’s effects.” The goal, of course, was to obtain and protect thedetails of the weapons system, yet also to set up a “memorial foundation…forthe preservation of the inventor’s memory.” Fitzgerald purportedly alsointerested Henry Ford in the project.On October 19, 1945, Brig. Gen. L. C. Craigee, Chief Engineering DivisionControl Equipment Branch, Wright Field, writing at the request of BloyceFitzgerald, David Pratt, Herbert Schutt, and P. E. Houle, all engineers working atWright Field, contacted Harvey Ross of the FBI in New York in order toofficially “request…in the interest of National Defense, access…to the effects ofDr. Nicola Tesla held in Manhattan Storage Warehouse.” Col. Ralph Doty, frommilitary intelligence in Washington, followed up the inquiry by working as aliaison officer between the War Department, the OAP, and the FBI.39Since the FBI had no jurisdiction over the Tesla estate, Fitzgerald, Conroy,and Craigee were referred to the OAP.On September 5, 1945, Lloyd Shaulis, of the OAP, mailed off two copies ofthe Trump report to Colonel Holliday of the Equipment Laboratory, Propulsionsand Accessories Subdivision, who no doubt forwarded them to Fitzgerald.“These were the full photostatic copies, not merely the abstracts.”40 Two yearslater, Colonel Duffy of Air Material Command, Wright Field, wrote to the OAPthat the papers were still being evaluated.By 1950, Kosanovic was still barred from the warehouse.41 He was nowofficially the Yugoslavian ambassador to both the United States and the UnitedNations, and his patience had reached its limit. Kosanovic wanted his uncle’seffects in Belgrade, where they would be rightly honored. In March he went tothe warehouse to inform them of the inventor’s wishes to send the estate to theTesla Museum. It was at this time that the ambassador was informed that the FBIhad microfilmed the entire contents. He called J. Edgar Hoover to request a copyof the microfilm, but Hoover said that they did not have such a copy. Kosanovichad probably been misinformed; one of the warehouse people may havemistaken the Trump people for the FBI; or another group microfilmed the papers(now held in the Library of Congress) at a different time.Finally, in 1952, arrangements were made, and the entire eighty trunks wereshipped to Belgrade. Included were many valuable original papers completelyunknown to O’Neill, such as Tesla’s 1899 Colorado diary, various photographs,tens of thousands of letters, and most of his inventions, including the remote-controlled boat, wireless fluorescent lamp, motors, turbines, plans for his verticaltakeoff flivver plane, and a model of the magnifying transmitter. Tesla’s asheswere sent at a later date.Spanel would be questioned by Joseph MaCarthy, and the copies of thedeath ray papers moved further underground.THE PROBABLE TRAIL OF THE SECRET PAPERIn 1984, Andrija Puharich presented Tesla’s secret death-ray paper to theInternational Tesla Centennial Symposium, held in Colorado Springs. It waspublished in the proceedings. Puharich told this author that the original source ofthe report was Ralph Bergstresser, author of a notable Tesla article published in1957. Puharich thought that Bergstresser, along with an associate (who may havebeen Bloyce Fitzgerald), was linked to the FBI and thus obtained the paper inthat capacity. In the 1940s, Bergstresser worked for RCA and “Marconi’s boys. Ialways believed that Marconi was the inventor of the wireless…Then I found outit was all a lie.” Bergstresser, who was about eighty years old when I spoke tohim, recalled that Marconi had lived on a ship on the high seas to avoidsubpoenas Tesla tried to give him.At the outbreak of World War II, Bergstresser began to work on “behalf ofthe war effort…[when] he [Tesla] turned over to me [his various papers]. Iwould take and read them and return them to him.” According to one source,Bergstresser was under the command of the new secret organization the Officeof Strategic Services (OSS), (later the Central Intelligence Agency [CIA]), andin that capacity he was analyzing the papers for their military significance.Bergstresser recounted that he had only known Tesla during the last sixmonths of his life. “He was skinny, tall, stooped, emaciated—didn’t eat right.” Infurther questioning, he also said that he had known Jack O’Neill and hiscolleague William Lawrence, author of the 1940 New York Times death-rayarticle, which sparked such interest by the FBI and factions of the armed forces,and that he and Bergstresser had attended Tesla’s funeral together in 1943.During the conversation, I asked Bergstresser if he had any proof to supporthis contention that Tesla’s papers had been systematically removed fromlibraries. He said that the conspiracy was massive and extremely complex, goingback to J. Pierpont Morgan and his wish to suppress Tesla’s wireless powerdistribution inventions because they threatened to provide cheap or free powerfor the masses. He was upset that Tesla’s entire estate was “hauled away…behind the Iron Curtain” and partially blamed Lawrence, who he said was laterfound to be a Communist. He agreed that Bloyce Fitzgerald had probably takenthe papers to Wright-Patterson Air Force Base, but he declined to comment onany relationship to Fitzgerald or the trail of the secret papers.Puharich had said that the particle beam article had been passed fromBergstresser to Bob Beck of the U.S. Psychotronics Society around 1981 andfrom there they were passed to him.42INFLUENCE OF THE McCARTHY PERIODIt was true that by the time the FBI and federal government became activelyinvolved in suppressing Tesla’s scientific papers, the inventor had alreadyslipped from the mass consciousness. Nevertheless, an air of secrecy, supportedby the taint of ties to a German fifth column or the Communists via his Yugoslavheritage, served to submerge even further the inventor’s work. This wasaugmented by the transfer of Tesla’s papers to the remote city of Belgrade.STAR WARSTesla’s numerous inventions could be applied in a variety of ways for militarypurposes, for example, particle-beam weapons, worldwide radar, earthquakecontrivances, brain-wave manipulation. One or more magnifying transmitterscould supposedly send destructive impulses through the earth to any location.Thus, a well-placed jolt of many millions of volts could theoretically destroy thecommunications network of any major city. Recent discourses on potential futurewarfare technologies stemming mainly from war games analyst Lt. Col. TomBearden and parapsychologist Andrija Puharich, M.D., suggest that the Sovietshad harnessed various Tesla weapons, including apparatus for seismic, weather,and mind control.43According to Bearden, the Tesla magnifying transmitter produced afundamental one-point gravity vector (or electrostatic scalar wave) that disturbsthe very fabric of the space/time grid itself and therefore is not bound by thespeed of light. Thus, a theoretical instantaneous Tesla wave, emitted from themagnifying transmitter, could potentially affect the planet’s geomagnetic pulseand thereby be directed to any number of targets on any continent.44This research is highly controversial and speculative, and should be readwith caution. Nevertheless, in 1977, in its May 2 issue, Aviation Week publisheda seven-thousand-word article on Soviet particle-beam weapons. The exposé,which “shook Washington,” was also abstracted in Science. It contained aschematic drawing of a particle beam weapon which bears a remarkableresemblance to Tesla’s then unpublished drawings made four decades earlier.Coupled with the realization that the Soviets were well advanced in this area,this is strong evidence in support of the claim that Tesla did, in fact, sell theschematics of such a device to them in the mid-1930’s.Aviation Week also described the use of “young geniuses under [the age of]29…located at the Wright-Patterson Air Force Base in Dayton Ohio” who weretrying to conceive of a breakthrough in the technology; and also, surprisingly,that “the President [Jimmy Carter] was screened from vital technicaldevelopments by the bureaucracy of the CIA and Defense Intelligence Agency.”The source was General George Keegen, former head of Air ForceIntelligence.45Three intriguing points emerge: (1) the concept of intense secrecy ofparticle-beam weapons; (2) the mention of Wright-Patterson Air Force Base; and(3) the policy of utilizing bright young geniuses. All of these variables areevident in the FBI files on Tesla reviewed earlier. Great support is lent to theconspiracy hypothesis that Tesla’s work and papers were systematically hiddenfrom public view in order to protect the trail of this top-secret research, whichtoday is known as Star Wars.Particle-beam weaponry is still more a dream than a reality, at this time in1996. Therefore, if indeed the inner sanctum of one or both superpowers hasaccess to Tesla’s plans, why is it that no death ray has ever been constructed?Perhaps there are prototypes, but it seems to me that they should have been triedout in the field during such wars as Vietnam, Afghanistan, or Kuwait/Iraq. Thispart of the story must remain a mystery. 