9REVISING THE PAST (1891)Many of the investigations of the book apply to polyphase systems circuits[with chapters] on induction motors, generators, synchronous motors,[etc.]…A part of this book is original, other parts have been publishedbefore by other investigators…I have, however, omitted altogether literaryreferences, for the reason that incomplete references would be worse thansome, while complete references would entail expenditure of much moretime than is at my disposal…I believe that the reader…is more interested inthe information than in knowing who first investigated the phenomenon.CHARLES STEINMETZ1Three months after Tesla’s Columbia College lecture, in August 1891, twoengineers, Charles Eugene Lancelot Brown, of the Swiss firm ofMaschinenfabrik Oerlikon, and Michael von Dolivo-Dobrowolsky, representingthe German firm Allgemeine Elektrizitäts-Gesellschaft (AEG), galvanized theengineering community when they successfully transmitted 190 horsepowerfrom a waterfall at a cement factory on the Neckar River in Lauffen to theInternational Electrical Exposition, which was being held at Frankfurt, Germany,112 miles away. With the support of three different governments, the linespassed through Wurtemberg, Bavaria, and Prussia before arriving in Frankfurt.2By using oil as an insulator, as Tesla had explained in his Columbia Collegelecture, Brown was able to generate as much as 40,000 volts on his equipment,25,000 of which he transported along the wires, stepping them down to usablefrequencies when they reached the exposition. The efficiency of 74.5 percentastounded his colleagues. Dobrowolsky, who suggested that the invention washis conceptualization, utilized a three-phase AC with a working frequency of 40cycles per second (instead of the single-phase current, with a frequency of 133cycles per second, that the Westinghouse people kept insisting on). The powerwas so great at the Frankfurt site that a large advertising sign with a thousandincandescent lamps was lit, and a motor pump powering an artificial waterfallwas harnessed.3On December 16, Michael Pupin delivered a talk before the AIEE onpolyphase systems. Having given the same talk a week before at the New YorkMathematical Society, Pupin was proud to advance abstract theories on this newfield of polyphase systems. With his hair swept back, wearing wire-rimmedglasses, a brush mustache tapered at the ends, and a professorial three-piece suit,Pupin was fast readjusting to his return to the States. Now he was beginning tocarve a name for himself. Dutifully, he had written Tesla before the talk todiscuss his motors, but the inventor had eluded him.In his opening remarks at the AIEE, with Arthur Kennelly, Elihu Thomson,Charles Bradley, and Charles Steinmetz present, Pupin referred to the “beautifulinventions of Nikola Tesla and the completeness of the success whichDobrowolsky and Brown obtained by the practical applications of theseinventions,” but he also described the German operation in such a way as toimply that aspects of it were independently conceived.It appears that Tesla did not attend the lecture. Instead, he wrote Pupin theday after; but it was not to offer congratulations or to extend an invitation tomeet. Tesla suggested that Pupin obtain the original patent specifications; theGerman design was simply a copy of his work.But Pupin shot back, “I don’t think that you ought to find fault with me fornot having given your inventions a fuller discussion…In the first place, it was alittle bit too soon to discuss the practical details…in a paper which treats of themost general fundamental principles of the polyphasal systems. Secondly, Iknow of your motors only by hearsay; I have not had the pleasure of beingshown one by anybody…I looked you up twice at your hotel and wrote youonce…but all my efforts were in vain.”4 Pupin tried at the end of the letter to setup a personal interview, but Tesla was not one who could easily forgive suchnaïveté, especially from a Serb who spoke the native tongue so poorly.5 To thehypersensitive Tesla, Pupin was a man who spread falsehoods. And his continualassociation with Thomson did not help. As Tesla was about to take a trip toEurope, a meeting of amelioration never took place.Concerning the dispute over whose invention it really was, it is important torealize that obfuscation of the truth continues to this day.6 The problem beganwith Michael von Dolivo-Dobrowolsky himself, who was reluctant to admit thathe got the idea from Tesla, and it was perpetuated by his friend Carl Hering, whowrote a prodigious number of articles on the episode in the journals as the eventunfolded throughout 1891. Hering had been a professor of engineering at theuniversity in Darmstadt, Germany, in the early 1880s. His protégé Dobrowolsky,a native of St. Petersburg and the son of a Russian nobleman, replaced Heringwhen he retired from the university at the end of 1883.C. E. L. Brown, a Swiss native and son of a designer of steam engines,began successfully transmitting electrical power with AC dynamos he hadconstructed while working in Lucerne. Brown, who was a year younger thanDobrowolsky and seven years younger than Tesla, had received most of histraining in Winterthur and Basel, where he worked for the Burgin machineshops. In 1884 he began his employment at Oerlikon and within two yearsbecame director of operations.7 On February 9, 1891, Brown delivered anaddress in Frankfurt on the subject of long-distance transmisssion of electricalpower, and that is where he met Dobrowolsky. A partnership was formedbetween Oerlikon and AEG, and within seven months, their success betweenLauffen and Frankfurt was achieved.8Now, with Dobrowolsky’s claims and Hering’s one-sided reporting in theelectrical journals,9 factions of the American engineering community that werelocked out of the Tesla patents could extol the Lauffen-Frankfurt venture whileat the same time continuing to imply that Tesla’s work was not intrinsic to itssuccess. Ironically, the Westinghouse side wanted to downplay the event as well,not only because it proved Tesla right and them wrong but also because itdwarfed their success at Telluride. Thus, when perusing the Westinghouseliterature, one is hard-pressed to find any mention of Lauffen-Frankfurt at all.Pupin, in his lectures, did not support Tesla’s role, nor did Kennelly,Thomson, or Bradley. Charles Proteus Steinmetz, however, was in anothercategory. Like Pupin, he had just emigrated from Europe, and also like Pupin, hewas academically oriented, with no particular economic stake in the invention atthat time.Steinmetz, who had fled Germany in 1889 in order to escape imprisonmentfor being a revolutionary socialist, was a brilliant student of mathematics fromthe University of Breslau. A dwarf hunchback, with his head sunk into hisshoulders and one leg shorter than the other, Steinmetz had to continuallyovercome his odd appearance and frail disposition by displaying an advancedintellect. Just twenty-six years old and still attempting to cultivate a mustacheand beard, Steinmetz, who was gaining a reputation for his work on the law ofhysteresis (which involved a mathematical explanation that explained thelagging of magnetic effects when electromagnetic forces are changed)recognized some flaws in Pupin’s talk. As this would be one of his earliestattempts to express himself before his peers in the difficult English language,10he carefully bolstered the addendum by bringing along calculations anddrawings. Working in Yonkers, Steinmetz had developed a single-phasecommutator motor a year before, in the summer of 1890.11With brazenly long shoulder-length hair, the gnome was dressed in aslightly wrinkled three-piece suit adorned with an opulent watch chain and a pairof pince-nez that hung distinctively from a strap attached to his right collar.Standing to his full height of four feet and reaching for his glasses to read off hiscalculations, Steinmetz noted in his German accent that “Ferraris built only alittle toy.” He also went on to correct Pupin’s implication that the Dobrowolskycreation was the first to use a three-phase system. “I cannot agree with that in theleast, for [that] already [exists] in the old Tesla motor.” Summing up, Steinmetzconcluded, “I really cannot see anything new…in the new…Dobrowolskysystem.”12It would take a few months for Steinmetz to realize why his colleaguesraised their eyebrows as he dashed all hopes for Dobrowolsky’s claims.Nevertheless, they were impressed with his analysis and mathematical expertise.Elihu Thomson returned to his firm of Thomson-Houston in Lynn,Massachusetts, with the knowledge that a new mathematical genius had arrivedfrom Europe, and soon thereafter Thomson-Houston offered Steinmetz a job atLynn.Meanwhile, in Pittsburgh, unbeknown to Edison, Westinghouse had beensurreptitiously meeting with Henry Villard, Edison’s financial backer, over atwo-year period to discuss a possible merger. Villard, who had recentlycombined a number of smaller companies with Edison Electric to create EdisonGeneral Electric, was well aware that Edison did not get along withWestinghouse. Villard was an immigrant from Germany, the son of a Bavarianjudge. Having tried in his earlier days to set up a “free soil” German settlementin Kansas, Villard was the individual who drove the golden spike in the NorthernPacific Railroad to link the West Coast with the East. He conferred with J.Pierpont Morgan, the real power behind the operation, and had Morgan sendEdward Dean Adams, a longtime banking associate, to Menlo Park to try and getEdison to align with Westinghouse. Thriving on “beating the other guy,” Edisonwould hear none of it. “Westinghouse,” he said, “has gone crazy over suddenaccession of wealth or something unknown to me and is flying a kite that willland him in the mud sooner or later.”13Legal fees in trying to protect the Edison lightbulb patents had already costEdison $2 million and Westinghouse the same. The Edison camp had decided tosue Westinghouse rather than Thomson-Houston, because the Pittsburghcompany had purchased United States Electric, the concern that held thecompeting patents from Sawyer-Man and Hiram Maxim, while Thomson-Houston had only a lease agreement. Thus, while two giants fought each other inwhat Edison called “a suicide of time,” Thomson-Houston got rich.On July 14, 1891, after many years of battles and appeals on priority ofinvention of the lightbulb, Judge Bradley ruled in favor of Edison. AlthoughWestinghouse was caught with the wrong lightbulb patents, his Tesla AC powersystem was an asset worth attaining; but Westinghouse was proving difficult tonegotiate with. Villard therefore began to make overtures to Tesla directly, butthe inventor had to yield to Westinghouse’s decisions.“Dear Sir,” Tesla wrote Villard in his tidiest penmanship, “I haveapproached Mr. Westinghouse in a number of ways and endeavored to get to anunderstanding…[but] the results have not been very promising…Realizing this,and also considering carefully the chances and probabilities of success, I haveconcluded that I cannot associate myself with the undertaking you contemplate.”Tesla reluctantly concluded the letter by wishing the financier “best success in[his] pioneer enterprise.”14Villard switched tactics and approached Thomson-Houston with the thoughtof buying them out. He had gone up to Lynn, Massachusetts, in February andhad continued secret negotiations with Charles Coffin, chief executive officer(CEO) of Thomson-Houston, throughout the summer. In December a meetingwas held at 23 Wall Street, in Morgan’s office, to finalize plans for a merger.After Morgan looked over the financial records of both companies, he realizedthat Edison Electric, which was in debt for $3.5 million, had less revenue thanthe smaller and solvent Thomson-Houston. Morgan thereupon reversed himselfand suggested that Thomson-Houston buy out Edison Electric. Either way, hecreated a monopoly. Simultaneously, Morgan maneuvered Villard out of thecompany altogether—he had to blame someone for the problems—and CharlesCoffin took control of the new consolidation. They named the company GeneralElectric (GE).Because of the enormous debt of his company and the possibility that hewas working with inferior DC equipment, Edison had lost his edge. The thoughtof working with that patent pirate Elihu Thomson and the removal of his ownname from the marquee made the electrical wizard, for the time, a beaten man.Although he stirred the hornets’ nest before he left, Edison realized that a newage of electricity had arrived, one that would not countenance his commonsense,trial-and-error approach. Over a year before the actual merger was completed, hewrote Villard, “It is clear that my usefulness is gone…Viewing it from this lightyou will see how impossible it is for me to spur my mind, under the shadow ofpossible future affiliations…I would now ask you not to oppose my gradualretirement from the lighting business, which will enable me to enter into freshand congenial fields of work.”15 And so Edison turned his interests to furtheringthe work of Edward Muybridge, a pioneer in motion pictures. In 1888 and 1891he had his first patents on a device he called the kinetograph, and a few yearslater, he developed a fully working movie camera and projection system. In1893, Edison could write to the elderly Muybridge16 that he now had a peep-show device that people would pay five cents to see.17The “Morganization” of GE created an even greater foe for Westinghousebut also a critical problem for GE. Whereas Westinghouse was blocked fromusing an efficient lightbulb, GE was blocked from generating AC. As the Edisonpatents were only valid for another two years, certainly Westinghouse was in thebetter position. But in 1891-92 it was still too early in the game to realize this.From the point of view of the courts, it was still undecided as to who the authorof the AC polyphase system really was, even though Westinghouse had theFerraris patent trump card to back those of Tesla’s, and so, over the next fewyears, Westinghouse was forced to sue not only a number of subsidiaries of GEbut also some independents, such as William Stanley, who were now producingpolyphase systems on their own.From GE’s point of view, there was a whole host of patents in AC thatThomson owned, but any others that they could obtain would undoubtedly helpin the legal arena. Thus, they approached Charles Steinmetz with a scheme towork on improvements on AC designs in such a way that they would obscureTesla’s role. Attracted to the intrigue, Steinmetz accepted the challenge.18The fray between Westinghouse and GE took a new turn in the race to winthe bid to light the upcoming Chicago World’s Fair and to harness Niagara Falls.In the courts, the suits switched from lightbulbs to power generation, and at theirrespective plants attention turned toward a way to compete with the successachieved by Brown and Dobrowolsky.For Westinghouse Corporation, Schmid, Scott, and Lamme could conferwith Tesla, while Stillwell and Shallenberger brooded, and the money menreluctantly agreed to dismantle the very lucrative but outmoded Gaulard-Gibbsmachinery. For GE, the situation was more complex. They had hoped thatsomeone like Steinmetz or Thomson could come up with a competing design,but they hadn’t realized that Tesla held all the fundamental patents. Quite simply,there was no other system. Tesla had understood the foundation. One couldn’tproceed without him.Thomson and Steinmetz were reduced to figuring out ways to somehowbypass the patents by designing “teaser currents”19 or some other smokescreendevice in order to pretend that they had created a separate invention. In a case ofindustrial espionage, Thomson-Houston apparently paid a janitor to steal theTesla blueprints from the Westinghouse plant.20 Embarrassed to explain how theblueprints ended up at Lynn, Thomson said that he needed to study the Teslamotor designs to make sure that his were different.The intrigue must have triggered a variety of emotions in Steinmetz. He hadalready lived a clandestine life in Germany; by editing a radical socialistnewspaper under a pseudonym during the so-called Reign of Terror, he hadlearned to use secret passwords at radical meetings and write with invisible ink,as when he carried love notes between his leader, the charismatic revoutionaryHeinrich Lux, who had been jailed for his activities, and Lux’s girlfriend.Although Steinmetz never renounced his affiliation with the socialist movement,he supported a rather unscrupulous capitalistic corporate structure that wasmotivated not only by the all-consuming profit motive but also by its ability tosubvert the law to achieve its ends. This new situation thereby only served toheighten his contradictory nature.His affiliation with the Machiavellian policies of GE induced Steinmetz toabandon his ideals. His opus on AC, Theory and Calculations of AlternatingCurrent Phenomena, coauthored with Ernst Julius Berg, a colleague educated atthe Royal Polytechnikum in Stockholm, and first published in 1897, just threeyears after Tesla’s own compendium, omitted any reference to Tesla at all. (Bythe turn of the century, Berg’s name on the cover, like Lux’s love notes,disappeared.)At the time, Tesla’s book The Inventions, Researches and Writings ofNikola Tesla, edited by T. C. Martin, was a veritable bible for all engineers in thefield. It included chapters on alternating-current motors, the rotating magneticfield, synchronizing motors, rotating field transformers, polyphase systems,single-phase motors, etc. That it does not appear in the bibliography ofSteinmetz’s work is astounding.In the foreword to Steinmetz’s second text, Theoretical Elements ofElectrical Engineering, written in 1902, the author tries to explain why heomitted reference to the inventor of the AC polyphase system. “Of later years,”Steinmetz wrote, “the electrical literature has been haunted by so many theories,for instance of the induction motor, which are incorrect.”21 This was a naturalopening that might have catapulted Steinmetz into a discussion which would setthe record straight, but he chose a pusillanimous path instead. This decision notonly aided in obfuscating the truth as to the origin of the invention; it alsobolstered his own image in the corporate community.As these texts on AC would serve as important templates for subsequentwriters, it was quite common in the later years for engineers to obtain degrees,study AC, and even write textbooks on the topic themselves and never comeacross Tesla’s name.Clearly, it was to GE’s benefit to pretend that Tesla never existed, and itwas to Westinghouse’s benefit to pretend that the Lauffen-Frankfurt transmissionhad never occurred. The next generation of engineers, and those that followed,never realized that obfuscation had taken place; that is one of the main reasonswhy Tesla’s name practically vanished.Perhaps the most blatant case of misrepresentation occurred a generationlater, when Michael Pupin published his Pulitzer Prize-winning autobiographyFrom Immigrant to Inventor. Pupin was able to write long passages on thehistory of AC and ignore Tesla almost completely. Tesla’s name appears onlyonce, in passing, in the 396-page book.22In this work Pupin described “four historical events, very important in theannals of electrical science,” that is, the Lauffen-Frankfurt transmission, theharnessing of Niagara Falls, the formation of GE, and the lighting of the ChicagoWorld’s Fair by AC. Mentioning the Westinghouse concern only once as acompany that was interested in AC, Pupin concluded, “If the Thomson-HoustonCompany had contributed nothing else than Elihu Thomson to…[GE], it wouldhave contributed more than enough…[Thus] the senseless opposition to thealternating current system…vanished quickly.23In the preface Pupin had the audacity to write that “the main object of [my]narrative [is]…to describe the rise of idealism in American science, andparticularly in physical sciences and the related industries…[As] witness to thisgradual development,…[this] testimony has competence and weight.”Considering that Pupin is generally remembered fondly by the engineeringworld, it is my opinion that he failed to live up to the standards to which heaspired.These attempts to alter the past turned the stomach of a number of keyplayers, most notably C. E. L. Brown, of Oerlikon Works in Switzerland, andone of his top engineers, B. A. Behrend. A staunch man with a granite profileand hound-dog eyes, Brown, who, with Dobrowolsky, had been the firstengineer to transmit electrical power over long distances with Tesla’s ACinvention, had learned of Tesla’s work from British engineer Gisbert Kapp, whopublished Tesla’s 1888 talk in his magazine Industries. Kapp, who authored oneof the most “brilliant” textbooks on induction motors, wrote Tesla on June 9,1888, to request the use of his paper for the magazine.24Based on Tesla’s treatise and Kapp’s refinements, Brown was able toconstruct “[before] Westinghouse…probably…the first successful motor…in1890.”25 Brown’s succinct response, conspicuously placed in Electrical World,was directed specifically to Carl Hering, one of the first writers to imply that theinvention was Dobrowolsky’s. “The three-phase current as applied at Frankfort,”Brown wrote, “is due to the labors of Mr. Tesla, and will be found clearlyspecified in his patents.”26Hering’s first response was to continue the artifice. “I do not think,” Heringsaid, “[that] Mr. Brown does proper justice to the real inventor of thismodification of the Ferraris-Tesla system, namely, Dobrowolsky.”27 But Teslademanded a more clear-cut communiqué. After a discussion with W. J. Johnston,who would later allow Hering to take over the editorship of Electrical World,Tesla was able to obtain the following response: “We desire to state right here,”Johnston said, “that the Electrical World has over and over put itself on record asupholding Mr. Tesla’s priority.”28 The magazine was also able to extract fromHering the following: “Dobrowolsky, though he may have been an independentinventor, admits that Tesla’s work is prior to his.”29Although Hering was loath to admit Tesla’s priority, at the same time heplaced his finger on an important point: Tesla himself had not demonstratedphysically that his system could be used for long-distance transmission.Certainly Westinghouse at that time was not aware of the vast benefits of thesystem. Had it not been for the success at Lauffen-Frankfurt, Tesla’s apparatusmight have evolved differently in America. Hering did not have access tovarious details of the Westinghouse motors, and that was because the work wasnot in the public domain. Great amounts of money were spent to keep the workprivate. Had a Lauffen-Frankfurt type of transmission occurred in Americawithout Westinghouse’s permission, it would have clearly been a case of patentpiracy. Tesla issued patents in most of the industrialized countries, and it appearslikely that Brown and Oerlikon licensed Tesla’s patents and paid him for theprivilege of using them.Coincidentally, Gisbert Kapp’s treatise, which was initially published in twoinstallments in December 1890 in the Electrician in London, appears also tohave been used extensively by Charles Steinmetz in 1891 and 1892, while hewas constructing AC motors at a machine shop in New York before he was hiredby Thomson, according to B. A. Behrend, author of one of the first definitiveworks on the AC motor. An émigré from Switzerland, Behrend came to work forthe New England Granite Company, a division of GE, in 1896. Particularly upsetby the tactics of such writers as Steinmetz in using other people’s work andleaving their names out of the bibliography, Behrend would later become one ofTesla’s most important allies. In the foreword of his book, Behrend stated: “Thetendency to write books without references is due largely to the desire to avoidthe looking-up of other writers’ papers. The reader is not benefited by suchtreatment, as he may frequently prefer the original to the treatment of the authorwhose book he is reading. Besides, a knowledge of the literature of ourprofession is essential to an understanding of the art and to an honestinterpretation of the part played therein by our fellow workers.”30Writing to Oliver Heaviside specifically about such authors as Steinmetz,Behrend quoted Huxley: “Magna est veritas et praevalebit!” translating andmodifying the quote as follows, “Truth is great, certainly, but considering hergreatness, it is curious what a long time she is apt to take about prevailing.” Thebody of his book began with this sentence: “The Induction Motor, or RotaryField Motor, was invented by Mr. Nikola Tesla, in 1888.” Tesla’s picture alsoappeared as the frontispiece.Throughout his life, Behrend sought to set the record straight as to who thereal author of the AC polyphase system was. When Westinghouse sued NewEngland Granite for patent infringements, Behrend was placed in “anembarrassing and disagreeable” position; the high command, which stemmedfrom Wall Street, wanted him to testify against Tesla.On May 3, 1901, Behrend wrote back to the attorney Arthur Stem, “Mydear sir…You will see that I am now, even more than I have been before, of theopinion that it is not possible for us to bring forth arguments that could go toshow the invalidity of the Tesla Patents in suit…I cannot undertake this duty.”31 