8SOUTH FIFTH AVENUE (1890-91)At one bound [Tesla] placed himself abreast such men as Edison, Brush,Elihu Thomson, and Alexander Graham Bell…His performance touched onthe marvelous.JOSEPH WETZLER IN HARPER’S WEEKLY, JULY 11, 18911Tesla returned from Paris during the summer of 1889 to his new laboratorynear Bleecker Street. Down the road from one of Edison’s showrooms, the labtook up the entire fourth floor of a six-story building located at 33-35 South FifthAvenue (which today is called West Broadway). At the same time, he toured thehotels, moving into the Astor House, a posh five-story establishment situated bya trolley line in the heart of the city.Over the summer, Tesla’s “best friend,” Anthony Szegeti, passed away. Hewrote home to notify his family. “I feel alienated,” he told Uncle Pajo, “and it isdifficult [for me to adapt to the American lifestyle].”2Now part of the nouveau riche, and also the star of the family, the inventorbegan sending money home to his mother and sisters and also to some of thecousins. Addressing the letters mostly to his sisters’ husbands, all of whom werepriests, Tesla wrote Uncle Pajo, “Somehow it is hard to correspond with theladies.”3 Although occasionally he did write his sisters, mostly he just sentchecks, and each of them would repeatedly write back to try and get a morepersonal word from “the only brother that we have.”4 Throughout the 1890s,Tesla sent several thousand forints, at 150 forints a clip, which was an amountequivalent to six months’ rent at a well-to-do home or six months salary for aSerbian workman. Some of the funds were given as gifts, some to pay back hisuncles for their aid in funding his education and sojourn to the New World, andother funds, which were partially obtained through European royalties, wereused as investments.5 To Uncle Petar, who had advanced to become aMetropolitan (Cardinal) in Bosnia, Tesla revealed that he was receiving manyletters from dignitaries and also such respect that it was difficult for him todescribe.6Uncle Pajo occasionally shipped European bottles of wine to his finickynephew, unhappy with the selection in the United States. Impatiently waiting forthese bottles was, for Tesla, like “waiting for the messiah.”7As Tesla’s fame grew, and reports of his successes made the headlines intheir local papers, Tesla became a virtual demigod to the Serbian and Croatianpeople, and a noble, though distant benefactor to his family. “We think about youeven in [our] dreams,” one of his brothers-in-law wrote.8Except for occasional dinners with such friends as T. C. Martin or necessarytrips to Pittsburgh, the inventor spent virtually all of his waking existence at thelab. His partner, Alfred S. Brown, would stop by to help when needed, butmostly Tesla worked with either one or two assistants or alone. As was hiscustom, he could labor seven days a week and around the clock, stopping only tofreshen up at the hotel or for a necessary appointment. Monastic by choice andcompelled by an all-consuming desire to be a major player in the burgeoningnew age, the wizard preferred working through the night, when distractionscould be minimized and concentration could be intensified.Now free, he began his investigations along a number of separate butinterrelated lines. As an experimental physicist, he began to study the differencebetween electromagnetic and electrostatic phenomena, and also the relationshipof the structure of the ether to that of electricity, matter, and light. As aninventor, he began to design equipment for generating extremely highfrequencies and voltages and for transforming direct into alternating current, orvice versa, and for creating uniform oscillations. Tesla also wanted to deviseways to manufacture light and to explore the concept of wirelesscommunication. Already concerned about the fragility of the earth’s naturalresources, the finite supply of timber and coal, Tesla spent endless hours incontemplation, reviewing and replicating the findings of others, criticizing orimproving upon their inventions, and also designing completely originalcreations. His goal was influenced by an evolutionary perspective and pragmaticconsiderations: He wanted to devise mechanical means for doing away withneedless tasks of physical labor so that humans could spend more time increative endeavors.Unlike Karl Marx, who saw the worker becoming “an appendage of themachine,”9 Tesla realized that machines could liberate the worker.The inventor, in Tesla’s eyes, had always been and always would be thelight giver of the species, guiding its future through advanced technology. Themasses, in turn, would benefit because machines would perform menial tasks sothat they could pursue more intellectual occupations. With increased technology,cultural evolution would proceed at ever faster rates. “Conversely,” Teslawarned, “everything that is against the teachings of religion and law ofhygiene…tend[s] to decrease [human energy].”10 Impure drinking water, inparticular, was one of the greatest dangers.Within the next eighteen months Tesla initiated most of the inventions thatwould occupy him for the next half century. During the last weeks of 1889,Martin met with him on several occasions in order to finalize his article on theSerb’s heritage and plans for the future. The inventor would talk late into thenight about his youth and the incessant struggle of his ancestors to fight off thediabolical Turks. As Martin took notes, Tesla outlined some of his inventions,particularly his work with high frequencies and his original theories on therelationship between electromagnetism and the structure of light. Martin tried totalk the inventor into presenting his ideas before the AIEE, but Tesla evaded adirect response. “Suppose I were to obtain for you Lord Kelvin’s lectures? Iknow they are a bit wearisome, and somewhat beyond solution, but I believe thatyou, Samson like, can wrestle the honey from this lion’s jaw.”11“Perhaps” was Tesla’s reply.On January 21, 1890, Professor Anthony took over the presidency of theAIEE from Elihu Thomson (who followed T. C. Martin) and opened the yearwith his own lecture on new electrical theories.12 Happy to see the professoragain, Tesla attended the seminar and was elected vice president. Participating inthe discussion which followed, he was joined by Irish mathematician ArthurKennelly of the Edison Company and Michael Pupin, a physics teacher andfellow Serb.Having just returned from Helmholtz’s laboratory in Germany, Pupin wasunaware of the extent of the animosity that existed between the Edison andWestinghouse camps.Pupin was from Idvor, a Serbian town north of Belgrade. His father hadbeen a knez, or village leader, much like Tesla’s father, but unlike Milutin Tesla,Mr. Pupin was an illiterate peasant and not part of the clerical aristocracy. Manyof Pupin’s relatives, like Tesla’s, were war heroes who had fought off the Turksto protect the empire; and, like Tesla, Pupin had avoided military service.Michael Pupin emigrated to the United States in 1874. After working at oddjobs, he entered Columbia College in New York in 1878. Graduating in 1884with a keen interest in electrical theory and with honors, Pupin received afellowship to study abroad. He wanted to go to Cambridge to learn under JamesClerk Maxwell, but he found upon his arrival that Maxwell had been dead forfour years.13 This tendency to overlook the obvious appears to be a theme thatruns through Pupin’s life. After Cambridge, he went on to the University ofBerlin, where he received a doctorate in physics. In 1889 he returned to NewYork to become an instructor at Columbia College.In February 1890, the full-page Martin article on Tesla was published inElectrical World accompanied by a very prominent photograph of the youthful-looking engineer. For Tesla it was excellent publicity, the first major essay toappear portraying the up-and-coming inventor.A meeting of the AIEE, devoted entirely to the new Tesla AC system, wasplanned for the following month. In particular, the conference had been sparkedby a number of important developments; most notably plans coming fromSwitzerland and Germany for a proposed long-distance AC power-transmissionexperiment,14 the impending success of the Westinghouse Company ininstituting a hydroelectric plant utilizing the Tesla AC system at a mining campin Telluride, Colorado, and the announcement of an International NiagaraCommission to look into the best way to harness Niagara Falls.At the March AIEE meeting, Prof. Louis Duncan was the main speaker; hislecture began with a mathematical dissection of the workings of “the novel andadmirable little machine invented by Mr. Tesla.” A former officer from the U.S.Naval Academy, Duncan had recently transferred from the South Pacific toJohns Hopkins University, where he stayed on to teach. An important ally, hegave the Tesla invention academic credibility. “The great advantage of themotor,” Duncan said, “lies in the fact that it has no commutator and it permitsthe use of very high voltages. In the future, power will be transmitted electricallyat voltages that will make machines with the commutator next to useless.” Afterthe lecture, there was a discussion, and Tesla participated.15Pupin, who spoke that summer in Boston and again in New York thefollowing year on “Alternating Current Theory,” was fast becoming an admirerof Tesla’s work. However, at the same time, Pupin was also becoming embroiledin the controversy as to who was the real author of the AC polyphase system,and from Tesla’s vantage point, Pupin made the mistake of befriending thewrong people.At the Boston meeting, Pupin “noticed that my audience was divided intotwo distinct groups; one group was cordial and appreciative, but the other was ascold as ice. The famous electrical engineer and inventor, Elihu Thomson, was inthe friendly group, and he looked me up after the address and congratulated mecordially. That was a great encouragement and I felt happy.” Other prominentindividuals, however, tried to have Pupin fired from the electrical engineeringdepartment at Columbia because of his adherence to AC,16 but Pupin overrodethe controversy and at the same time increased his friendship with Thomson.Unbeknown to Pupin, Thomson himself was in a quandary because he nowrecognized the clear advantage of the Tesla system, but he was locked out of itsuse because Westinghouse owned the patents.Although the Thomson-Houston Electric Company was extremelyprofitable, the concern faced certain doom if it was unable to use efficient ACmachinery. As Elihu Thomson had worked with AC for over a decade, he feltfully justified in adapting a Tesla-like system, especially because there wereother engineers who also claimed legitimate priorities of aspects of the system,notably Shallenberger and Ferraris. Furthermore, Thomson himself had comeclose to conceiving a similar workable plan. That Tesla held fundamental patentson a completely revolutionary invention was continually overlooked byThomson as he sought ways to rationalize his position while working at hiscompany, presiding at the AIEE, and writing in the electrical journals. He hadsuccessfully circumvented the Edison lightbulb patents by paying Sawyer for alicense to produce the stopper lamp, (an exhausted light bulb similar to Edison’swhich used a rubber plug—stopper—to hold in the vacuum) and so he sought asimilar tack with AC.During a heated series of articles in Electrical World between Thomson andTesla, it appears that Thomson admits to some of his distaste for his rival whenhe writes, “I confess that my statement as to the motive of my critical remarksmay have been out of place. They were elicited, however, by Mr. Tesla havingon a former occasion misunderstood my motives.”17 And so Pupin’s feelings forhis Serbian brother became undermined as his friendship with Thomson grew.Tesla agreed to present his work in high-frequency phenomena during athree-day symposium of the AIEE, which was held in May 1891, three monthsafter he first published his research on the topic.18 A hall was booked atColumbia College, which, at the time, was located between Park and Madisonavenues, on Forty-ninth and Fiftieth Streets, and the public was invited.19It is difficult to calculate the enormous impact that this lecture had on theengineers of the day and on the course of Tesla’s life, for it is clear that after theevent Tesla was perceived in an extraordinary way. Joseph Wetzler, or Josh, ashe preferred to be called, covered the talk for Electrical World. But Tesla’slecture was too important for a single exposure in a journal of limitedcirculation, and Wetzler was able to also peddle the piece as a spectacular full-page account in the prestigious Harper’s Weekly.“[With] lucid explanations in pure nervous English,” Wetzler proclaimed,“this stripling from the dim border-land of Austro-Hungary…[had] not onlygone far beyond the two distinguished European scientists Dr. Lodge andProfessor Hertz in grasp of electromagnetic theory of light, but…he had actuallymade apparatus by which electrostatic waves or ‘thrusts’ would give light forordinary every-day uses.” Tesla had not only presented a remarkable display ofelectrical phantasmagoria, he had also outlined new “fundamental and farreaching principles.”20Wetzler cogently pointed out that Tesla had gone far beyond HeinrichGeissler and Sir William Crookes in the production of light by use of vacuumtubes, and he had also “eclipsed” the Wizard of Menlo Park with his refinementsof the incandescent lamp. “But Mr. Tesla was not satisfied with these results,brilliant as they were. He had set himself no less a task than to create a lampwhich, without any external connection to wires…would glow brightly whenplaced anywhere in an apartment.”21 And if that were not enough, for aconclusion, Tesla passed tens of thousands of volts of AC through his body tolight up lightbulbs and shoot sparks off his fingertips and to show the world thatit was not at all a killer current when utilized correctly. “Exhausted tubes…heldin the hand of Mr. Tesla…appeared like a luminous sword in the hand of anarchangel representing justice,” said one reporter.22With Gano Dunn, his assistant,23 Tesla began his talk somewhat nervouslybut gained momentum as he progressed: “Of all the forms of nature’simmeasurable, all-pervading energy, which ever and ever change and move, likea soul animates an innate universe, electricity and magnetism are perhaps themost fascinating…We know,” Tesla continued, “that [electricity] acts like anincompressible fluid; that there must be a constant quantity of it in nature; that itcan neither be produced or destroyed…and that electric and ether phenomena areidentical.” Having set up the premise that our world is immersed in a great sea ofelectricity, the wizard proceeded to astound the audience with his myriadexperiments. And at the end, Tesla’s matched his opening in poetic expression:“We are whirling through endless space, with an inconceivable speed,” he said.“All around us everything is spinning, everything is moving, everywhere isenergy.” Based on this premise, Tesla ended with a prophetic supposition, whichhas often been interpreted by some to suggest that a zero point, or free energystrata, exists. “There must be some way of availing ourselves of this energydirectly,” he said. “Then, with the light obtained through the medium, with thepower derived from it, with every form of energy obtained without effort, fromstores forever inexhaustible, humanity will advance with giant strides. The merecontemplation of these magnificent possibilities expands our minds, strengthensour hopes and fills our hearts with supreme delight.”24Those who attended the lecture, including Professor Anthony, Alfred S.Brown, Elmer Sperry,25 William Stanley, Elihu Thomson, and Francis Upton,would remember the historic occasion for the rest of their lives.26 RobertMillikan, for instance, who later won a Nobel Prize for his work with cosmicrays, was a graduate student at Columbia at the time. He said many years later, “Ihave done no small fraction of my research work with the aid of the principles Ilearned that night.”27Michael Pupin, who also attended, however, appears not to have been soentranced. “[While] I was lecturing,” Tesla told a Serbian reporter, “Mr. Pupin,with his friends, [most likely, Elihu Thomson and Carl Hering] interrupted…bywhistling, and I had difficulty quieting down the misled audience.”28 Pupinwrote to Tesla to smooth things over and to set up an appointment to see themotor, as he was scheduled to deliver a number of lectures on polyphasecurrents, but Tesla avoided him.29 In Europe rumors began to circulate about thenew electrical Svengali in America, and Tesla was quickly invited to speakbefore European scientific societies. 