19SHADOWGRAPHS (1896)The rising claims of the inventors revives an incident in connectionwith the discovery of the Roentgen ray…Oliver Lodge [announced]apparatus by which he saw through a man. A few days later Mr. Edison[proclaimed] that he had apparatus with which he had seen through twomen. Within a week, Mr. Tesla produced rays of such penetrating power thatthey went clear through three men. When this was shown to Mr. Edison, thegreat man, who hasn’t a spark of jealousy in his nature, smiled and said,“Well, let’s stop it at three. What do you say? I think three men will do aswell and prove as much as a regiment.”NEW YORK MAIL & EXPRESS1Afew days before the New Year, the scientific world was shaken by theremarkable discovery by Wilhelm Roentgen of a queer, unknown energy that hecalled X rays, which emanated from his Lenard and Crookes tubes. MichaelPupin wrote, “No other discovery within my lifetime had ever aroused theinterest of the world as did the discovery of the X-rays. Every physicist droppedhis own problems and rushed headlong into the research.” Astonishingly, Pupinadded, “To the best of my knowledge I was at that time the only physicist herewho had had any laboratory experience with vacuum-tube research…I obtainedthe first X-ray photograph in America on January 2, 1896, two weeks after thediscovery was announced in Germany.”2 As Pupin could so neatly do, heforeswore any mention of his compatriot. To Pupin, Tesla was a nonperson.Roentgen gained world recognition virtually overnight with hisannouncement that he had discovered a new energy emanating from cathode-raytubes that could illuminate light-sensitive chemicals at the far end of a room,penetrate solid objects, and photograph the internal organs and bones of livingbeings. As Pupin noted, scientists from all over the world dropped their currentprojects to join in this exciting new venture. Tesla himself wrote no fewer thannine articles on the topic in a two-year period. Although Tesla may have noticedthese rays and their effects on photographic paper years earlier,3 he did notpursue the investigations and left no doubt that the discoverer of what he liked tocall “shadowgraphs” was Wilhelm Roentgen.Tesla had taken the word “shadowgraph” from Søren Kierkegaard, whodescribed them in his essay “Either/Or.” To the existential philosopher they weresketches “that derive from the darker side of life…[but] are not directly visible…The [shadowgraph] does not become perceptible until I see through theexternal…Not until I look through it, do I discover that inner picture toodelicately drawn to be outwardly visible, woven as it is of the tenderest moods ofthe soul.”4In Europe meager X rays were being produced by static machines andRuhmkorff induction coils; Tesla suggested, instead, the use of a high-frequencydisruptive coil attached to a special bulb with two electrodes, a cathode insidethe vacuum, for generating the “cathode streams,” and an anode placed as faraway as possible outside the bulb to limit the reduction of the potential. With thisapparatus, “effective pressures of about 4,000,000 volts were achieved.”5 Atfirst, the bulb will get hot and glow with a purplish hue, then the electrode willdisintegrate, and the bulb will cool. Use of a fan helps. “From [this] point on…the bulb is in a very good condition for producing the Roentgen shadows.” Whenthe electrode is too hot, it is probably because the vacuum is not high enough.6Generating such high voltages, this work not only was set up to measure thequality of the energy emanating from the bulb and to test its ability to pierceliving and nonliving objects or be reflected; it also laid the foundation for Tesla’slater experiments with particle-beam weapons.Here, in 1896, Tesla discussed the idea promulgated by the quantumphysicists a few years later that the energy had both particle-like and wavelikeproperties. Having set up a target to shoot the streams at, Tesla wrote: “Theeffects on the sensitive plate are due to projected particles or else to vibrations[of extremely high frequencies].”7 The inventor further speculated that “thestreams are formed of matter in some primary or elementary condition…Similiarstreams must be emitted by the sun and probably by other sources of radiantenergy.”8 Tesla also appeared to have come close to the idea of breaking up theelectron into subatomic particles. “The projected lumps of matter act as inelasticbodies, similarly to ever so many small lead bullets…These lumps are shatteredinto fragments so small as to make them lose entirely some physical propertiespossessed before the impact…[Might it not be possible] that in the Roentgenphenomena we may witness a transformation of ordinary matter into ether?9 [Or]we may be confronted with a dissolution of matter into some unknown primaryform, the Akâsa of the old Vedas.”10The inventor as physicist then proceeded to take X rays of small animals,such as birds and rabbits, as well as his workers, and of his own skull, ribs,limbs, and vertebrae. As some shadowgraphs took as long as an hour to obtain,Tesla noticed that he would sometimes fall asleep while he was beingbombarded by the machine.Week after week, Tesla would crank out yet another article on his “LatestResults.” On March 18, 1896, he announced in Electrical Review that he hadproduced shadowgraphs of humans at distances of forty feet and affectedphotosensitive paper at a distance of sixty feet from the source of the rays. Theinventor also tested different metals to see which ones reflected the energy in thebest way. Adorned with a lavish X ray of the bones of the wizard’s own rib cage,the article conveyed an eerie impression.11“I told some friends,” Tesla wrote, “that it might be possible to observe bythe aid of [a]…screen objects [and skeletons] passing through a street…Imention this odd idea only as an illustration of how these scientificdevelopments may even affect our morals and customs. Perhaps we shall shortlyget used to this state of things.”For Tesla, Roentgen rays were a gateway to a world invisible and ripe fornew possibilities. “Roentgen gave us a [wonderful] gun to fire…projectingmissiles of a thousandfold greater penetrative power than that of a cannon ball,and carrying them probably to distances of many miles…These missiles are sosmall that we may fire them through our tissues for days, weeks, and years,apparently without hurtful consequence.”Throughout the year, the inventor suffered from “the grippe.” Although hisillness made the papers, nobody seemed to link it to his excessiveexperimentation with the mysterious energy. In fact, concerning the risk to one’shealth, Tesla wrote: “No experimenter need be deterred from…investigation ofRoentgen rays for fear of poisonous or generally deleterious action, for it seemsreasonable to conclude that it would take centuries to accumulate enough of suchmatter to interfere seriously with the process of life of a person.”12 We nowknow, of course, that this view is wrong as long-term exposure to X rays can bevery dangerous to one’s health.Tesla did, however, refer to pain in the center of his forehead whenexperimenting with the rays and to “the hurtful action on the skin, inflammationand blistering,” but this he attributed to the production of ozone, which in smallquantities was “a most beneficial disinfectant.” Nevertheless, there was a severeaccident in the lab “to a dear and zealous assistant…without a protective screenpresent. The worker suffered severe blistering and raw flesh exposed,” theinventor undertaking “the bitter duty of recording the accident” in order to lessenthe danger for others.”13Edison was also making headlines with his work with Roentgen rays,especially when he noted that the streams caused blind people to experiencesensations in their eyes. “The X-rays succeeded in eliciting from the blind theejaculation, “I see; yes, I see a light!”14Edison, whose fluoroscope was already being used for lighting the eyeduring eye surgery, saw the possibility that eyesight, in some way, might berestored with the use of X rays.15 Tesla doubted it, and so the press took up thecharge and created a new round of headlines placing the two pioneers once againagainst each other. “The humorless dark Hungarian [had the] unpleasant duty tosay, ‘Is it not cruel to raise such hopes when there is so little ground for it…Whatpossible good can result?’”16Time proved Edison wrong, as X rays have not been used to “stimulate theretina” in such a way as to restore sight, but the two wizards did perform anumber of successful miracles with the strange energy when each used theinstruments to locate bullets lodged in the bones of various patients. Fortunately,the Kentucky School of Medicine helped bring the battle between the two to aclose when they “combin[ed] the devices of Tesla and Edison” to extract birdshot from the wounded foot of a voter who had received the injury in a fight atan election poll. After developing the X ray, which took only ninety seconds tomake, “every bone was distinctly shown, and the shot, about thirty in number,were plainly located.”17To celebrate the triumph and quell any purported hostilities, T. C. Martinwas able to coax Tesla into joining Edison and a number of other electricians fora day of fishing on a topsail schooner off Sandy Hook. The event was sponsoredby the Safety Insulated Wire and Cable Company. Although a storm erupted,accompanied by dark clouds and lightning, the “bold fishermen wereundismayed…In stately grandness…as happy and well satisfied a party as everrode the waves of the Atlantic’s billows…Toward nightfall, the [ship] turned herprow homeward…Nicola Tesla [caught] a flounder of large dimensions…[and]Edison caught a shocking big fluke.”18 