22SORCERER’S APPRENTICE (1896-97)Tesla had his rooms in the laboratory on Houston Street darkened [and] acurrent was turned on invisibly. As the group ga[z]ed at this the apartmentwas filled with a terrific lightning display, with the snapping, cracklingsound, displacing the reverberation of heaven’s artillery, and all remarkedthe weird and awing effect of the exhibition…His face lighting up and his spare figure vibrant with pride, [Teslaannounced], “I am producing an electrical disturbance of intensemagnitude [which] by means of certain simple instruments can be felt andappreciated at any point of the globe without the aid or intervention ofwires of any [kind] at all.”NEW YORK JOURNAL1One of Tesla’s most ardent admirers was Yale student Lee De Forest, who hadstudied the inventor’s collected works the previous semester. Tesla’s writings are“the greatest exciters to zealous work and study,” De Forest wrote in his diary.“His New York laboratory [is] a fabulous domain into which all ambitious youngelectrical students aspire…to enter and there remain…How I pray that I mayequal or excel him, that all this belief in my genius is not idle and conceit.”In May 1896, De Forest was able to arrange a visit to the East HoustonStreet den. “Now is the critical point in the curve of my life,” the youth scribbledon his pad as he sat on the train waiting for his stop, “for I am about to seekwork with Nikola Tesla.”The expert greeted the novice and gave him a tour, but was unable to takehim on as an apprentice. Noticing the dejected countenance on the buddinginventor’s face Tesla told De Forest: “I see a great future for you as you areendowed with a keen mind. You will not need this job to succeed.” Tesla wishedhim well and suggested De Forest contact him again.De Forest would apply once more in the spring of 1898, and probably againin 1900 or 1901, but for various reasons he was never hired. In retrospect,Tesla’s decision to reject the talented engineer was unfortunate, for De Forestwould soon rise to a premier position as a pioneer in the field of wirelesscommunication. He had a commercial mind and became a tenacious rival toTesla’s other young competitor, Guglielmo Marconi.2Throughout 1896, Tesla applied for and received eight patents on hiswireless system. These were mostly different types of oscillators for generatingelectromagnetic currents of high frequency and high potential. His firstapplication specifically in the field of radio communication was in 1897; hissecond, remote control, in 1898. Earlier patents on oscillators dating back to1891 and 1893 also covered this work, though in veiled form. Over the next fiveyears, the inventor’s arsenal grew to thirty-three fundamental patents, coveringall essential areas of “transmitting electrical energy through the naturalmedium.”3As part of his overall scheme, Tesla also began working on perfecting asystem of telephotography. His interest could be traced to 1893 and the ChicagoWorld’s Fair, where Elisha Gray’s teleautographic machine was displayed. Butover the summer of 1896 competition peaked, especially when Edisonannounced his plans to market an “autographic telegraph.” “I’m getting it readyfor you newspaper fellows,” Edison said, “and when I get working, all you willhave to do is hand your copy to the operator say in New York, for example, thecover will be shut down and presto! the wires will transmit it letter for letter tothe machine at the other end in Buffalo. The wires will transmit 20 square inchesof copy a minute and will carry sketches and pictures as well.”4In attempts to outdo Edison, Tesla told the New York Herald of his ownadvances. Under the imaginative assumptions that images from the retina couldbe captured and transmitted, Tesla included this esoteric idea along with a morerealistic plan to transmit text and pictures over the phone lines and by wireless.5Even today, the facsimile machine holds a special place in our imagination,for something typed in an office in New York can be transmitted instantaneouslyby satellite or over the phone lines to a receiver in San Francisco, Moscow, orTokyo. One can only imagine the sense of disbelief facing Tesla as he tried toconvince readers that pictures could be sent by means of wireless from one cityto another. Even primitive Morse-coded messages had yet to really be effectivelytransmitted.Nevertheless, Marconi was closing in rapidly on successfully demonstratinghis wireless apparatus as Tesla scoured the libraries to study the history oftelephotography.Tesla traced early work in inventions that led to the development of thefacsimile machine and television to English physicist Alexander Bain, who, in1842, first transmitted pictures by using a grid of electrical wires imbedded inwax held firmly beneath a sheet of chemically treated paper. All of these wirescould be channeled into one cable and strung to a receiving station where anidentical grid was constructed. If the receiver traced out the letter A, for instance,with an electric stylus, the particular wires comprising the design of the letterwould be electrified, and these, in turn, would treat that area of the paper on thereceiving end to spell out the matching character. Autographs and drawingscould also be transmitted in the same manner. As the process evolved, picturescould be broken down into a finite number of picture elements so that they couldalso be dispatched. In the 1860s, this grid was replaced by a single wire throughthe implementation of spinning disks and “perfect synchronism betweentransmitter and receiver,” Tesla’s synchronous AC motor helping augment theprocedure in the late 1880s and early 1890s.6With the development of the photographic process, the first wirelesspictures were sent in 1898 by Küster and G. Williams, “but the arrangementsinvolved the employment of Hertz waves and were impractable.” In 1892, Teslarecalled many years later, “the attention of the scientific world was directed to awonderfully sensitive receiver, consisting of an electron stream maintained in adelicately balanced condition in a vacuum bulb, by means of which it wasproposed to use photography in the transmission of telegraphic and telephonicmessages through the Atlantic cables, and later also by wireless.”In 1904, Dr. Arthur Korn, an electrical engineer from the University ofMunich, gained the attention of the scientific community when he successfullytransmitted wire photos from Munich to Nuremburg. According to Korn, who isoften credited as the inventor of the television tube, the apparatus utilized “Teslacurrents.”7 Tesla notes that once Korn introduced “a sensitive place [and] aselenium cell to vary the intensity of the sending current,” the process which iscalled the television advanced a giant step. Korn’s “tube is excited by a high-frequency current supplied from a Tesla transformer and may be flashed upmany thousand times per second,” thereby attaining the moving televisionimage.8Tesla dates Korn’s first experiments to 1903. A May 1899 article states thatTesla was working on a “visual telegraphy” system with the light-sensitiveelement selenium, thus predating Korn’s work by four years. It is probable thatTesla was replicating the experiments of Küster and Williams on precursors tothe video camera, although Korn, not Tesla, perfected it.9In essence, the modern television works in a way analogous to Bain’s first1842 construction. An electronic tube, similar to Tesla’s brush vacuum tube, ismoved across an entire TV screen in an instant. During its pass over the areawhere the image is formed, it releases synchronized impulses for each pixel. Theposition of the beam and its precise sequence of firing are directed by impulsesstemming from the broadcast station. Each pass over the entire screen creates aseparate image that when played in sequence portrays natural moving pictures.Tesla followed the advances in the field of telephotography as they occurredand experimented himself. His first task was to figure out the optimal way totransmit the energy.Having tested the Hertz spark-gap apparatus, Tesla found that this device,which Marconi was utilizing, was subject to static interference and involvedarbitrary pulsed (damped) frequencies that were weak. They transmittedthemselves transversely through the air and did not take into accountlongitudinal properties which were augmented when making use of extremelyhigh potentials and a ground connection. Working out calculations that took intoaccount the speed of light and the size of the earth, Tesla designed carefullyconstructed continuous (undamped) electromagnetic waves that were in harmonywith those of the planet.By 1897, Tesla amassed all of the essential patents for generating,modulating, storing, transmitting, and receiving wireless impulses. In a letter tohis lawyer, Parker W. Page, Tesla wrote, “I forward herewith M. Marconi’spatent which was just allowed…I notice that the signals have been described asbeing due to Hertzian waves, which is not the case. In other words, the patentdescribes something entirely different than what actually takes place…How fardoes this affect the validity of the patent?”10 Clearly, Tesla already suspected thatMarconi was utilizing his equipment.In Tesla’s first patent specifically for wireless transmission, no. 649,621,filed on September 2, 1897, he discusses the need for a “terminal…preferably oflarge surface…maintained by such means as a balloon at an elevation suitablefor the purposes of transmission…[and another] terminal of the secondary…connected to [the] earth…At the receiving station a transformer of similarconstruction is employed.” The specification goes on to describe how thewavelengths can be constructed and modified so as to tune the circuits and takeinto account the natural properties of electromagnetic energy.Having taken into account the size and capacity of the earth, Tesla hadcalculated that with a coil fifty miles in length oscillating at 925 times persecond, a resonant relationship to the frequency of light was realized. Since hehad worked with exhausted tubes, Tesla knew that electricity traveled moreeasily through them than through air. Thus, he reasoned, if his transmissiontowers were placed on high elevations above obstructions and further raised bythe use of balloons, the upper atmosphere (or ionosphere) itself would serve as ameans of transmission. Large power stations located near waterfalls wouldsupply the energy necessary for the wireless transmission to this upper stratum.11In a separate way, the earth itself would also serve as a medium. Thefollowing passage from the same 1897 patent application criticized Marconi’suse of the more primitive Hertzian apparatus: “It is to be noted that thephenomenon here involved in the transmission of electrical energy is one of trueconduction and is not to be confounded with the phenomena of electricalradiation which have heretofore been observed and which from the very natureand mode of propagation would render practically impossible the transmission ofany appreciable amount of energy to such distance as are of practicalimportance.”12Marconi, who was working with Lloyds of London in ship-to-shoreexperiments, was using a more trial and error method. In July 1896, inexperiments with Preece, the Italian had successfully transmitted messagesthrough walls and over distances of seven or eight miles. In December heapplied for a patent, which Preece felt was “very strong,”13 although he knew theyoungster had been anticipated by Lodge and Tesla. The patent was not original,and it did not put forth any new principles; nevertheless, Marconi was definitelysucceeding in the real world, while Tesla advanced in his laboratory inrefinements of apparatus and in the theoretical realm. The differences insophistication of knowledge on the subject are aptly described by one ofMarconi’s associates, Mr. Vyvyan. “We knew nothing then about the effect of thelength of a wave transmitted governing the distance over which communicationcould be affected,” the colleague stated. “We did not even have the means orinstruments for measuring wavelength, in fact we did not know accurately whatwavelength we were using.”14Preece’s initial work in his study of earth currents and induction effectsgenerating from normal telegraphic lines in the 1880s and 1890s led him torealize the strength of Tesla’s system. Marconi, at that stage, had nounderstanding of the role of the earth in conveying electrical energy. He wasutilizing the principle of “radiation” through the air according to Hertz’sapparatus. Without understanding why, he did make use of an aerial and groundconnection, but this setup had already been published widely in 1893 by Tesla.Other principles were taken from Oliver Lodge, who was in a patent dispute withGuglielmo Marconi. William Preece was well aware that they had beenanticipated, but he could also see Marconi advance markedly, while hisprecursors basically stood still.After Marconi rejected Preece’s suggestion that they request the use ofTesla’s apparatus, the British nobleman was placed in a conflictual situation. InAugust 1897 he mailed off a “terse” dispatch. “I regret to say that I must stop allexperiments and all action until I learn the conditions that are to determine therelations between your company and the [British] Government Departments whohave encouraged and helped you so much.”15 But the die was cast, and Preecebecame helpless to stop what he knew was a complex form of piracy. He becameill and retreated to Egypt, where he stayed a year.Marconi was also being aided by H. M. Hozier, director of Lloyds, who,according to one account, “succeeded in sending reasonably clear messages…[through Hozier’s apparatus]…in one place, at least where Marconi himself hadfailed.”16 Lloyds also contacted Tesla “to rig up a wireless set, ship-shore in1896 to report the international yacht race, [but] Tesla refused the offer, claimingthat any public demonstration of his system on less than a world-wide basiswould be confused with the amateurish effort being made by otherexperimenters.”17Instead, Tesla performed a long-distance clandestine experiment which hetold no one about, not even his workers. Sometime in 1896 or early 1897, theinventor turned on his generator to “produce continuous trains of oscillations”and took a cab to the Hudson River. There he caught a boat and ferried up toWest Point with a battery-operated machine “suitable for transportation.” “I didthis two or three times,” he told the courts in 1915. “[But] there were no signalsactually given. I simply got the note, but that was for me just the same.” In otherwords, having brought a receiving instrument with him, the inventor simplytuned it to the point where it began to respond to the oscillations emanating fromhis laboratory back at East Houston Street. “That is, I think, a distance of aboutthirty miles,” Tesla said.18Tesla also considered harnessing wind power, the tides, solar andgeothermal energy, and also energy released during the process of electrolysis. Ifwater was separated into oxygen and hydrogen, these explosive substances couldtheoretically be used to generate the heat to create steam. Working along varyinglines of research, Tesla also patented ozone-production machines and devised ascheme whereby nitrogen from the air would be electrically separated out andblended with conveyor belts of soil to create a fertilizer machine.“All the agriculturist needs,” Tesla suggested, “is…[to] shovel…a quantityof loose earth, treated by a secret chemical preparation in liquid form…into thecylinder. An electric current is passed through the confined atmosphere, theoxygen and hydrogen are…expelled, and the nitrogen which remains is thusabsorbed into the loose earth. There is thus produced as strong fertiliser for anominal price [right] at [the farmer’s] home.”19On April 6, 1897, Tesla spoke again to the public at the New YorkAcademy of Sciences. Over four thousand people attended.20 With largephotographs of dozens of radio tubes Tesla had designed gracing the walls, Teslaset out to explain his advances in Roentgen rays. Certainly the audience wasinterested in seeing a remarkable device that revealed the human skeleton of aliving person, but unquestionably most of them came to behold the sorcerer hurlhis thunderbolts.21Tesla’s world telegraphy system had finally come into clear focus. His planwas to disturb the electrical capacity of the earth with gigantic Tesla oscillatorsand thereby use these earth currents themselves as carrier waves for histransmitter. In 1897 he explained precisely how his world telegraphy systemwould operate:Suppose the whole earth to be like a hollow rubber ball filled with water,and at one place I have a tube attached…with a plunger…If I press upon theplunger the water in the tube will be driven into the rubber ball, and as thewater is practically incompressible, every part of the surface of the ball willbe expanded. If I withdraw the plunger, the water follows it and every partof the ball will contract. Now, if I pierce the surface of the ball several timesand set tubes and plungers at each place, the plungers in these will vibrateup and down in answer to every movement which I may produce in theplunger of the first tube.There is a peculiar addition to this paragraph: “If I were to produce anexplosion in the centre of the body of water in the ball, this would set up a seriesof vibrations in the whole body. If I could then set the plunger in one of the tubesto vibrating in consonance with the vibrations of the water, in a little while andwith the use of a very little energy, I could burst the whole thing asunder.”The water corresponds to “terrestrial currents” (which are today known astelluric currents), and the plungers refer to his transmitters and receivers. “Theinventor thinks it possible that his machine when perfected may be set up, one ineach great centre of civilization, to flash the news of the day’s or hour’s historyimmediately to all other cities of the world; and stepping for a sentence out ofthe realms of the workaday world, he offers a prophecy that any communicationwe may have with other stars will certainly be by such a method.”22This article, which appeared in Scribners, also discussed Marconi’ssuccessful wireless transmission of eight miles in Europe. We see in thesepassages stemming from 1896 and 1897, that Tesla had already conceived of atotal plan for his world telegraphy system and that it utilized a variety of wirelessmodes, one being through the upper air strata, another by means of mechanicalresonance, which he called telegeodynamics, and a third, and his most important,by riding terrestrial currents. His next plan was to measure precisely thefrequency of the planet and construct transmitters in harmonic relations to it.Nodal points could then be mapped out from, say, a wireless transmitter placedat Niagara Falls to precise positions for receiving towers on different continents.For all intents and purposes, no one, except for Marconi, had demonstratedthat wireless messages could be transmitted more than a few hundred feet. Andsuccess only involved the modest goal of sending Morse coded messages.Marconi’s next plan, which would capture the world’s attention, was to radiatethe impulses across the English Channel. Certainly Tesla had demonstrated all ofthe principles found in the modern radio years earlier, but his publicdemonstrations were held within lecture halls. He had established that he couldilluminate lamps from a transmitter placed on the roof of his laboratory onHouston Street to his hotel twenty-six blocks away, but these experiments wereheld in secret and were never publicized.23 The 1895 fire also thwarted hisefforts to display long-distance effects.And when Lloyds of London contacted him, to the dismay of his secretary,George Scherff, Tesla rejected the offer to demonstrate his system’s capabilities.Tesla, however, was not content with merely setting up a worldbroadcasting system that, from a conceptual perspective, is superior to ourprevailing technology in that it would transmit power as well as information; healso suggested that he could contact the stars, create rain in the deserts, or causewide-scale havoc. Tesla became the quintessential mad scientist. Through hisinventions, the world could be dominated according to whim.The contradictions within the inventor began to pull him in oppositedirections. In letters to the Johnsons he calls himself Tesla Great Inventor andimplies that, like Paderewski and other luminaries, he was not a mere mortal, butduring his Niagara Falls speech he denigrated himself. Tesla was somewhatwealthy during this period, but the requirements of his operations were beyondhis means. And yet Tesla shunned billing engineers when they sought his aid andvoided a royalty contract with Westinghouse, though it was now worth a fortune.In June 1897 it was reported that Westinghouse had paid $216,000 for hispatents.24 As Tesla and his partners, Brown and Peck, were receiving yearlychecks of $15,000, with an initial down payment of probably $70,000,25 thisworks out to about a quarter of a million dollars for a ten-year period. In a letterto Astor, Tesla places the figure at $500,000,26 but in either case, it was stillmillions of dollars less than its actual value.By this time, Westinghouse and GE had formalized their “entente cordiale.”This meant that a second gigantic corporation with numerous subsiaries wouldbe benefiting from Tesla’s invention but the inventor would not receive a dimefor it. The electric subway trains would also be implementing the Tesla motorsand system, and again the inventor would get no compensation.Tesla’s new plans would require enormous expenditures. Westinghouse wasmaking it clear that his company would not be a source of funds beyond theirformer signed agreement (although it is possible that Tesla did receive additionalrevenues for other inventions, such as for his oscillators). At the end of the year,the inventor wrote his friend Earnest Heinreich, an engineer at the WestinghouseCorporation who also was a novelist. “My dear Heinreich,” Tesla wrote, “It istrue that I have not been quite well of late, but can assure you that I amphysically and mentally all right at present. I have however, still a little ailmentwhich may be best designated as financial anemia, from which you are yourselfsuffering, if I am not mistaken. I wish you would remember me to all the boys atabout Xmas time for it is just possible that some of them might feel disposed tosend me a token.”27There were other pressures as well. Tesla was having difficulties with hisfinancial backer Edward Dean Adams, who was opposing his efforts to promotehis wireless enterprise; there was this continuing competition with Marconi; andthere were the painful echoes of his Serbian past, from Kosovo and his lostyouth. His parents and brother were dead, and he was away from his family notjust in distance but also in spirit. In yet another of so many letters sent, sistersMarica and Angelina pleaded for a response. Tesla had sent funds on manyoccasions and a copy of his Martin text, but they wanted more. “Remember whatyour name is and where you come from,” Marica wrote, ending her letter withthe customary “I am kissing you in spirit.”28 Part of him ached from the pain,and just as he was coasting high and ahead of the pack on the crest of the wave.Maybe it was the influence of the Boer War or the unrest brewing in Cuba,but Tesla’s destructive streak began to emerge. His previous inventions werealready reshaping human events; his newest creation could interlink everyremote hamlet or tear the world apart. He decided to experiment.With George Scherff present, Tesla placed one of his mechanical oscillatorson the center support beam in the basement of the Houston Street building wherehis laboratory was located and adjusted the frequency to the point where thebeam began to hum. “While he was attending to something else for a fewmoments, it attained such a crescendo of rhythm that it started to shake thebuilding, then it began shaking the earth nearabout [and other buildings withsupport beams in resonantfrequencies]…The Fire Department responded to an alarm franticallyturned in; four tons of machinery flew across the basement and the onlything which saved the building from utter collapse was the quick action of Dr.Tesla in seizing a hammer and destroying his machine.”“The device could be a Frankenstein’s monster,” Tesla confided many yearslater. “If not watched, no substance can withstand the steadily applied rhythmwhen its resonance point is reached. Skyscrapers could easily be destroyed withthe steady building up of resonance from the timed strokes of a five-poundhammer.29In another rendition of the story, told at another time, Tesla claimed that hehad taken his alarm clock-sized oscillator to a building site “in the Wall Streetdistrict.” Finding one under construction, about “ten stories high of steelframework…” he clamped the vibrator to one of the beams and fussed with theadjustment until he got it.“In a few minutes I could feel the beam trembling,” Tesla told a reporter.“Gradually, the trembling increased in intensity and extended throughout thewhole great mass of steel. Finally, the structure began to creak and weave, andthe steel-workers came to the ground panic-stricken, believing there had been anearthquake. Rumors spread that the building was about to fall, and the policereserves were called out. Before anything serious happened, I took off thevibrator, put it in my pocket and went away. But if I had kept on ten minutesmore, I could have laid that building flat in the street. And, with the samevibrator, I could drop the Brooklyn Bridge into the East River in less than anhour.”Tesla told the reporter that he could split the earth in the same way, puttingan end to mankind.“The vibrations of the earth,” he said, “have a periodicity of approximatelyone hour and forty-nine minutes. That is to say, if I strike the earth this instant, awave of contraction goes through it that will come back in one hour and forty-nine minutes in the form of expansion. As a matter of fact, the earth, likeeverything else, is in a constant state of vibration. It is constantly contracting andexpanding.“Now suppose that at the precise moment when it begins to contract, Iexplode a ton of dynamite. That accelerates the contraction, and in one hour andforty-nine minutes, there comes an equally accelerated wave of expansion. Whenthe wave of expansion ebbs, suppose I explode another ton…and suppose thisperformance be repeated time after time. Is there any doubt as to what wouldhappen? There is no doubt in my mind. The earth would be split in two. For thefirst time in man’s history, he has the knowledge with which he may interferewith cosmic processes.”Tesla calculated that this procedure might take more than a year to succeed,“but in a few weeks,” Tesla said, “I could set the earth’s crust into such a state ofvibration that it would rise and fall hundreds of feet, throwing rivers out of theirbeds, wrecking buildings, and practically destroying civilization. The principlecannot fail.”30 