21LUMINARIES (1896-98)A memorable occasion was the first meeting of Tesla and Paderewski. Twomore intellectual or lovable men I have never known. They were mostcongenial and became friends at once. On comparing notes, theydiscovered that they had both been in Strasburg years before at the sametime [1882], Tesla as an electrical assistant on a small salary, andPaderewski as a student in music, and they laughed heartily at the changeof their conditions since that time of storm and stress.ROBERT UNDERWOOD JOHNSON1Tesla traveled back to Manhattan with T. C. Martin, Francis Lynde Stetson,Darius Ogden Mills, and John Hays Hammond’s brother, Richard Hammond,who was considering placing Tesla turbines at a dam in California. A Roentgensymposium was being coordinated by Martin and R. U. Johnson under theauspices of the Century, and Tesla would help in the preparations, butdisagreements with Tom Edison, Elihu Thomson, and Michael Pupin hadpeaked, and Tesla declined an invitation to a dinner of all the participants. “I cannot explain, but it is really impossible for me to join the company,”2 he said.Edison was about to join forces with Marconi. Thomson was still piratingTesla’s induction motor; Pupin, the Tesla oscillators. Stetson, as Morgan’s“attorney general,” could smooth over the bumps in GE’s attempts to lay thegroundwork for a pooling of patents with Westinghouse—GE would get the ACpolyphase system in exchange for the Vanderpoel trolley patents—but he couldnever erase the growing vendetta against Tesla by a number of key men in hisindustry.This was a particularly difficult time for Martin and so a gap betweenMartin and Tesla began to form.At the end of January, Tesla sponsored another lavish feast followed by atour of his lab. He invited John Jacob Astor and his stunning wife, Ava Willing,and Mr. and Mrs. Stanford White. Due to the late hour, Lady Astor was“dreadfully disappointed” to pass on the electrical pyrotechnics.3 However,White and company were able to take advantage of the entire affair.“My dear Tesla,” wrote White, “I cannot tell you how impressed I was theother night at your laboratory, and how delighted I was to be there.” Signing theletter “Affectionately yours,” White also congratulated Tesla on his “address atBuffalo…[which was] so full of beautiful thoughts.”4 This was White’s secondvisit to the lab, and his feelings for Tesla continued to grow.March 28, 1896Dear Luka,I happen to be free this evening. If you have visitors (ordinary mortals)I will not come. If you have Paderewski, Roentgen or Mrs. Anthony I willcome.Yours sincerely,TGI5“Tesla Great Inventor” had met Paderewski for the first time at a dinner atthe Johnson “salon” in April of 1896. After an invitation from Robert, Teslawrote back, “Hope that Miss—I mean Mr. Paderewski will come.”6 He wasreferring to Paderewski’s trademark, a lush, unbridled mane which flared abovehis head as he played the piano during his concerts.Referring to this first meeting, Johnson wrote, “Like Tesla, he [Paderewski]has a marvelous mind, which is a store-house of knowledge on all sorts oftopics.” Johnson, who had written a poem about the virtuoso, likenedPaderewski’s music to “choiring angels in Paradise.”7Latter-day prime minister of Poland, Paderewski was the highest-paidperformer of the decade. Richard Watson Gilder, editor in chief at the Century,frequently invited, in Paderewski’s words, “all the great visiting artists,musicians, distinguished writers, sculptors, painters and politicans who came toAmerica…A connoisseur of art and of life, [Gilder] appreciated and recognizedat once the unusual in everything—in people as well.”8 Through Gilder, Johnsonmet many luminaries, and through Johnson, Tesla followed.At this same time, in the spring of 1896, Tesla and the Johnsons were busyreading Rudyard Kipling’s recently published Jungle Book. “The stories ofKipling’s are charm itself,” Tesla wrote Mrs. Filipov. “I think Rikki Tikki Tavi isthe best.”9 Two days later, a party for Kipling was organized at the Johnsonhome. “Sorry I can not come to dinner,” Tesla wrote, “but will show up as soonas possible afterwards.”10Kipling, who was thirty at the time, had purchased a house from hisbrother-in-law in Brattleboro, Vermont, where he had written The Jungle Book,and now he had come to New York to help promote it.Much like Twain, Kipling was known as a “globe-trotter,” having visitedsuch places as Ceylon, India, New Zealand, and Australia. After the party, andhis stay in New York, Kipling traveled to England and then on to South Africa.On the boat trip over he ran into John Hays Hammond, and when he reachedCape Town, he talked Cecil Rhodes into giving him a tour of the front lines ofthe Boer War. Upon his return to New York, in early 1899, he spent time withTesla before another formal dinner in his honor was prepared by the Johnsons.The following letter, although written three years later, reflects the kind offriendship the two men shared:Dear Mrs. Filipov,What is the matter with inkspiller Kipling? He actually dared to inviteme to dine in an obscure hotel where I would be sure to get hair andcockroaches in the soup?11On the very day of the party, Kipling rocked the world, for he was taken illwith typhoid and nearly died. Katharine would spend the next few monthshelping to take care of the ailing novelist.12 Kipling survived the ordeal, buttragically, his daughter Josephine perished. He was in such a weakened conditionthat his wife was forced to hide the young girl’s death from him until he waswell enough to be able to handle the news. As the newspapers carried dailyreports of Kipling’s condition on their front pages, the world mourned the younggirl’s loss, just as they rejoiced with his recovery. Having experienced familytragedy in his own life, Tesla hoped that the death would not impair Kipling’sability to write. “I am delighted Kipling has recovered,” Tesla told the Johnsons.“I just hope there will be no evil consequences except a sorrow though hard tobear.” Philosophically, Tesla added, “It will probably give his works moredignity and depth.”13Do not thus drift with the mob. I invite you to join me in a month’s worshipwith Nature in the high temples of the great Sierra Crown beyond our holyYosemite. It will cost you nothing save the time and very little of that for youwill be mostly in eternity.JOHN MUIR14Another frequent visitor to the Johnson household was the conservationistand poet John Muir, who, a few years earlier, had taken Johnson on a tour ofYosemite, what Muir called, “the great creations of the Almighty.” On his tripsto New York, Muir typically dressed in a seasoned three-piece suit completewith a gold watch dangling from a high vest pocket; but his demeanor was“mountain man” all the way. Sixty years old, still in his prime, his hair was grayand long and his face adorned with a beard that extended to his navel likescraggy sagebrush. His eyes may have sparked in different directions because ofan early industrial accident, but his gaze proclaimed the aura of an enlightenedone.Having dined with Muir at the Johnsons’ during the holiday season, andhaving invited the naturalist back to his lab, Tesla later told Katharine, that heappreciated Muir’s contribution to society. “I am always grateful to [Muir],” hewrote, “for his magnificent description of Yosemite Valley which I have readthrough in one breath.”15A founder of the Sierra Club with Johnson, Muir was, in a sense, Tesla’sdoppelgänger. Muir was a somewhat unkempt naturalist who spent most of histime in the forest, but part of him longed for civilization, and Tesla, ever thefastidious and smartly dressed metropolitan, spent most of his life in the city butlonged for the mountains. A former inventor himself, having fashioned anaward-winning bed that toppled the sleeper out onto the floor in the morning,Muir was not opposed, in principle, to human progress, only to callousobliteration of the precious wonders of the planet. Since Tesla’s inventionssought to utilize renewable energy and minimize destruction of naturalresources, in that sense, both Tesla and Muir shared a common end.Muir’s writings remain his most powerful statement to the spiritual path.The importance of his friendship with Tesla helps support the modern-conceptsconservation and ecological thinking. Placing it all in perspective, Muir wrote,“Who wouldn’t be a mountaineer! Up here all the world’s prizes seemnothing.”16 