33WARDENCLYFFE (1902-1903)While the tower itself is very picturesque, it is the wonders hiddenunderneath it that excite the curiosity of the little [hamlet]. In the centre of[the] base, there is a wooden affair very much like the companionway on anocean steamer. Carefully guarded, no one except Mr. Tesla’s own men havebeen allowed as much as the briefest peep…Mr. Scherff…told an inquirer that the [shaft entrance] led to a smalldrainage passage built for the purpose of keeping the ground about thetower dry; [but] the villagers tell a different story.They declare that it leads to a well-like excavation as deep as thetower is high, with walls of masonwork and a circular stairway leading tothe bottom. From there, they say. the entire ground below has beenhoneycombed with subterranean [tunnels that extend in all directions].They tell with awe how Mr. Tesla, on his weekly visits…spends asmuch time in the underground passages as he does on the tower or in thehandsome laboratory where the power plant for the world telegraph hasbeen installed.NEW YORK TIMES1Just as Tesla had created a notebook for his experiments in Colorado, he alsocompiled a daily log of activities at Wardenclyffe. His records for 1902 reveallittle activity for the first third of the year except for the month of March.Extended note taking really began again in May and continued uninterruptedlyuntil July 1903. Each week, Tesla watched the tower attain a new height as heexperimented by measuring the capacitance of his apparatus and constructing aprototype planet to calculate “his theory of current propagation through theEarth.” On this sizable metal sphere, the inventor would transmit varyingfrequencies to measure the voltage, wavelength, and velocity of the transmittedenergy and also assess various nodal points, such as along the equator and at thepole opposite the point of generation.2In February 1902, along with Stanford White, Tesla entertained PrinceHenry of Prussia who had come to New York to retrieve a royal yacht that hadbeen built in America. The brother of Kaiser Wilhelm, it had been Prince Henrywho had assisted in the performance of the inventor’s famous experiments underTesla’s name in Berlin six years earlier. The yacht was being christened by AliceRoosevelt, daughter of the president.3 In June out at Wardenclyffe, “two grey-haired East Hampton pilgrims drop[ped] in on their way to a Spring retreat.”4Kate’s eyes glowed as she broke off from Robert and Nikola to approach thetower and feel it with her own hands. A radiant warmth flowed through herbeing as she watched the lanky engineer converse with her husband.By September, the transmitter had reached its full elevation of 180 feet.Exhausted of funds, with still the dome to place on top, the inventor had nochoice but to wind down activities and lay off most of the workers. Tesla hadsold his last major asset, a $35,000 land holding, but even that could not keep theoperation fully afloat. Nevertheless, with this new source of revenue, heprocured enough funds to keep a skeleton crew, cover Scherff’s and his ownlodging, and pay for a chef from the Waldorf to come out at regular intervals.Tesla also took this time to photograph the interior operations of his entire plant.These pictures not only included reproductions of all his machinery but alsocontained a representative sample of the myriad different types of radio tubesthat the inventor had designed. They numbered nearly a thousand.5The Port Jefferson Echo reported “War between Marconi and Tesla” intheir headlines in 1902. According to the paper, the United States MarconiCompany had purchased land west of Bridgehampton and was planning onconstructing its own competing 185-foot tower, with New York City connectionsto Western Union. “It should become the most important wireless center in thecountry.” Whereas Marconi was going to send his signals through the air, thepaper said, Tesla plans, through his “500-foot deep” shaft, to send messagesthrough the earth as well. Though the hollow was 120 feet, the gist of the reportwas accurate.Having first sent an emissary, Marconi himself hired a horse and buggy onerainy morning to go out to Wardenclyffe to meet with Tesla and see the operationwith his own eyes.6 Marconi’s limitations became apparent in conversation, andthis gave Tesla the courage to return to see Morgan. He had stayed out ofMorgan’s way for nearly a year, but now it was clear to the inventor that once hispartner realized the work accomplished with so little funds at hand, he wouldreconsider his position and agree to resume investment. All the inventor had todo was change the man’s mind.On September 5, Tesla wrote the financier to inform him that the foreignpatents had been assigned to the company. The letter explained clearly that hiswireless system ensured privacy and had the ability to create a virtually infinitenumber of separate channels that were dependent not only on particularcombinations of differing frequencies but also on “their order of succession.” Inessence, the inventor had explained to Morgan the concepts inherent in suchdevices as the protected channels on cable TV, digital recording, and the wirelesstelephone scrambler.In the letter, Tesla explained that he was forced to increase the power of hisapparatus because of “bold appropriations” of his equipment (Marconi’s piracy),but his mea culpa also betrayed paranoid tendencies, even though he wasattempting reconciliation: “The only way to fully protect myself was to developapparatus of such power as to enable me to control effectively the vibrationsthroughout the globe. Now, if I had received this necessity earlier, I would havegone to Niagara, and with the capital you have so generously advanced, I couldhave accomplished this easily. But unfortunately my plans were already madeand I could not change. I endeavored once to explain this to you, much to mysorrow, as I impressed you wrongly. Nothing remained then but to do the best Icould under the circumstances.”Morgan’s response was utter astonishment. Tesla had not only reiterated thebreach of contract but had also revealed a striking flaw in his plan. Whereas hewould have to haul in continuing truckloads of coal to provide the energyrequired to fire up his transmitter on Long Island, if he had set up operations atNiagara, there would have been easy access to unlimited amounts of power, andthus the operation would have been considerably less expensive to initiate.Furthermore, there was a standing offer by Rankine and his associates to providepower at the Falls for little or no cost, thereby reducing potential expenses evenmore. Nevertheless, Tesla incredibly informs Morgan that even on Long Islandhe could outdo the power of the giant cataract.“By straining every part of my machinery to the utmost,” Tesla wrote, “Ishall be able to reach…a rate of energy delivery of 10 millions of horse power.”This production, he proclaimed, would be equal to “more than twice that of theentire Falls of Niagara. Thus the waves generated by my transmitter will be thegreatest spontaneous manifestation of energy on Earth…the strongest effectproduced at a point diametrically opposite the transmitter which in this instanceis situated a few hundred miles off the western coast of Australia.”Whether or not this statement was true, it was counterproductive to divulgethis. (Most likely Tesla is discussing the production of a single massive burst ofelectrical energy rather than a continuous, never-ending flow. In either case,having spent a year in the outbacks of Colorado, the bon vivant was not about togive up his lifestyle at the elegant Waldorf for another lonely excursion to thedreary location near Buffalo.) Neurotically impelled , the inventor was stirred toimpress the financial magnate when all Morgan wanted was to signal oceanliners and send Morse code to Europe.Later in the letter the inventor did address this more modest task ofbroadcasting simple messages. Over transmission lines, dispatches from NewYork Telegraph & Cable could be delivered to Wardenclyffe, where they couldthen be distributed to Europe by means of wireless to a central receiving station.Since your departure, Mr. Morgan, I have had time to reflect…[on] theimportance and scope of your work, and I now see that you are no longer aman, but as a principle and that every spark of your vitality must bepreserved for the good of your fellowmen. I have therefore given up thehope that you might aid me in establishing a manufacturing plant whichwould enable me to reap the fruit of my labors of many years. But someideas which I have not simply conceived—but worked out—are of suchgreat consequence that I honestly believe them to deserve your attention…I have no greater desire than to prove myself worthy of yourconfidence, and that to have had relations, however distant, with so greatand noble man as you will ever be for me one of the most gratifyingexperiences and most highly prized recollections of my life.Yours most devotedly,N. Tesla7Perhaps it was the finale or the inventor’s rank or maybe the realization ofthe value of the fundamental patents that continued to flow into his office, butfor whatever reason, Morgan was moved to the point of allowing anothermeeting—as long as it was expressly understood that the liaison would still bekept unpublicized.8Tesla’s plan was to seek new investors by selling bonds and capitalizing thecompany at $10 million. What he did not realize was that his silent partnerwanted to maintain his 51 percent control over the patents, take in “about  ofthe securities,” and also be reimbursed for his initial investment.9 In other words,whereas Tesla required about an additional $150,000 to complete the tower, payoff his debts, construct the receiving equipment, and so on, the Wall Street hydrawanted his money back in full, wanted to maintain his large share of the concern,wanted the inventor to raise the funds on his own, and wanted no one to know ofhis connection to the project! If Tesla were to agree to all that, they would have adeal.Kate gazed out her window at the changing colors of the leaves as she wentover the Thanksgiving menu with Agnes.“Do you think he’ll come, Momma?”“Of course he will.”“He didn’t last year.”“Mr. Tesla was not himself,” Katharine stated matter-of-factly. Sitting by afizzling Edison lightbulb, she penned an urgent notice and hired a specialmessenger to deliver it.Tesla was working on his list of prospective investors when a loud bangingat his door interrupted him. “Sorry, sir, it is important.”The inventor grabbed the letter and ripped it open. Thoughts of accidentand death flashed through his brain as he reflected upon his relationship with theJohnsons and his inability to deal with them now. He wrote back:Some day I will tell you just what I think of people who mark their letters“important” or send dispatches at night.You know I would travel 1000 miles to have such a great treat as oneof Mrs. Filipov’s dinners, but this Thanksgiving day I have a great manyhard nuts to crack and I will pass it in quiet meditation. The rest of theholidays I propose to pass in the same good company.Never mind my absence in body. It is no consequence. I am with youin spirit.With love to all and Agnes in particular,Nikola10With this painful letter, Tesla succeeded in transferring some of his anguishto his friends. Not only would he not attend the November holiday feast; hewould also not partake of the Christmas festivities. Unable to escape himself ordig his way out of the deep hole he was in, he passed the time cranking out waysto enlist new investors.When Katharine realized the depth of the inventor’s despair, she becamealarmed. The emptiness at such an important occasion was almost too much tobear. “Agnes, please write Mr. Tesla once again and tell him that he may stop byat any time that he likes, and forever long he wants.”“Don’t you think he knows what he is doing,” Robert interrupted. “Heneeds to be by himself right now.”“Don’t tell me what he needs!” Kate exploded, her Irish temper flaring. “Doit,” she commanded her daughter. Robert moved quietly into the living room toread a book of poems.As Agnes sat down to write, a peculiar dark and twisted expression passedover her mother’s face. Kate retired to her boudoir to sit there in her gloom.Tesla wrote, “My dear Agnes,” back two days after the new year. “I have no timebut plenty of love and friendship for all of you. I would like very much to seeyou, but it is impossible. Even kings are beginning to infringe my patent rights,and I must restrain myself.”11Katharine could take solace in the fact that her platonic aficionado had usedthe word love twice in two letters. In his own peculiar way, he had transformedthe pain of his career to their linkage, and in that sense, he had reached out, asnever before, but it was by withdrawing, and this made her love him more.Thomas Commerford Martin may have had mixed feelings about havingsupported so vigorously a man he knew had infringed on Tesla’s patents, butMartin had warned Tesla nearly five years earlier that whereas Marconi wassucceeding on the physical plane, Tesla appeared to advance mostly in theory. Asocial gadfly, Martin had also upped his prestige considerably by hosting thegala Marconi affair, and he continued to elevate his standing among the upperechelon of the electrical community. Harper’s decided to do a feature on him,and Edison was becoming amenable to the idea of allowing him to write hisbiography.12 As a precursor to the new venture, the editor prepared for theweekly a short piece on the “volcanic lifetime of a master who has produced apatent every fortnight for over thirty years.”An “Edison Man” remains an Edison man to the end of the chapter, and isproud of the stamp left upon his career by the great spirit with whom trialsand triumphs have been shared…[Although] Edison has always beensurrounded by a willing host of workers, [he] has always held easily hisleadership among them. This is by no means true of other[s]…Somepowerful thinkers, whether from instinctive distrust or unavowed jealousy,endeavor to hammer out their conceptions in lonely struggle, and namescould be mentioned here of electrical inventors whose curse seems to bethis sterile seclusion. In Edison’s case, the sunny, kindly temperament of theman makes for friendship.13Martin was almost certainly talking about Tesla here, and in so doing, hehighlighted ponderous debilities in the inventor’s personality. Tesla could beinordinately withdrawn, private, “distrustful,” an elitest, and yet envious ofothers, unable to share in the development of his ideas lest he would have toshare credit. Later in this article, Martin wrote that “a great many first-classinventors are sharply concentrated along one line,” while Edison had “manyirons in the fire.” As versatile and incredibly prolific as Tesla was, he stuck, untilthe end of his days, to the single monumental Wardenclyffe idea when anyaspect of the grand plan, in and of itself, would have been a revolutionaryaccomplishment.Underneath it all, however, Martin was, without doubt, the one individualwho had accomplished the most toward explicating the wondrous achievementsof the sequestered genius, and his connection to Tesla would remain sacred tohim for the duration of his life. Martin took the opportunity to let Tesla knowthis when he gave the inventor an updated version of the collected works.“Many thanks for the book,” Tesla wrote his old-time friend. “It was apleasure to read the dedication which tells me that your heart is true toNikola.”14 This occasion served to break the ice again, and the two resumed theirfriendship, albeit not with the same intensity as before.In a dreadful predicament, the inventor was beginning to stare down acanyon of doom, writing his letters now in pencil, abandoning the certainty ofthe pen.Ever since I was a boy I was desirous of drawing on the Bank of England.Can you blame me? I confess my low commercial interests dominate me…Will you please give me a list of people almost as prominent and influentialas the Johnsons who desire to get into high society. I will send them myletter.Nikola Busted15Forced to approach both the Johnsons and his manager, George Scherff, forfunds, both lent him thousands over the next few years.16 Simultaneously, hereturned to former enthusiasts such as Mrs. Dodge and Mrs. Winslow, and newinvestors, such as Mrs. Schwarz, wife of toy store owner F. A. O. Schwarz.17The price for investment was $175 for each share.With his back to the wall, he approached again his Wall Street benefactor.“Will you now let me go from door to door to humiliate myself to solicit fundsfrom some jew or promoter and have him participate in that gratitude which Ihave for you?,” he wrote Morgan. “I am tired of speaking to pusillanimouspeople who become scared when I ask them to invest $5000 and get thediarrhoea when I call for ten.”18MAD SCIENTIST“It is a mighty fine tower,” said one good farmer…last week. “The breezeup there is something grand of a Summer evening, and you can see theSound and all the steamers that go by. We are tired, though, trying to figureout why he put it here instead of Coney Island.”19Although operations were suspended, there were many avenues the inventorwould explore in his attempts to complete the vision. One of his first decisionswas to comply with George Scherff’s plan to become more pragmatic.Throughout the balance of the year and much of 1903, Tesla began tomanufacture oscillators and continue development of his fluorescent lamps.Revenues began to trickle in, and by midyear he had compiled enough savings tohire back a half-dozen workers and pay for the cupola, which was placed at theapex of the spire.20 Over fifty feet in diameter, ten feet tall, and weighing fifty-five tons, this iron-and-steel crown, with its specially designed multitude ofnodal points, would serve the purpose of storing electrical charges anddistributing them either through the air or down the metal column and into thehollow. The cupola was linked to four large condensers behind the laboratory,which also served the purpose of storing electrical energy, and these in turn werecoupled with “an elaborate apparatus” which had the ability to provide “everyimaginable regulation…in the control of energy.”J. Pierpont Morgan: one of numerous political cartoons poking fun at the most powerfulfinancier in the world, circa 1901At the base of the edifice, deep below the earth, along the descending spiralstaircase, was a network of catacombs that extended out like spokes of a wheel.Sixteen of them contained iron pipes which protruded from the central shaft to adistance of three hundred feet. The expense for these “terrestrial grippers” wasnotable, as Tesla had to design “special machines to push the pipes, one after theother” deep into the earth’s interior.21 Also in the well were four stone-linedtunnels, each of which gradually rose back to the surface. Large enough for aman to crawl through, they emerged like isolated, igloo-shaped brick ovens threehundred feet from the base of the tower.Although the exact reason for the burrows has not been determined, theirnecessity was probably multifaceted. Tesla had increased the length of the aerialby over a hundred feet by extending the shaft into the earth. Simultaneously, hewas able to more easily transmit energy through the ground with thisarrangement. It is possible that he also planned to resonate the aquifer which wassituated slightly below the bottom of the well. The insulated passageways whichclimbed back to the surface may have been safety valves, which would haveallowed excess pressure to escape. They also provided an alternative way toaccess the base. Tesla may have planned to fill other shafts with salt water orliquid nitrogen to augment transmission. There may have also been other reasonsfor their construction.22Just as the inventor prepared to test his new equipment, creditors began toencroach more vigorously and Tesla was never able to put the final fireproofprotective outer facing on the cupola and tower. To Westinghouse he owednearly $30,000,23 the phone company was billing him for the telephone polesand lines which they erected to connect him with civilization,24 and JamesWarden was suing for taxes owed on the land.25 With the exigency of timeinexorably pressing down, the inventor worked furiously to link his transmitterto the power source and test its potentialities.Throughout the early part of 1903 the engineer “performed manymeasurements of ground resistance and insulation resistance of the tower. Heeven considered temperature [increases] caused by ground losses, differenceswhen salty water was spread around the base, weather conditions and time ofday.”26In the last week of July, just days before men came to cart away part of hisequipment, the inventor fashioned a way to couple his behemoth and fire it up.As pressures reached their maximum with the cupola fully charged, a dullthunder rumbled from the site, alerting the hamlet that something was about tohappen.Strange Light at Tesla’s TowerFrom the top of Mr. Tesla’s lattice work tower on the north shore of LongIsland, there was a vivid display of light several nights last week. Thisphenomena [sic] provoked the curiosity of the few people who live near by,but the proprietor of the Wardencliffe [sic] plant declined to explain thespectacle when inquiries were addressed to him.27Tesla’s mushroom-shaped citadel spewed forth a pyrotechnic eruption thatcould be gleaned not only by those who lived nearby but also by the populaceinhabitating the shores of Connecticut, across Long Island Sound. But by the endof July the tower fell silent, never to raise its radio cry again.It was a foggy morning when the Westinghouse crew appeared with theirhorse-drawn wagon and court order granting them permission to cart away theheavier equipment. The gargantuan edifice loomed as a specter of what could be,its head still obscured by the low-hanging clouds. Except for a guard, GeorgeScherff, and a handyman, the entire crew was let go. His dream now hobbled,the sullen wizard crept back to the city to weep alone in his Waldorf suite. 