36THE CHILD OF HIS DREAMS (1907-1908)I do not hesitate to state here for future reference and as a test of theaccuracy of my scientific forecast that flying machines and ships propelledby electricity transmitted without wire will have ceased to be a wonder inten years from now. I would say five were it not that there is such a thing as“inertia of human opinion” resisting revolutionary ideas.NIKOLA TESLA, MAY 16, 19071“It’s three o’clock in the morning, Mr. Tesla,” George Scherff rasped into thephone as his wife grumbled in her sleep.“The sheriffs seized the land.”“You owed Warden a hundred ninety-nine dollars!” Scherff said inamazement.Fighting back a flood of tears, the inventor rasped, “I don’t have it.”“I’ll take care of it, Mr. Tesla.”2“Thank you,” Tesla said as his hand limply hung up the line. His hairdisheveled, his clothes scattered about, the former man of the hour was going tohave to let the maid in soon. What would she say about the drapes he had placedover the mirrors? And then there was the tower. He had to go back there to sealup the property. Would he have the strength to make the journey?His appetite all but gone, Tesla hadn’t seen his friends for months. Hemanaged a letter to Katharine as he rang room service to send up breakfast. “I’mever in so much greater trouble,” he scratched out on his letterhead.3 But hewould allow no one to truly know the hell he had entered. No sunlight must enterhis room. He sat in the shadows and petted a wounded pigeon he had foundfloundering by the New York Public Library. If Boldt ever knew, the bird wouldhave to be smuggled back out.The withered man reached over to the envelope addressed to him in afeminine hand. Carefully he removed the letter and theater ticket. MargueriteMerrington had invited him to her new play Love Finds a Way. He stared at thetitle and broke down once again into uncontrollable sobs.4Reconciling the torment, Tesla eased himself back into the social net as1907 commenced. As part of his therapy, the recluse would surreptitiously boarda moonlight train to Wardenclyffe. There, in the wizard’s chambers, the Balkangenie would hook up high-frequency apparatus to his skull and thereby impressmacabre waves of soothing electrical energy through his brain. “I have passed[150,000 volts]…through my head,” Tesla told the New York Times, “and did notlose consciousness, but I invariably fell into a lethargic sleep some time after.”In May, Tesla was inducted as a member of the New York Academy ofSciences.6 Slowly, he began to see once again that perhaps his grand plan couldbe resurrected. To raise the capital to keep his ship afloat, the inventor took out aseries of mortgages, subdividing the enterprise into a string of hypotheticalparcels. In the spring of 1904 he had borrowed $5,000 from Thomas G.Sherman, a law partner of Stanford White’s brother-in-law, and in the winter of1906 he obtained $3,500 from Edmund Stallo, a son-in-law of one ofRockefeller’s Standard Oil partners; but those funds had long disappeared.Having dodged the Waldorf management for nearly three years, he took outanother mortgage for an additional $5,000 against the rent he owed with theproprietor, George Boldt.7 And thus began a fresh plan for continuing to live inthe lap of luxury without laying out another dime.Boldt had done exceptionally well for himself. Having hobnobbed with themegarich for many years, the Waldorf manager had been able to take advantageof a number of inside opportunities. By 1907, a millionaire in his own right, hehad expanded his base to become a banker, orchestrating the creation of theLincoln Trust Company, which was located across the street from MadisonSquare Garden.8Everyone except Tesla seemed to be flourishing. Morgan, through JacobSchiff, had finally iced his deal with the Guggenheims to form the “AlaskaSyndicate,” an enormous corporation which had been set up to exploit a copperfind in the inviolable northern wilderness. Whereas the Guggenheim mountain inUtah contained only 2-3 percent ore, this lode, according to John HaysHammond’s report, was 75 percent pure copper! A site of incalculable wealth, itwould take a fleet of steamships, a thousandman crew, and an up-front capitalinvestment of $25 million to construct a railroad just to reach the find.But copper was not all the “Morganheims” had their eye on. They alsobegan purchasing coal and iron reserves and hundreds of thousands of acres offorestland. “Thus the press, the few environmentalists active at the time, and asignificant portion of the American people began to vigorously oppose theGuggenmorganization of Alaska.”9With the growing need for copper wire came also a demand for insulation.Seizing the opportunity, Thomas Fortune Ryan and Bernard Baruch went toEurope to sign a contract with the king of Belgium (the former Prince Albert, anacquaintance of Tesla’s). Their plan was to take over the rubber industry in theAfrican Congo. The financiers negotiated an even split, with the king allocating25 percent for his country and retaining 25 percent for himself. As Baruchreturned to Wall Street to handle marketing, Ryan traveled to Africa to overseethe product’s manufacture. Naturally, the tire companies were just as interestedas the electrical concerns.Once it was realized that Tesla’s plans to do away with transmission lineshad been abolished, it seemed as if there began a feeding frenzy on copperstocks, as this market was now assured a continually increasing demand.PANIC OF 1907The first signs of economic distress was heralded in August, when John D.Rockefeller of Standard Oil was fined the staggering sum of $29 million forprice gouging and illegal tariffs. Suddenly, Wall Street became edgy. In October,F. Augustus Heinze, a well-known speculator and enemy of the Guggenheimsyndicate, began dumping large blocks of United Copper onto the market.Heinze miscalculated in his attempts to buy back the stock at a much lowerprice, and his shifty scheming resulted in a drop in the market and a run on hisbank, the Mercantile Trust Company. Due to Heinze’s links to other financialinstitutions, the hysteria spread, and the Panic of 1907 began. Depositorsemptied out every bank they could get into.J. Pierpont Morgan called an emergency conference of all the bank and trustpresidents, gathering them together in his newly constructed library in an all-night vigil. Sitting among his tapestries, original manuscripts, paintings, andjewels, the Wall Street monarch did his best to orchestrate a bailout of thoseinstitutions that were salvageable. Some, however, were beyond repair, and thestronger banks would go only so far in dipping into their reserves. CharlesBarney, director of the Knickerbocker Trust Company, and father of “twoawfully pretty sisters,” pleaded for assistance, but he was rebuked. Barney wenthome and put a pistol to his head. This act produced a wave of suicides,particularly among the Knickerbocker’s eighteen thousand depositors. WithHenry Clay Frick acting as liaison, President Theodore Roosevelt would transfer$25 million into Morgan’s control. Although this figure matched the pledge ofthe stronger institutions, the new influx could only stretch so far. Boldt’s bank,the Lincoln Trust, along with the Knickerbocker, the Mercantile, and half adozen others, had gone under by the end of the week.10 Now Tesla’s chances ofresurrecting his own enterprise became even more remote.“These are simply awful times,” Tesla told Scherff. “I cannot understand atall how Americans who are so daring and reckless in other respects can getscared to such a degree. My ship propulsion scheme is really great, and I feelsure that it will pull me out of the hole. Just how, I do not see as yet because itseems almost impossible to [amass] any money at all.”“We’re still waiting to hear from the International Mercantile MarineCompany,” Scherff said.“Be patient, my man. They are certainly interested, but make conditionswhich I am unable to accept for the present. If I had just a little capital I wouldnot worry about finishing my place.”“What about Astor?”“He told me over the phone, that he would see me as soon as possible, butup to present, nothing has materialized. I know now, that if I am to get capital, Ican only get it from some fellow who has not less than a hundred million.”“Then, Mr. Tesla, let’s hope for the best.”11“Dulled by [his] own suffering,”12 Tesla began edging himself out of hisdepression by producing a number of acerbic essays for the electrical journalsand local newspapers. Covering a wide range of topics, the inventor sought tovindicate himself and thereby try and make sense out of an absurdly ironicsituation. Simultaneously, he sought to explain the Wardenclyffe vision yet againin the vain hope that some financier with a transcendent vision would come tohis rescue. He was searching for a hero, not only for selfish desires but, in hiseyes, for the future of the planet.Under the guise of commenting on Commodore Perry’s exploration of theNorth Pole, Tesla explained in detail the modus operandi of his world wirelessscheme.13 For Harvard Illustrated, he discussed Lowell’s Martian discoveriesand the way to signal the nearby planet;” for the World and English Mechanic &World of Science, he described how a tidal wave could be created by using highexplosives to set the entire earth in oscillation and discussed how this wall ofwater could be harnessed to “engulf” an advancing enemy;15 and for the NewYork Sun and New York Times he drafted a flurry of letters to the editor on suchtopics as his dirigible wireless torpedo,16 the transmission of voice by means ofwireless, the “narcotic influence of certain periodic currents” when transmittedthrough the body for therapeutic reasons, the inefficiency of Marconi’s system,and the piracy of his oscillators by Marconi and another wireless inventorValdemar Poulsen. Tesla also declared that the telephone was invented by PhilipReis before Bell and the incandescent lamp by King and J. W. Starr beforeEdison.17Unlike Bell and Edison, Tesla wrote, “I had to cut the path myself, and myhands are still sore.” After reviewing his bitter battle for vindication as the trueauthor of the AC polyphase system against such “feeble men” as ProfessorFerraris, the wizard went on to discuss his seminal work in wireless telegraphy.“It will never be possible to transmit electrical energy economically through this[planet] and its environment except by essentially the same means and methodswhich I have discovered,” he declared, “and the system is so perfect now that itadmits of but little improvement…Would you mind telling a reason why thisadvance should not stand worthily beside the discoveries of Copernicus?”18This was a new Tesla—resentful, indignant, defiant, petulant. He was thediscoverer of the AC polyphase system, the induction motor, fluorescent lights,mechanical and electrical oscillators, a novel steam propulsion system, wirelesstransmission of intelligence, light, and power, remote control, and interplanetarycommunication. He was an original discoverer, whereas Bell and Edison hadmerely modified the works of others. How dare the world deny him his due?Tesla’s inventions were even at the heart of the new electric subway systemwhich had just opened its doors beneath the thriving metropolis. Flooding,however, was a continual problem which marred this newest Tesla spin-off. Thepublic had to be warned lest water cause corrosion of vital components, therebyincreasing the risk of causing an explosion, and so another article advised theauthorities on ways to cure the problem.After one of his biweekly trips to his esteemed tonsorial artist for the warmcompresses on his face and vigorous head massage to stimulate brain cells,19Tesla picked up his walking cane and strolled out in his green suede high-tops toForty-second Street, to the entranceway of the freshly tiled Interboroughcatacombs. He was looking for new office space. Descending the staircase, thecreator was overtaken with a pompous sense of pride as he stood by the tracks toawait the next train. It was an almost magical experience for him to drop downin one part of the city, only to pop up majestically in another spot a few minuteslater.While waiting at a stop one ordinary day in 1907, he was approached by alad and asked if he were the great Nikola Tesla. Catching a gleam in theinquirer’s eye, the inventor answered in the affirmative.“I have many questions to ask you,” the youngster said as Tesla movedforward to step aboard the train.“Well, then, come on,” Tesla responded, unable to understand why the boyhesitated.“I do not have enough money for the fare” was the embarrassed reply.“Oh, is that all,” the electronic savant chuckled as he tossed the youngsterthe required sum. “What’s your name?”“O’Neill, sir, Jack O’Neill. I’m applying for a job as a page for the NewYork Public Library.”“Good. We can meet there and you can help me research the history ofsome patents I am investigating.”O’Neill, who also had a keen interest in psychic phenomena, would go on adecade later to become a science reporter for the Long Island paper, the NassauDaily Review Star. Eventually he took a position at the Herald Tribune, where hewon the Pulitzer Prize before penning Prodigal Genius.20In June came yet another legal suit, again from Warden, only this time fromhis heirs, as he had passed away. The amount was for $1,080, for money owedon an option Tesla had on four hundred acres adjacent to the two hundred hecontrolled.“This is an old case which has been dragging in the courts for years,” Teslatold the Sun reporter. “I [had] intended to use this land for an agriculturalexperiment in fertilizing soil by means of electricity. I thought that by the use ofcertain electrical principles [in producing nitrogen], the soil could be increasedvery much, [and thus I had] agreed to take a certain option. But subsequently [I]discovered that the person who entered into the agreement had no right to makesuch a disposition…I told him the option was off…[but] the heirs of the ownerhad simply pressed the claim, and it is very likely that it will have to be paid.”21VTOL’S: A HISTORY OF VERTICAL & TAKEOFF LANDINGAIRCRAFTJune 8, 1908My dear Colonel,I am now ready to take an order from you for a self-propelled flyingmachine, either of the lighter or heavier-than-air type.Yours sincerely,Nikola Tesla22Astor was particularly interested in flying machines, but as would becomehis habit, Tesla would be working at cross-purposes. He wanted the good colonelto fund this work in aeronautics, but, in actuality, his ultimate goal was to earnenough money so that he could return to Long Island and reopen his worldtelegraphy plant. Thus, any potential profits were always threatened by thegreater plan. This problem would continue to encumber any possible deal,especially with someone like Astor, who knew full well the inventor’s primaryintentions.One of Tesla’s most confounding prognostications came at the onset of1908. Having finally located a new work space at 165 Broadway, Tesla felt thathe was getting back on track. Shortly after he moved in, he received an invitationto speak at a Waldorf-Astoria dinner in honor of himself and Rear Adm. CharlesSigsbee. “Th[is] coming year will dispel [one]…error which has greatly retardedaerial navigation,” Tesla prophesied. “The aeronaut will soon satisfy himself thatan aeroplane…is altogether too heavy to soar, and that such a machine, while itwill have some use, can never fly as fast as a dirigible balloon…In strongcontrast with these unnecessarily hazardous trials are the serious and dignifiedefforts of Count Zeppelin, who is building a real flying machine, safe andreliable, to carry a dozen men and provisions, and with a speed far in excess ofthose obtained with aeroplanes.”23Assuming that the viscosity of the atmosphere exceeded that of water, Teslahad calculated that an airplane could never fly much faster than “an aqueouscraft.” The inventor further reasoned that for highest velocities “the propeller isdoomed.” Not only was its rotational speed restrictive, it was also subject to easybreakage. The prop plane, according to calculations, would have to be replacedby “a reactive jet.”24In the short run, that is, for the next thirty years, the airship was thepreferred method of passenger travel.BERLIN, May 30 [1908]. Count Zeppelin, whose remarkable performancesin his first airship brought such signal honors, today accomplished the moststriking feat in his career so far. He guided his Zeppelin II, with twoengineers and a crew of seven aboard, a distance of more than 400 miles,without landing…All through the night the vessel…sped over Wertenberg and Bavaria,passing over sleeping countryside and villages and cities hardly lessasleep…It was announced and widely published…that the Count would cometo Berlin and land at the…parade ground. In expectation of the event…theEmperor and Empress…and hundreds of thousands gathered there.25It would be two decades before Lindbergh would capture the imagination ofthe public by flying solo in a propeller-driven airplane across the high seas, butairships were already close to accomplishing that feat. In 1911, Joseph Bruckerformed the Transatlantic Airship Expedition, but he was beaten in the quest bythe British air force, which succeeded in crossing the Atlantic eight years later.26During World War I, the zeppelin ran frequent bombing missions from Berlin toLondon; Robert Underwood Johnson flew with fifty other passengers in asimilar “leviathan” over Rome just two years later, in 1919.27 However, by thelate 1920s this infamous legacy was all but forgotten, as these great airshipswere flying regularly across the Atlantic from Europe to both North and SouthAmerica, and Germany was enjoying a reputation as the new leader in futuristictechnology.One curious and unfortunate footnote to history was the senseless choice tofill those blimps with hydrogen, a highly explosive gas, instead of nonflammablehelium. Had engineers insisted on the much safer medium by heeding Tesla’s1915 warning, the great Hindenburg disaster of 1937 would never have takenplace, and the use of zeppelins would probably have continued for many moreyears to come. The problem stemmed all the way back to the late 1700s, whenJacques Charles, a French scientist, discovered that hydrogen was fourteen timeslighter than air and filled a balloon with it. Monsieur Charles, like CountZeppelin of Tesla’s time, gained great notoriety by traveling in his balloonfifteen or twenty miles at a stretch.Today airships create stable platforms for TV sports cameras, advertisersuse them because of their unique ability to generate “brand-name recognition,”and the military likes them because they offer singular advantages over thehelicopter. They can be used for low-flying rescue missions without creatinghazardous turbulence; they can be used to detect the submarine launching ofcruise missiles by positioning themselves in a single area for hours or days onend; and they are extremely difficult to locate by ground surveillance. “Whydon’t they show on radar?” a recent Popular Mechanics article asks. “Becausethe Skyship’s gondola is made of Kevlar, the envelope is of polyurethane fiberand it’s filled with helium.They all have little or no radar register…The next-generation [air] shipswould sip fuel. And they would stay operational for months at a time. As theseare developed for military use, it is not too farfetched to predict that airships ofthe [21st century] may even be used for trans-Atlantic passenger service.”28Tesla reveals in his Waldorf-Astoria speech his prophecy of the inevitabledevelopment of the jet plane, which would be about as close as he would cometo explaining his highly novel and still obscure invention of an airplane thatoperated much like today’s VTOL “vectored thrust” aircraft. Tesla had playedwith a number of airship designs since his college days. One of his models,drawn up in 1894, was a traditionally shaped hot air balloon. Inspired by thosehe had seen at the World Fairs in Paris and Chicago, this dirigible received itscontinuing supply of heat from a gigantic induction coil that was placed highabove the gondola, in the center of the hot-air container.29The more recent model, which resembled a gigantic teardrop, took intoconsideration aerodynamic principles uncovered by such researchers asLeonardo da Vinci, Count von Zeppelin and Lawrence Hargrave, an Australianwho, in 1890, fashioned rubber-band powered prop planes which traveledthrough the air over distances exceeding a hundred yards. This design wasschematically prepared in the shape of a conventional airfoil by one of Tesla’sdraftsmen in 1908.30My airship will have neither gas bag, wings nor propellers…You might seeit on the ground and you would never guess that it was a flying machine.Yet it will be able to move at will through the air in any direction withperfect safety, higher speeds than have yet been reached, regardless ofweather and obvious “holes in the air” or downward currents. It will ascendin such currents if desired. It can remain absolutely stationary in the aireven in a wind for a great length of time. Its lifting power will not dependon any such delicate devices as the bird has to employ, but upon positivemechanical action…[Stability will be achieved] through gyroscopic actionof my engine…It is the child of my dreams, the product of years of intenseand painful toil and research.31Tesla’s vehicle had the “reactive jet” placed at its “leading edge,” or bulkyend, and the fifty steering escape valves placed at the opposite, “trailing edge,”or tapered end. If fashioned as a lighter-than-air dirigible, the ship would havebeen modeled, in part, after the work of Henri Giffard, a Frenchman whoinvented the first dirigible in 1852, as well as Count von Zeppelin, the inventorwho had been the first to construct a successful prototype with a rigid metalframework “within the bag.”32 Zeppelin was also one of the first to take intoconsideration wind resistance; his ships could travel at speeds of more than fortymiles per hour.A well-designed airfoil can develop “a lift force many times its drag. Thisallows the wing of an airplane to serve as a thrust amplifier…[If] the thrust isdirected horizontally, a vertical lift force large enough to overcome the vehicle’sweight can be developed.”33Thus, it appears that Tesla’s reactive-jet prototype could have also beenfabricated in a heavier-than-air design. Oliver Chanute, M. Goupil, and O.Lilienthal were other Gay Nineties aeronauts whose patented works Tesla hadstudied. Naturally, he was also influenced by Samuel Langley and the Wrightbrothers, both of whom had produced heavier-than-air models that had actuallyflown.34THE HOVERCRAFTAnother horseshoe crab-shaped VTOL designed by Tesla was called ahovercraft. This vehicle, which resembled a Corvette, placed the powerfulturbine horizontally within its center. Operating much like a great fan, the enginecreated a heavy downdraft which caused the vehicle to rise up and ride along theground on a layer of air.35 This invention, which apparently worked much likethe hovercraft depicted in the original Star Wars film, was the early precursor ofthe army’s car-sized “aerial jeep,” which “derive[d] its thrust from ducted fansmounted rigidly in the airframe. To fly horizontally, the entire craft [was] tiltedslightly [by the leaning motion of the driver].” In 1960, Scientific Americancould write that “this design is being explored because of its simplicity and…adaptability for flying at very low altitudes.”36It is doubtful that Tesla ever constructed any of the heavier-than-airhovercrafts, although he may have built a hydrofoil model to skim over theHudson. There is no doubt that he also constructed “lighter-than-air” vesselswhich could be operated by means of remote control.Ideas inherent in Tesla’s hovercraft and paramecium-shaped reactive-jetdirigibles evolved into today’s Harrier fighter plane, a supersonic aircraftconsidered one of the military’s “most potent fighting machines,” and the new,yet-to-be-built Lockheed Martin X-33, which is a lightweight VTOLreplacement of the space shuttle having a new experimental engine, the planeitself being shaped like a “flat-flying wing.”37The seeds of this technology can also be traced to the work of “A. F. Zahm,a prominent aeronautical engineer who patented [in 1921] an airplane with awing that would deflect the propeller slipstream to provide lift for hovering.”Although Zahm did not actually construct his plane, his concept, which mayhave been influenced by Tesla’s work, evolved into the English Hawker, aBritish fighter developed in the 1960s. This airplane utilized nozzles to deflect aslipstream downward for vertical takeoff or for hovering and horizontally fornormal flight. Utilizing “thrust vectoring,” this apparatus became more workablewith the development of the Pegasus engine, an extremely powerful turbojetfound in the Harrier, which was unyeiled in 1969.38 “From the pilot’s point ofview, there is only one extra control in the cockpit: a single [lever] to select thenozzle angle.”39 “AV-8B Harrier: The U.S. Marines’ ground-support jet can takeoff vertically, hover close to a battlefield and let loose missiles, cluster bombs orsmart bombs.”40FLYING ON A BEAM OF ENERGYWhether or not Tesla was able to perfect his design for aircraft that operatedwithout any fuel—by deriving energy from wireless transmitters—is unknown.This concept, however, has been adopted by the military. In 1987, the New YorkTimes and also Newsweek reported large glider planes “powered without fuel.”Their energy is derived from microwaves beamed up from ground transmitters tolarge, flat panels of “rectennae” on each wing’s underbelly. These “specialantennas, laced with tiny rectifiers that turn alternating current into directcurrent, power an electric motor to run the craft’s propeller.”41 This concept isalso utilized as solar panels onboard spacecraft as well as on solar-poweredautomobiles.The Flivver PlaneTesla Designs Weird Craft to Fly Up, Down, SidewaysCraft Combines Qualities of Helicopter & PlaneDetailed descriptions were available yesterday of the helicopterairplane, the latest creation of Nikola Tesla, inventor, electrical wizard,experimenter and dreamer.It is a tiny combination plane, which, its inventor asserts, will rise anddescend vertically and fly horizontally at great speed, much faster than thespeed of the planes of today. But despite the feats which he credits to hisinvention, Tesla says it will sell for something less than $1000.12Although this article was written in 1928, Tesla first applied for patents onhis new “method of aerial transportation” in 1921.43 Nevertheless, designs forpropeller-driven VTOL aircraft dated back even before the turn of the century.One of Tesla’s earliest and most primitive helicopters looked much like awashbasin, with vertical shaft rising from its center. Flailing out, like theskeletons of two umbrellas stacked above one another, were its dual horizontalpropellers. This vehicle evolved into the flivver plane, which took off verticallylike a helicopter and then flew like a normal airplane, when the propeller andcraft were rotated 90 degrees into the horizontal position. The concepts found inTesla’s flivver plane can be found in another advanced military VTOL aircraftcalled the V-22 Osprey. In this design, the body of the vehicle resembles anormal military transport plane. It is the propellers, at the ends of each wing,which rotate ninety degrees from the helicopter position, for vertical takeoff, intothe normal airplane position for forward flight. Used in the recent war with Iraq(February 1990), this vehicle, like the aerial jeep and VTOL Harrier fighter jet,evolved directly out of Tesla’s designs. As Tesla’s work in aeronautics has neverreceived much publicity, it is quite possible that the military adopted it in secret.VTOLs can be grouped into four general categories. The aircraft could betilted, the thrust could be deflected, the propeller or turbojet engine could betilted, or a dual propulsion system could be utilized. Bell Labs beganconstructing propeller-driven VTOLs in the 1940s. Early models included thewing-tilted XC-142A, developed by Vought, Hiller & Ryan, and the X-19propeller tilted craft, developed by Curtiss & Wright.The New WeaponsEvery service has its favorite new weapon, and the Marine Corp’s favoriteis the V-22 Osprey, an aircraft that can take off like a helicopter and fly likea plane. Just the craft to ferry Marines quickly and far into the desert, argueits manufacturers, Bell Helicopter Textron Inc. and Boeing Vertol Co…[Thevehicle can carry] 24 men and costs $40 million.44Tesla’s invention of the helicopter-airplane, which he called the flivver plane. (NewYork American, February 23, 1928) 