35DISSOLUTION (1904-1906)I have observed in the House of Morgan a largeness, nobility and firmnessof character the like of which is very scarce indeed. I can only smile when Iread of the attempts to find something discreditable in the transactions of J.P. Morgan & Co. Not a hundred of such investigations will ever uncoveranything which an unprejudiced judge would not consider honorable, fair,decent and in every way conforming to the high ideals and ethicalstandards of business. I would be willing to stake my life on it.NIKOLA TESLA1Sociologist Karl Mannheim suggests that the psychohistorian should attempt toreconstruct both the subject’s Weltanschauung and the spirit of the age inquestion. Irrational components should be recognized. Thus, and in this sense,history is paradoxical; it is contradictory, dynamic, multileveled, and dialectic.2Tesla’s worldview involved a philosophy based on the work of Wolfgang vonGoethe. His inventions were for him not true creations in the sense that theystemmed from nothing. They evolved from the work of others and fromuncovering secret mechanisms lying within hidden laws of nature.Was it God who wrote each sign?Which, all my inner tumult stilling,And this poor heart with rapture filling,Reveals to me, by a force divine,Great Nature’s energies around and through methrilling?Am I a God? It grows so bright to me!Each character on which my eye reposesNature in act before my soul discloses.This idea can clearly be found in Goethe’s Faust, Tesla’s favorite poem,which he memorized in its entirety and which he referred to throughout his life.3It was Faust which he recited in Budapest during his salad days, when heuncovered the secret to the rotating magnetic field, and it was a Faustianparadigm to which he adhered when he linked the invention of the worldtelegraphy system to the discovery of the Holy Grail.There manifests itself in the fully developed being—Man—a desiremysterious, inscrutable and irresistible: to imitate nature, to create, to workhimself the wonders he perceives…He subdues and puts to his service thefierce, devastating spark of Prometheus, the titanic forces of the waterfall,the wind and the tide. He tames the thundering bolt of Jove and annihilatestime and space. He makes the great Sun itself his obedient toiling slave…Can man control this grandest, most awe-inspiring of all processes innature? Can he harness her inexhaustible energies to perform all theirfunctions at his bidding?…If he could do this, he would have powersalmost unlimited and supernatural…[This] would be the supreme manifestation of the power of Man’smind, his most complete triumph over the physical world, his crowningachievement, which would place him beside his Creator, make him fulfillhis ultimate destiny. Nikola Tesla4Two major themes which run through Goethe’s poem are that (1) secrets ofnature can be revealed and harnessed to human needs and that (2) humans areenticed by satanic forces. Clearly, Tesla was driven by both tenets. In the secondcase, consciously or unconsciously, Morgan was sought out for the very reasonthat he was a demigod, a superhuman, whose life transcended that of meremortals. Just as Faust was tempted by Mephistopheles, Tesla was lured by theHouse of Morgan. In the financier’s “strong hands” Tesla willingly, and alasirrationally, handed over the 51 percent control, insisting on it. Knowing that thecontract involved relinquishing his cornucopia of past and future patentapplications, the inventor still sealed the Faustian pact, as “the terms wereimmaterial” to him.MEPHISTOPHELES: Whatever promise on your Books find entry, we strictlycarry into act…for the present I entreat Most urgently your kinddismission.FAUST: Do stay but just one moment longer then, tell me good news, and I’llrelease thee.Dear Mr. Morgan,Since many years I have known one side of your character intimately. Ibelieve that in my first approach to you I have given you evidence of thisknowledge…You have already put aside the money necessary to completethe work begun—in your thoughts—and that is as good as done. But I didnot understand you as a businessman until lately.I have worked for results carrying with them a dignity and force suchas to deserve your attention. What you wanted was a simple result. Will youlet me profit by this later knowledge and give me an opportunity torehabilitate myself in your opinion as a businessman?5In October 1903, fully two months before Orville and Wilbur Wright madeaviation history, Prof. Sameul P. Langley launched a heavier-than-air ship fromthe roof of a houseboat situated on the Potomac. With photographers from theSmithsonian Institution present, the craft was slingshot “over the 70 foot railsand in a moment was free upon air. Then it wavered. Down the aerodromesank…with its daring navigator [emerging from]…the disaster…suffering only aducking.” The press called Langley’s airplane “a failure,”6 but Tesla rallied toLangley’s defense. “Langley has perceived a great truth,” Tesla wrote in the NewYork Herald, namely, that “a machine heavier than air could be made to fly…Such a man should be provided with the necessary means to complete his work,great honor attaches to this achievement, [and] also great practical utility whichthis country can ill afford to lose.”7Tesla started off 1904 on the offensive with his manifesto and strikingpublications. Work on the wireless operation was suspended, and essentialcomponents were stripped from the tower and returned to digruntled creditors. Askeleton crew kept up appearances and continued the development of his lampsand oscillators. But as his Wardenclyffe notes reveal, there were no theoreticalwritings during this period;8 all of Tesla’s energies were concentrated in oneavenue: raising the funds to resurrect the project. Tesla’s attorneys had located amanufacturer in Connecticut to “make all the metal parts” of his oscillators, butthere was still the problem of distribution, and the revenues would not enablehim to reopen the Wardenclyffe plant. Another predicament had to do with Mr.Warden himself. Apparently he had not conducted a title search when hepurchased the land, and a legal shadow had fallen on the property. Tesla used theentanglement to further delay payment of the mortgage.9“One consideration,” he wrote Scherff, “is that the Edison-Pupin-Marconicombination, who have given me so much trouble, are in a worse fix.”10In February, Tesla attended a musical recital and party in Gramercy Parkhosted by Stanford White and his wife, Bessie, for 350 of his friends, withdinner afterward at Sherry’s.11 Most likely the inventor crossed paths withMorgan as well as other potential investors. The following month, the inventorconferred with the CEO (chief executive officer) of GE, Charles Coffin. “If [theGE people] refuse they are simply snoosers,” he wrote Scherff.12 Nothing cameof the meeting, but in April a solid lead came via John S. Barnes, a well-connected financier who had read Tesla’s article in Electrical World & Engineer.An associate of Col. Oliver Payne’s from the Rockefeller clique, Barnes hadinvited Tesla to his home for dinner and to discuss the inventor’s plans.“I have always had the highest regard for Col. Payne, and would be happyindeed should he ever deem me worthy of his association.”“We are curious as to the details of the Commodore’s bestowal,” Barnesinterjected.“Mr. Morgan has not made a generous donation as you might have inferredfrom my article,” Tesla craftily retorted. “He is a man with a great brain and hasseen that [by forming a business partnership instead] he can make an extremelyprofitable investment.”13Although hesitant to make a commitment, Barnes nevertheless suggestedthat Tesla have his lawyers write up their evaluation of his patent applications.Because of his link to Colonel Payne, Tesla took the suggestion veryseriously. A multimillionaire from the city of Cleveland, Payne had made hisfortune as a partner of John D. Rockefeller; the duo had earned fifty cents perbarrel for every barrel of oil that was shipped by rail. This enormous kickbackhad been set up as a rebate for their own crude and as a tariff for everycompetitor. With their vast holdings and Rockefeller’s ferretlike spirit, they hadsimply bullied the railroads into this contractual arrangement.14Known as a haughty fellow and “kin of God,” Payne never did take to JohnD., but he did maintain the partnership. He had a residence in New York and wasa friend and financial benefactor of Stanford White, whom he commissioned topurchase art for him while in Europe and design his nephew’s mansion, PayneWhitney, in the city.White, who was in an awful fix, nearly three-quarters of a million dollars indebt, mainly from the Northern Pacific fiasco, informed Tesla that Payne hadprovided him with notable assistance to help ease his burden. White was alsodisheartened because his girlfriend, young Evelyn Nesbit, had now begun datinga deranged multimillionaire from Pittsburgh, Harry Thaw. “I have heard storiesfrom the Floradora girls that he whipped one of them in bed with a cat-of-ninetails.”Ironically, White held no ill feelings for Morgan, even though the financierwas directly responsible for the market crash. At the close of 1903, White andhis wife, Bessie, joined the commodore on the Corsair to watch the yacht races,and White’s partner, Charles McKim, was still busily involved in constructingthe Morgan Library. One wonders how Morgan might have felt when he boatedup to Newport or Bar Harbor and looked to the eastern horizon and saw Tesla’smushroom-shaped behemoth. “Do you think he will ever reconsider?” theinventor inquired.“With Morgan, anything is possible” came the architect’s reply. “However,I think at this stage, Colonel Payne is a safer bet.”A Yankee cornerstone, the good colonel was connected to the highestechelons in government. Through the marriage of his sister, he was linked toWilliam C. Whitney, secretary of the navy, and also to John Hay, secretary ofstate; Payne’s father, Henry Payne, was a well-known senator, often discussed asa potential candidate for president of the United States.15 This was not a lead totake lightly.As a favor to this Ohio nobleman, Tesla opened up his storehouse to theCleveland Leader and conferred with Kerr, Page & Cooper for a way to create alegal document which would delineate the scope and fundamental might of hisarsenal of patents. In a comprehensive article entitled “Harnessing theLightning,” journalist Alfred Cowles noted that the inventor’s prognostications“were so startling that had they come from another source, one would naturallyconsider them the vagaries of a wandering mind. If he can accomplish what he isundertaking, his fame will, in future centuries, overshadow the greatest names ofthe past.”Echoing sentiments Tesla had expressed during their interview, Cowlesconcluded, “Real inventions are only possible when the mental creation of theinventor proves to be in harmony with natural law; and such inventions, whenthey are necessities, are in themselves a part of the evolutionary process, wheredevelopment is an adjustment to environment.”16How all one whole harmonious weaves,Each in the other works and lives!See heavenly powers ascending and descendingThe golden buckets, one long line extending.Tesla presented to Barnes and Payne a comprehensive lawyers’ briefdelineating essentially every feature of his master plan. Included were patentspecifications and plans for “distributing electric energy without wires fortelegraphic, telephonic and industrial purposes,” for storing the energy,localizing transmissions, insuring non-interferability, and for creating separatechannels. Also included was Tesla’s work in telautomatics, means for creatinghigh frequencies, his oscillators, and “a method for insulating electric mains byrefrigeration to very low temperature…By [this] means, power can be conveyedto great distances cheaply, and literally, without any loss.” The plan alsosuggested the “perfect solution of the problem of underground distribution incities and populated districts.” Thus, the ultimate scheme would involve bothwireless and conventional means of distributing the electrical energy. Analyzingthe viability of each of the twenty-three patents, lawyers Kerr, Page & Cooperconcluded, “We know of nothing to anticipate the claims and are of the opinionthat they are valid.”17The report was also circulated to other major players, including FortuneRyan and Pierpont Morgan. “I SWEAR,” Tesla wrote to Scherff, “if I ever get outof this hole, nobody will catch me without cash!” Simultaneously, he haggledwith the coal company to maintain fuel deliveries and with the telephonecompany to keep his line at Wardenclyffe open. “I am now sure that the twolamps as proposed will be a perfect success and you know that after that I candraw on the U.S. Treasury.”18 Problems with the lamp persisted, however, and itwould never be marketed under Tesla’s name.October 28, 1958Westinghouse AnnouncementLamp DivisionThe Westinghouse Corporation [is pleased to] announce [that] a “flat lightbulb” which has no filaments, which produces no heat, which is glare free,and which will burn night and day for a year for less than a penny…hasbeen introduced…This marks the first time the public has been able topurchase an electroluminescent lamp as a light source for the home.19As the Colonel Payne deal fell through, Tesla wrote to Morgan fromWardenclyffe, “I hope the unfortunate misunderstanding, the cause of which Ihave been vainly trying to discover will be removed…and that you willrecognize that my work is the kind that passes into history and worthy of yoursupport.”20Throughout the spring and summer, Tesla would visit the plant again andagain for strength and confirmation. In June he instructed Scherff to make surethat the lawn was manicured at Wardenclyffe, as he was arriving with anotherpotential investor.21 Yet his resolve was beginning to waver; everywhere heturned, he met rejection. He became convinced that his success rested onchanging the mind of a single man. In September a dispatch was hand-deliveredto Morgan “assur[ing] contracts for several such plants in England andRussia,”22 but no response came from the financier.During the height of autumn, Morgan conferred with the archbishop ofCanterbury.23 Taking this as a mystical sign in the aid of his quest, theengineering cognoscente authored, on October 13, his favorite day of the month,a thirteen-point letter spelling out the entire chain of events to the omnipotentcapitalist. The letter began with a discussion of his patent applications, thedevelopment of their liaison, and Tesla’s decision to change the nature of theagreement because of Marconi’s piracy. Simply transmitting mere Morse-codedmessages was beneath consideration for the pompous conceptualist. As he hadaligned himself with the greatest economic force on the planet, this confirmedthe necessity of engaging in the larger endeavor.Your participation called for a careful revision of my plans…Perhaps youhave never fully appreciated the sense of this obligation…Once I lost your support I could not because of your personality andcharacter of our agreement interest anybody else, at least not for severalyears, until the…commercial value of my patents [was] recognized.[By increasing the size of the transmitter] until…the plant can transmitsignals to the uttermost confines of the Earth, its earning power becomes, soto speak, unlimited…but it will cost scarcely twice as much [e.g., $300,000]…[This] offered possibilities for a business on a large, dignified scale,commensurate with your position in life and mine as pioneer in this art,who has originated all its essential principles…You had told me from the outset that I should not ask for more, but thework was of such transcending importance…that I undertook to explain toyou the state of things on your first return from abroad. You seemed tomisunderstand me. This was most unfortunate…The audacious schemers who have dared to fool the crowned heads ofEurope, the President of the United States, and even His Holiness the Popehave discredited the art by incompetent attempts [far more than they evercould by success] and spoiled the public by false promises which it cannotdistinguish from legitimate right…and skill…I know you must be sceptical [sic] about getting hundredfold returns,but if you will help me to the end, you will soon see that my judgement istrue…I have expended about $250,000 in all and a much smaller sumseparates me from a giant triumph…$75,000 would certainly complete theplant…This letter (greatly condensed here) was a fair and accurate assessment ofwhat had occurred and why. Clearly, it was written by a lucid savant, one whohad proved himself in industry on many other occasions and one who was on theverge of altering the course of civilization in a dramatic and revolutionary way.Tesla was operating at the level of soul consciousness, and so he removed alldefenses and revealed the very depths of his being with the following salutationand sacred vow:Since a year, Mr. Morgan, there has been hardly a night when my pillow isnot bathed in tears, but you must not think me a weak man for that. I amperfectly sure to finish my task, come what may. I am only sorry that aftermastering all the difficulties which seemed insuperable, and acquiring aspecial knowledge and ability which I now alone possess, and which, ifapplied effectively, would advance the world a century, I must see my workdelayed.In the hope of hearing from you favorably, I remain,N. Tesla24October 15, 1904Dear Sir,Referring to your letter of the 13th October, Mr. J. P. Morgan wishesme to inform you that it will be impossible for him to do anything more inthe matter.25This cavalier dismissal tore the inventor apart and opened up a tendril thatbared not only his wrath against a force that had blocked his crusade but also apoetic eloquence.October 17, 1904Dear Mr. Morgan,You are a man like Bismarck. Great but uncontrollable. I wrotepurposefully last week hoping that your recent association [with theArchbishop] might have rendered you more susceptible to a softerinfluence. But you are no Christian at all, you are a fanatic musoulman.Once you say no, come what may, it is no.May the gravitation repel instead of attract, may right become wrong, everyconsideration no matter what it may be, must founder on the rock of yourbrutal resolve.It is incredible, a year and a half ago, I could have delivered a lecturehere which would have been listened to by all of the academicians of theworld…That would have been the time to thank you. [But] you let mestruggle on, weakened by shrewd enemies, disheartened by doubtingfriends, financially exhausted, trying to overcome obstacles which youyourself have piled up before me…“If this is a good thing, why does not Morgan see you through?”“Morgan is the very last man to let a good thing go.” So it has been goingon for two years. I advance, but how? Like a man swimming against astream that carries him down.Will you not listen to anything at all? Are you to let me perhapssuccumb, lose an immortal crown. Will you let a property of immense valuebe depreciated, let it be said that your own judgement was defective, simplybecause you once said no. Can now I make you a new proposition toovercome the difficulty? I tell you I shall return your money ahundredfold.26The letter was followed up with testimonials to his abilities as espoused byvarious leaders in his field. It also explained in detail how this operationadvanced the work performed at Colorado Springs. On December 16, Tesla sentan ultimatum. He requested either $100,000 to complete the plant or $50,000 “tofinish the indispensable parts, make everything perfectly fireproof…and take outinsurance,” or “if you do not want to do this, only one thing remains. You releaseme of all obligations, give me back my assignments and consider the sum youhave invested as a generous contribution leaving it all to my integrity and abilityto work out the best results for you and for myself.” Tesla suggested that hecould go on a lecture tour to raise the funds; then it would take him “not more…than a week to get a few million in Wall Street.”27On the seventeenth, Morgan wrote back:I am not willing to advance you any more money as I have frequently toldyou. As to your third proposition, I am not prepared to accept this either. Ihave made and carried out with you in good faith a contract and havingperformed my part, it is not unreasonable that I expect you to carry outyours.28December 19, 1904Dear Mr. Morgan,Owing to a habit contracted long ago in defiance of superstition, Iprefer to make important communications on Fridays and the 13th of eachmonth, but my house is afire and I have not an hour to waste.I knew that you would refuse…What chance have I to land the biggestWall Street monster with the soul’s spider thread.…You say that you have fulfilled your contract with me. You have not.I came to enlist your genius and power, not because of money. Youshould know that I have honored you in so doing as much as I have honoredmyself. You are a big man, but your work is wrought in passing form, mineis immortal. I came to you with the greatest invention of all times. I havemore creations named after me than any man that has gone before notexcepting Archimedes and Galileo—the giants of invention. Six thousandmillion dollars are invested in enterprises based on my discoveries in theUnited States today. [This is not a boast, Mr. Morgan; only my credentials.]I could draw on you at sight for a million dollars if you were the PierpontMorgan of old.At this point, Tesla refers to what he perceives as Morgan’s breach ofcontract:When we entered our contract I furnished: (1) patent rights; (2) my abilityas an engineer and electrician; (3) my good will. You were to furnish (1)money; (2) your business ability; (3) your good will. I assigned patentrights which in the worst case are worth ten times your cash investment.You advanced the money, true, but even this first clause of our contract wasviolated. There was a delay of two months in furnishing the last $50,000—adelay which was fatal.I complied conscientiously with the second and third obligations. Youignored yours deliberately. Not only this, but you discredited me.There is only one way to [go], Mr. Morgan. Give me the money tofinish a great work…Or else, make me a present and let me work out mysalvation. Your interest is sacred to me and my hearty wishes for yourhappiness and welfare will always be with you.Faithfully yours,N. Tesla29To demonstrate goodwill, Tesla enclosed a royalty check on one of hispatents and an advance copy of his theoretical masterpiece “The Transmission ofElectrical Energy Without Wires as a Means of Furthering Peace.” A fortnightlater, on January 6, 1905, Morgan sent the 49 percent balance legally due theinventor.THE WARDENCLYFFE PEACE PLANPublished in Electrical World & Engineer, Tesla’s treatise ran nearly sixthousand words. It began with a discussion of how “philanthropy” and “thepractical utilization of electrical vibrations,” that is, a mass communicationsystem, might bring about “universal peace.” In defining and analyzing thistheme, Tesla noted that it may come about suddenly, as the result of a slowaccumulation of past efforts through history. “We must think cosmically…Therace enmities and prejudices are decidedly waning…So far, however, universalharmony has been attained only in a single sphere of international relationship:that is the postal service…“A few strong countries [might] scare all the weaker ones into peace,” Teslasuggests, “[but] to conquer by sheer force is becoming harder and harder everyday.” Just as cruise missiles, CNN, and the world news organizations havealtered markedly the way war is conducted today, by having machines fightinstead of human (Nintendo war), and by usurping the old conventional chainsof command, Tesla prophesied similarly in 1905: “Had only a few [of my]‘telautomatic’ torpedoes been constructed and adopted by our navy [instead ofrejected], the mere moral influence of this would have been powerfully and mostbeneficially felt in the present Eastern [Russian-Japanese] complication. Not tospeak of the advantages which might have been secured through the direct andinstantaneous transmission of messages to distant colonies and scenes of thepresent barbarous conflicts.”His treatise went on to describe a new “quasi-intelligent” missile guidancesystem that he was developing which would have a “greater range and unerringprecision,” but also that “misunderstanding” is the basis of wars. Speaking toMorgan in veiled terms that help to explain why so many of Tesla’s mostimportant theoretical writings can be found in the pages of the New York Times,the Herald Tribune, the Sun and the World, the inventor wrote: “Mutualunderstanding would be immensely facilitated by use of one universal tongue…Next to speech we must consider permanent records of all kinds…Here thenewspapers play by far the most important part…Disregarding the force ofelectrical invention, that of journalism is the greatest in urging us to peace…Thatwhich is most desirable…in the establishment of universal peaceful relations is—the complete ANNIHILATION OF DISTANCE. To achieve this wonder, electricity isthe one and only means.”If Morgan were to fund him, universal peace would ensue. This was quite aresponsibility he placed on his benefactor’s shoulders. Continuing for five morefact-filled pages, Tesla described in vivid detail his entire world telegraphyoperation, precisely how it worked, and what it attempted to accomplish.Referring to the thunderstorm he had witnessed that summer night in theColorado Rockies and his discovery of stationary waves, Tesla concludes: “Onthat unforgettable day, the dark God of Thunder mercifully showed me in hisvast, awe-sounding laboratory [the geomagnetic pulse]. I thought then that itwould take a year to establish commercially my wireless girdle around theworld. Alas! my first “world telegraphy” plant is not yet completed, itsconstruction has progressed but slowly during the past two years. And thismachine I am building is but a plaything, an oscillator of a maximum activity ofonly ten million horsepower, just enough to throw this planet into feeble tremors,by sign and word—to telegraph and to telephone.”Although trying to assure Morgan that Wardenclyffe would not usurp thepower companies, Tesla had to go on: “When shall I see completed that firstpower plant, that big oscillator which I am designing?…Which will deliverenergy at the rate of one thousand million horsepower—one hundred Falls ofNiagara combined in one, striking the universe with blows—blows that willwake from their slumber the sleeping electricians, if there be any, on Venus orMars!…It is not a dream, it is a simple feat of scientific electrical engineering,only expensive—blind, faint-hearted world!”Had he shown restraint, would this treatise have served its purpose,transforming the capitalist into the philanthropist? Probably not. In any event,Tesla further injured his position by ending the essay with a final stab: “Perhapsit is better in this present world of ours that a revolutionary idea or inventioninstead of being helped and patted, be hampered and illtreated in its adolescence—…by selfish interest, pedantry, stupidity and ignorance; that it be attacked andstifled; that it pass through bitter trials and tribulations, through the heartlessstrife of commercial exis[t]ence. So do we get our light. So all that was great inthe past was ridiculed, condemned, combatted, suppressed—only to emerge allthe more powerfully, all the more triumphantly from the struggle.”30February 17, 1905Dear Mr. Morgan,Let me tell you once more. I have perfected the greatest invention ofall time—the transmission of electrical energy without wires to anydistance, a work which has consumed 10 years of my life. It is the longsought stone of the philosophers. I need but to complete the plant I haveconstructed and in one bound, humanity will advance centuries.I am the only man on this earth to-day who has the peculiar knowledgeand ability to achieve this wonder and another one may not come in ahundred years…Help me to complete this work or else remove theobstacles in my path.I was heartily glad to see you in such splendid health yesterday. Youare good for another 20 years of active life.Faithfully yours,N. Tesla31Pressures continued to mount. Warden’s lawyer pressed for a mortgagepayment, and one of Tesla’s previous workers, a Mr. Clark, was suing for pastwages. When some of the bad news arrived at his Waldorf suite, the inventor“tore the letter sufficiently to prevent any undesirable person [from] read[ing]the terrible open secret of Wardenclyffe.” Tesla tried to maintain a balance bypersevering with the development of his oscillators and other inventions, such asa transformer, a condenser, and a steam turbine, but these operations were long-range projects that would not provide immediate payoffs on the order needed toreopen the wireless operation. “The obstacles in my way,” Tesla wrote Scherff,“are a regular hydra. Just as soon as I chop off a head, two new ones grow.”32Tesla began to write exclusively in pencil during this period, his writingbecoming less distinct, lacking the boldness and clarity which had characterizedit at earlier periods. Beginning to feel run-down on a more regular basis, Teslalikened his task to that of a weight lifter. “Every ounce counts now,” he told hismanager.March 10, 1905My dear Luka,Won’t go to dinner [with you]. I am hard at work to get [Mrs. Filipov]that fine automobile.33At the end of March, Tesla was “thunder struck at the Waldorf” whenWarden’s lawyer stormed the premises demanding immediate payment. Theraising of even one of Mr. Boldt’s eyebrows was enough to unsettle thestruggling entrepreneur. “Hope to get out [to Wardenclyffe] Sunday.” Teslawrote Scherff. “Need it badly.”34Tesla set to work with his lawyers in April, finalizing patent applications forEngland, France, and Italy. But his inability to adequately compensate hisworkers on Long Island was creating a “[de]moral[izing] effect at Wardenclyffe.Perhaps we are nearing a revolution down there?” he inquired of Scherff.“Disappointments…and dangers…troubles and troubles again” continued toplague him.35 He was beginning to crumble.May 1, 1905My dear Tesla:I know it will please you to hear of the great happiness that has cometo me. Miss Grizelda Houston Hull…has consented to become my wife andthe wedding has been [planned] for May 25th…Do you know, my dearTesla, you are the very first person, outside of my family that I thought ofand which the ceremonies will be very simple, I wish to feel you present instanding close to me on this occasion so full of incoming in my life.Indeed, I could not feel the occasion complete without you.Sincerely yours,Richmond Pearson Hobson36The joyful occasion was a needed respite, Tesla “chatting” with Hobson’smother-in-law, hiding his worries, and characteristically teasing his friend.“Hobson,” he declared, “now that you are married, your career is over.”37 This,of course, was far from the truth, as rumors had long been circulating about thepossibility of grooming the charismatic lieutenant for the presidency.“I must do something for our dear Mr. Tesla,” Katharine told Robert on theride home.“What could you do that he hasn’t?”“Appeal to the king,” she answered wistfully. Upon their arrival home,Katharine ran to the house to hide her tears.While Morgan was away in Europe for his summer sojourn, Tesla met withJacob Schiff, a man in the midst of lending the Japanese large sums of money intheir war against the Russians. “S. said that perhaps he may take it himself,”Tesla wrote hopefully to Scherff. “I believe that he will be a valuable man tome.”38In August, Morgan returned. Tesla sent Scherff to hand-deliver his newestlist of patents granted, which the octopus grabbed in his tentacles and tossed intothe wastebasket.November 11, 1905Dear Mr. Scherff,Thirteen seems to be my lucky number. First of all, I met with Mr. F.just for a moment as he was going out of his office. He was most friendlyand said that he was sorry he had to go out, but he will talk with me someother day. I HAVE MY MAN as sure as the law of gravitation. I know it.39December 14, 1905My dear Mr. Tesla,I have received your letter of the 13th and in reply would state that Iam not willing to invest any more money in the enterprise. I should be veryglad if Mr. Frick would join you. You could have no better associate and Ishould be very glad to work with Mr. Frick in the matter, putting in what Ihave against his $100,000 to which you allude.Yours very truly,J. Pierpont Morgan40Christmas was approaching, and Tesla had apparently struck a deal withanother of the superrich. Frick, we remember, had earned upward of $60 millionin 1901, when U.S. Steel was created. Ryan and Schiff were also involved in thisnew potential syndicate. Tesla wrote Morgan to thank him for allowing theliaison to come about. “You and Mr. Frick can take whatever you like. [I shall besatisfied] with a very small interest,” Tesla wrote in a first draft. “I understandyour attitude perfectly. You adhere strictly to principles. Never in my life have I[met] a man who even in a small [way can approach] the state [as described] byGoethe.”41Yet again Tesla reviewed their relationship, his decision to change thecontract, and his ultimate wish to transmit power for industrial purposes. Why?Morgan sidestepped a meeting with Frick in December. An ill wind wasblowing. Tesla began to crumble, his handwriting now barely legible, written asa meager, wispy stroke in pencil.December 24, 1905Dear Tesla,I have been sorry to hear of your recent illness—well concealed fromyour friends and the public—and I am also now very glad to hear of yourrecovery. Please stay well and strong.Yours sincerely,T. C. Martin42January 24, 1906Dear Mr. Morgan,I have just learned that the Germans have commenced the constructionof a plant in all respects similar to mine which they expect to complete in ayear…Now, Mr. Morgan, you do not wish such a horrible thing to happen.If Frick will aid me, I can without delay, put my plant in operation by Julynext. Please see him at your earliest opportunity. I have not much time tolose.43With the Johnsons just back from Europe and a meeting with “His Majestyin Rome,” Kate decided to seize the moment. Completely on her own, Mrs.Robert Underwood Johnson called a hansom. “Twenty-three Wall Street,” shesaid boldly. Morgan would not see her.44February 2, 1906Dear Mr. Morgan,Please see Mr. Frick…He is going to call on you. Time is flying.45A fortnight later, Tesla wrote again, pleading with Morgan to allow theformation of “a reasonable foundation upon which I am justly entitled.” Teslarequested that Morgan agree to take one-third of the enterprise, thereby reducinghis share by approximately 20 percent. “Please do not spoil the letter byunnecessary reference to your unwillingness of furnishing more money. Thewhole town knows it.”46Morgan did his best to scuttle the deal, and with it Tesla fell. His bodyshook violently, and his eyes began to bulge out of his head. Forgetting to shaveor even shower, the ailing engineer grabbed the first train to Shoreham and ranfrom the station to his precious tower, just a few hundred yards away. Clutchingthe girders for support as he climbed, the pulverized sorcerer ascended fifteenstories to the apex and looked out at the flat land which lay undisturbed for milesin every direction.April 10, 1906Dear Mr. Tesla,I have received your letter and am very glad to know that you arevanquishing your illness. I have scarcely ever seen you so out of sorts aslast Sunday; and I was frightened.Yours sincerely,George Scherff47In May there was a portentous explosion in Bridgeport which caused ashock wave that was felt in Shoreham. “I hope my tower will not be subjectedoften to such tests,” Tesla wrote Scherff. It was less than a month after the greatSan Francisco earthquake, but the jolt served to reawaken a new reserve ofenergy. Working with Scherff and a few men at the plant, Tesla continueddevelopment of his condenser and steam turbine which he was planning onplacing inside a torpedo.Concerned about the stability of the buildings America was constructing,Stanford White wrote the city of San Francisco, telling them to pass “stringentlaws…The hot riveted steel building stood the shock wonderfully,” heconcluded.48White, like Tesla, was a victim of financial misfortune and he begandrinking heavily. Only fifty-four, his health was in decline, and he was sufferingfrom tuberculosis. In February the architect had planned to auction off $300,000worth of his tapestries, sculptures, and paintings in order to reduce his debt byhalf, but a fire wiped out the uninsured holdings just two weeks prior to the sale.Harry Thaw, having married Evelyn Nesbit, was having White followedday and night. On June 25, 1906, with Evelyn present, Thaw snaked his waydown the aisle of the Roof Garden restaurant at Madison Square Garden, pearl-handled pistol in hand. While entertainer Harry Short sang “I Could Love aThousand Girls,” Thaw spotted and shot the “Beast” between the eyes. StanfordWhite, designer of Madison Square Garden, the agriculture building at theChicago World’s Fair, the Niagara Falls power plant, the Capitol in Providence,the Washington Arch in New York, Rosecliffe and the Tennis Hall of Fame inNewport, the Casino in Narragansett, the Boston train station, the Players’ Club,numerous churches and other mansions, the new extension on the White House,and Wardenclyffe was dead.Few attended White’s funeral for he had been accused of raping a sixteen-year-old girl. But Tesla came.49 The dream vanquished; the Gilded Age ended.Throughout the year, Tesla’s handwriting began to unglue, and by August itcompletely disintegrated, supporting the hypothesis that he suffered a nervouscollapse at that time.50 Entering his own private hell, the inventor was forced toendure an emotional enervation which caused a corresponding dysfunctionalshift in his personality. Self-alienation took hold, bitterness and displaced angerbecame manifest as the quirks in his nature became more pronounced. Letterseven to his closest friends would be signed N. Tesla, not Nikola. The untimelydeath of William Rankine at the age of forty-seven in September was anothernail in the coffin of his dreams.In a barely legible letter dated October 15, 1906, the last in this incredibleseries to Morgan, Tesla informed the Wall Street monarch that Messieurs Ryan,Schiff, and Frick were all willing to enter the partnership.Every opportunity is there…I have high regards for you as a big andhonorable man…There is greater power in the leaf of a flower then in thepaw of a bear. That is as much as I’ll ever say…You are reputed as a builderof properties, but if you prefer in this instance to chop down poles…goahead.51FAUST: Gnash not so thy greedy teeth against me!—Great and gloriousspirit, thou that deniest to appear to me, who knowest my heart andsoul, why yoke me to this shame-fellow, who feeds on mischief andfeasts on ruin?MEPHISTOPHELES: Who was it that plunged her into ruin? I or thou? 