26CONTACT (1899)My dear Luka,Everybody is after me since I was favored by the “Martians.”…Myfriend J. Collier…has persuaded me to make a short statement regardingthe subject of interplanetary communication.Yours sincerely,Nikola Tesla1The Colorado notebook is virtually a daily record of Tesla’s work at the time.Nowhere in the notes can there be found a distinct passage of the pivotalmoment when he received unidentified impulses that he came to attribute toextraterrestrials; however, he does refer, on December 8, to this event, writing tofriend and columnist Julian Hawthorne: “The art of transmitting electrical energythrough the natural media…will…perhaps make it possible for [man] toproduce…wonderful changes and transformation on the surface of our globe asare, to all evidence, now being wrought by intelligent beings on a neighboringplanet.”2And just a few weeks later, during the holiday season, while still inColorado, Tesla, in a Christmas message to the local Red Cross Society “when itasked me to indicate one of the great possible achievements of the next hundredyears,”3 wrote: “I have observed electrical actions, which have appearedinexplicable. Faint and uncertain though they were, they have given me a deepconviction and foreknowledge, that ere long all human beings on this globe, asone, will turn [their] eyes to the firmament above, with the feelings of love andreverence, thrilled by the glad news: ‘Brethren! We have a message from anotherworld, unknown and remote. It reads: one…two…three…’”4Throughout July, Tesla was carefully monitoring the electrical activity ofthe earth, verifying that it had a specific geomagnetic pulse and harmonics off ofthat pulse. On the twenty-eighth, he worked on increasing the sensitivity of hisreceivers by “magnifying the effects of feeble disturbances.” The inventor hadtuned his equipment so carefully that “in one instance the devices recordedeffects of lightning discharges fully 500 miles away, judging from the periodicalaction of the discharges as the storm moved away.”5 Thus, he reasoned, he didnot have to test transmitted oscillations by installing a receiver fifty, twohundred, or five hundred miles away, as he was already proving that this couldbe accomplished simply by monitoring these distant electrical storms. This wasone way Tesla rationalized his decision not to conduct long-distanceexperiments; he had verification that they would work.6 Three days later, onAugust 1, the inventor departed from writing out his growing file of complexequations to compose a discourse of four thousand words on the atmosphere andthe climate. In these passages, he describes the “baffling power of themoonlight” for taking night photographs, the “amazing brilliancy of the stars,”magnificent sunsets and shooting stars, the peculiar ability of voices to travelseveral miles from the center of town to his laboratory, the “curious phenomenaof the rapid formation and disappearance of cloud formations,” and thenumerous unusual shapes that appeared therein.“The days were clear with just enough clouds in the sky to break themonotony of the blue,” he wrote. “No wonder…people in feeble health aregetting on here so well…I soon learned there were thousands of consumptives inthe place…and concluded that while this climate is certainly in a wonderfuldegree healthful and invigorating, only two kinds of people should come here:Those who have the consumption and those who want to get it…” Placinghimself back into the mood of scientific observations, he ended the essay withthe following line: “But the most interesting of all are the electrical observationswhich will be described presently.”7It appears likely that this sudden burst of poetic reverie could be attributedto the mystical moment he had encountered three nights earlier while monitoringhis equipment alone at the lab.This event, which was to alter his destiny in many ways, as we have seen,did not come out of the blue. Tesla had been planning for nearly a decade tomake contact.Talking With the PlanetsNikola TeslaThe idea of communicating with other worlds…has been regarded as apoet’s dream forever unrealizable…[Having] perfected the apparatus…for the observation of feeble effects[from] approaching thunderstorms…so far from my laboratory in theColorado mountains, I could feel the pulse of the globe, as it were, notingevery electrical charge that occurred in a radius of eleven hundred miles.I can never forget the first sensations I experienced when it dawnedupon me that I had observed something possibly of incalculableconsequences to mankind. I felt as though I were present at the birth of anew knowledge or the revelation of a great truth…There was presentsomething mysterious, not to say supernatural, but at the time the idea ofthose disturbances being intelligently controlled signals did not yet presentitself to me…It was sometime afterward when the thought dashed upon my mindthat th[ose] disturbances might be due to intelligent control. Although Icould not decipher their meaning…the feeling is constantly growing on methat I have been the first to hear the greeting of one planet to another.8As the inventor admits, the night he received the signals he did not attributethem to extraterrestrials. Most likely he first thought that they were periodicoscillations stemming from the thunderstorms that he was monitoring. A fewdays later, it began to dawn upon him that the metronome nature of the beats didnot correlate with the supposition that they were linked to lightning discharges.The article also speculated that they may have stemmed from Venus or Mars.Two decades later, in 1921, Tesla wrote:Others may scoff at this suggestion…[of] communicat[ing] with one ofour heavenly neighbors, as Mars…or treat it as a practical joke, but I havebeen in deep earnest about it ever since I made my first observations inColorado Springs…At the time, there existed no wireless plant other than mine that couldproduce a disturbance perceptible in a radius of more than a few miles.Furthermore, the conditions under which I operated were ideal, and I waswell trained for the work. The character of the disturbances recordedprecluded the possibility of their being of terrestrial origin, and I alsoeliminated the influence of the sun, moon and Venus. As I then announced,the signals consisted in a regular repetition of numbers, and subsequentstudy convinced me that they must have emanated from Mars, the planethaving just then been close to the earth.9Note slight alterations from the original article and letter to the Red Cross.In the 1901 article Tesla does not single out Mars as the only possible source ofthe impulses. Venus or other planets are also mentioned. In the 1921 article hesays that Venus had been ruled out. Clearly this had to occur over two years afterthe event, that is, some time after the 1901 article which still included Venus as apossibility. “After mature thought and study,” Tesla himself dates his “positiveconclusion that they must [have] emanate[d] from Mars” to the year 1907.10 Inthe Red Cross letter and the 1901 article Tesla is very specific in mentioningthree beats. In the 1921 article the number of beats is obscured. JulianHawthorne, who had written to Tesla while he was in Colorado Springs and whomet with Tesla in New York upon his return, also refers to “three fairy taps.”Tesla also alters the facts with regard to competing wireless operators. WhileTesla was in Colorado, he received a number of letters from George Scherffconcerning competitors. For example on August 1, 1899:Dear Mr. Tesla,Mr. Clark, the experimenter in wireless telegraphy called this morningseeking a powerful oscillator or information on how to build one.11In August and September 1899, Scherff continued to inform Tesla aboutClark, who could send messages three miles, thereby obtaining employment by aNew York newspaper to report yacht races. Other wireless operators at this timeincluded Professor D’Azar in Rome, Professor Marble in Connecticut, and Dr.Riccia in France.12 And, of course, there was Guglielmo Marconi, who capturedthe imagination of the media during the America’s Cup races that autumn.Although Scherff wrote, “The New York Times continues to boom Marconi,”13Tesla confidently replied, on September 22, 1899, to Scherff, “Do not worryabout me. I am about a century ahead of the other fellows.”14Tesla, as one of numerous adherents to the group-fantasy belief that Marswas inhabited, assumed that the impulses stemmed from there. In 1899 it wasfrankly inconceivable to him that he could have intercepted a competitor’smessage. However, the fact of the matter is that Marconi was transmittingmessages hundreds of miles across Europe and the English Channel during thesummer of 1899 and was using as a signal the Morse-code letter S (dot-dot-dot),which precisely corresponds to the three beats Tesla said he intercepted while hewas in Colorado.15On July 28, the very date it has been hypothesized that Tesla received thesignals, Marconi was with the British Admiralty and the French Navy in theEnglish Channel, demonstrating his wireless apparatus between ships in mockbattle maneuvers over distances of thirty miles, fifty-five miles, and eighty-sixmiles. “On 28 July, Marconi had inspected [the ship] Alexandra’s equipment inpreparation for hostilities.”16 Most likely he transmitted the letter S at that timeto see if it was picked up by the other warcraft. If Tesla was monitoring hisequipment at twelve midnight, it would have been about 8:00 A.M. in England,so the times correlate as well.At first, Tesla must have sincerely believed that the source of the impulseswere extraterrestrial, for he boldly stated as much in a series of publishedarticles.17 A few years later, the awful truth dawned upon him. Worse, Tesla mayhave intercepted Marconi’s impulses and made a fool of himself by claimingthey had derived from superior intelligences. Marconi for Tesla was anathema.In 1921, ironically, while Marconi was making headlines by trying himself tointercept messages from nearby planets, Tesla wrote: “I was naturally very muchinterested in [recent] reports that these supposed planetary signals were nothingelse than interfering undertones of wireless transmitters. These disturbances Iobserved for the first time from 1906-1907 occurred rarely, but subsequentlythey increased in frequency. Every transmitter emits undertones, and these giveby interference long beats, the wavelength being anything from 50 miles to 300or 400 miles.”18This statement supports the hypothesis that the 1899 impulses also stemmedfrom some competitor. Furthermore Tesla suggests the actual mechanism for hisencounter: an undertone effect; and it appears that he unfortunately alsoprovided, through Marconi’s piracy, the very oscillators used to transmit thesignals! The transmitter on the high seas in England, therefore, was attuned tothe receiving equipment in Colorado. Coincidentally, this realization in 1906-1907 occurred, as we shall see, during a time of great emotional stress. Ratherthan face the truth, the mystical Serb clung to a supernatural explanation.The most ardent proponent of the outer-space scenario was undoubtedly thejournalist Julian Hawthorne. The son of Nathaniel Hawthorne, Julian authored aseries of elaborate treatises on Tesla’s philosophy, laboratory work, experimentsin interplanetary communication, and place in history. Perhaps because he hadengaged in a spectacular duel of articles with his brother-in-law George Lathrop,who wrote science-fiction tales about Tom Edison battling invaders from Mars inArthur Brisbane’s New York Journal,19 Hawthorne took up Tesla’sextraterrestrial cause.The competition between Edison and Tesla would never abate, and itcontinued even into the realm of science fiction. Like many creative individuals,Edison had an interest in the occult. With Charles Batchelor, he had studiedtelepathy,20 and he had worked with spiritualists on a “telephone” tocommunicate with departed souls. Edison was interested in space travel andinterplanetary communication. Lathrop, who had married Julian’s sister, hadworked with Edison since the mid-1890s in cowriting a number of articles thatbecame the precursors to latter-day fantastic tales. In Lathrop’s story “Edison’sConquest of Mars,” when the Red Planet warriors invaded the earth, the Wizardof Menlo Park “invented a disintegrating ray…and it was ‘Edison to the Rescueof the Universe.’”21 The son of Nathaniel Hawthorne would not be outdone.And How Will Tesla Reply to Those Signals From Mars?Julian HawthorneThe other day, there happened to Mr. Tesla the most momentous experiencethat has ever visited a human being of this earth—three fairy taps, one afterthe other, at a fixed interval travelling with the speed of light were receivedby Tesla in Colorado from some Tesla on the planet Mars!No thoughtful man can have much doubt then, that little as we areaware of it, we must for ages have been subjected to the direct inspection ofthe men of Mars and of the older planets. They visit us and look us overyear after year; and report at home: “They’re not ready yet!” But at length aTesla is born, and the starry men are on the watch for developments.Possibly they guide his development; who can tell?22Perhaps more than any other writer, Hawthorne elevated Tesla to the orderof an interplanetary Adonis whose mystical destiny upon the earth was to giveits inhabitants electrical power, instrumentation, and enlightenment. Note theoverblown yet elegant description Hawthorne pens in meeting with the sorcerer:“Ever and anon there appears a man who is both scientist and poet [who] walkswith feet on the ground but with head among the stars. Men of this mark are rare.Pythagoras was one; Newton must have had a touch of the inspirational; in ourown times Tesla is the man…He was born in Herzogovina, of Greek stock, oneof the oldest families there. I believe he is a prince at home.”23Hawthorne interviewed Tesla in the same article in which the inventorreiterated his extraterrestrial hypothesis and his technological vision of thefuture, creating a world in which cheap energy would be available for all andhumanity could begin to take its rightful place in the evolutionary hierarchy. Andalthough Hawthorne tried to introduce some doubt as to the definite reality of theextraterrestrial encounter, a quarter of the way through the five-thousand-wordtreatise, the writer softened the potential criticism by rationalizing that “thehopes Tesla holds out embody things that ought to be true; that would immenselyenlarge and beautify the world if they were true…” Concluding with a rhetoricalquestion, Hawthorne wrote, “And what about conversing with Mars?…Tesla willdo what he was sent here to do.”Backed by the opposition, factions of the press also lashed out vigorously.One severe critic, under the byline of a mysterious Mr. X, cautioned “intelligentreaders”: “Mr. Tesla obviously wants to figure in the newspapers. Everyonewould be greatly interested if it were true that signals are being sent from Mars.Unfortunately, he has not adduced a scrap of evidence to prove it…Hisspeculations on science are so reckless as to lose an interest. His philosophizingis so ignorant as to be worthless.”24While in Colorado, Tesla negotiated with officials of the U.S. Navy andLight House Board, with nine letters passing between them from the spring of1899 and, upon his return to New York, through the autumn of 1900.25 On May11, Rear Adm. Francis J. Higginson of the U.S. Navy wrote Tesla a letter whichwas forwarded to Colorado:Dear Sir:I would like to ask you if you can not arrange to establish a system ofwireless telegraphy upon the Light-Vessel No. 66, Nantucket Shoals, Mass.,which lies off about 60 miles south of Nantucket Island.26Higginson stated explicitly, “The Light-House Board [has] no money…[sofunding] will have to be paid from some outside source.”Tesla sent his “humble apologies for a tardy reply,” because of a “severecold,” and then ended the note with this seemingly innocuous line: “[It] is alsomy sincere hope that I am not standing in the way of some other expert moredeserving and better able to fulfill the task than myself.”27The statement strikes this investigator as odd. Why would Tesla write thathe was potentially “standing in the way of some other expert more deserving”when he knew that this was a completely false statement. No other expert wasmore deserving or more knowledgeable than he. Moreover, he knew that it wasvery likely that other experts were pirating his work, so why would he encouragemore of that activity? This was clearly a self-deprecating and self-destructiveelement. Be that as it may, the response from Commander Perry, Higginson’sassociate, was just as peculiar:Office of the Light House BoardWashington, D.C. 16 August ‘99.Mr. N. TeslaExperimental Station,Colorado Springs, Col.Sir:In acknowledging the receipt of your letter of 11 Aug. ’99…from certainexpressions used in it the Board fears there may be some misunderstanding,so in order to prevent you from going to any trouble of expense, the boarddesires to say that it has taken no action as yet toward providing anyapparatus for using wireless telegraphy, as no appreciation is available forthe purpose…When it does take up the question of installing apparatus forcommunicating with light-vessels, your great name and fame in suchmatters will insure earnest consideration of yourself.Respectfully yours,T. Perry, Commander, U.S.N.Apparently, Commander Perry read into Tesla’s letter information thatwasn’t there. The inventor did not discuss reimbursement but took theopportunity in another letter to chastise Perry for his miserly response, writingon August 20, 1899, from his “Experimental Station” in Colorado Springs, to theLight House Board, Washington, D.C.:Gentlemen,…On this occasion permit me to avail myself of myacquired and precious prerogative as a citizen of the United States andto express my deep astonishment that, in a country of such vast wealth, andleading in enlightenment, so important a body as the Light House Board,instead of being provided with unlimited resources, should be triviallyhampered and placed in…such an awkward position.Very respectfully yours,N. Tesla28Although clever, Tesla’s response was short-sighted, as the benefits thatwould accrue from installing wireless apparatus on this boat would clearlyoutweigh any short-term loss. The equipment would have been far moreadvanced than Marconi’s, the press and public would see, without doubt, Tesla’ssuperiority, and other branches of the navy and armed forces would have createdcontracts with the inventor. Furthermore, it would have been the first publicdemonstration by Tesla of long-distance wireless telegraphy. Unfortunately,throughout Tesla’s long career, he never demonstrated this capability to anyoneother than himself.Nevertheless, Tesla’s letter did not destroy his chances with the LighthouseBoard. On September 14, Commander Perry responded by offering Tesla thecontract because the navy “preferred to award home talent” over Marconi.29Here was the opportunity of a lifetime. Certainly it was understandable thatTesla needed to stay in Colorado through the autumn. He would return to NewYork the first week of January 1900. The Colorado experiment was a costlyendeavor, and the inventor had now built up momentum, pushing toward thegrand conclusion, that is, his wish to send impulses around the globe. Perrywanted action “quickly.” But asking him to delay ninety days would not havebeen an unreasonable request. However, from the emotional point of view, Perryhad said the wrong thing. He had mentioned the name of Signor Marconi.Gentlemen,…Much as I value your advances I am compelled to say, in justice tomyself, that I would never accept a preference on any ground, the merit ofmy own work excepted, particularly not in this case, as I would becompeting against some of those who are following in my path and as anypecuniary advantage which I might derive by availing myself of theprivilege, is a matter of the most absolute indifference to me.But since you have reasons for preference, permit me to state…that afew years ago I laid down certain novel principles on “wireless telegraphy”which I have been since perfecting.Tesla went on to describe the seven features of his system: (1) an oscillator;(2) a ground and elevated circuit; (3) a transmitter; (4) a resonant receiver; (5) atransformer “that scientific men have honored me by identifying it with myname” (Tesla coil); (6) a powerful conduction coil; (7) a transformer in thereceiving apparatus. Having “carefully perused all the reports of the moresuccessful experimenters as they appeared,” Tesla discovered that “they are allusing, with religious care, these devices and principles, without the slightestdeparture, even in minor details…” He ended the letter by offering his servicesonce again but requesting that the navy purchase an even dozen transmitters,with the caution thatin the end one is apt to be accused of making outrageous prices. It is morethan probable that my apparatus will cost more than that offered by othersas I look to every detail myself.With many thanks for your good intentions I remain,Very respectfully yours,N. Tesla30The navy never responded to this letter. One year later, on October 4, 1900,Tesla wrote Admiral Higginson. Four days later, the admiral responded: “Itwill…be necessary before asking Congress for money to carry on this work tohave further estimates of cost.”Tesla’s style of writing to the navy was particularly irritating and filled withcontradictions. He claims to be “absolutely indifferent” to gaining a “pecuniaryadvantage,” and yet he tells Commander Perry that the cost might appear to be“outrageous.” At the dawning stage of a completely new industry, instead ofbuilding one or two prototypes to display before the government, Tesla insists ona sizable order. In an early letter he states that he does not want to stand in theway of any competitor; in another he claims he did not know there were anyother competitors. In one passage, he accuses all his competitors of piracy(which was probably true), and yet in another he wishes them “hearty success.”His position was incongruous to say the least, and it served to scuttle his owncause. This would turn out to be one of the most significant blunders of hiscareer. 