24WALDORF-ASTORIA (1898)November 29, 1897My dear Luka,I have concluded that so important a literary event as the appearanceof your splendid book of poems should be firstly commemorated by a dinnerat the Waldorf as Mrs. Filipov suggested in her peculiarly delicate way…Asthis does not seem possible because of your immense popularity, I wouldlike you to name another evening very soon, however, for my money mayrun out.Yours sincerely,N. Tesla1The Waldorf-Astoria was the tallest hotel in the world, a center forbanquets, concerts, and conventions in the city, and the permanent or temporaryresidence of the wealthiest and most eminent citizens of the day. Residing therebecame a goal to which Tesla aspired; it would be one he would achieve beforethe end of the year, and one he would maintain for the next two decades. Built intwo parts, the original Waldorf was completed by William Waldorf Astor in1893; the Astoria, by his cousin, John Jacob Astor, in late 1897. At first, Jackwas reluctant to tear down his mother’s home to erect a hotel, but after theWaldorf grossed $4.5 million in its first year, he changed his mind. Its opening“marked the beginning of a new concept in living,” extolling the essence ofexclusiveness, cordiality, pomposity, and elegant grandiosity to the masses.2The manager, George C. Boldt, was a Prussian immigrant from the island ofRügen, situated near Denmark in the Baltic Sea. “Mild mannered, dignified andunassuming,” Boldt resembled “a typical German professor with his close-cropped beard which he kept fastidiously trimmed…and his pince-nez glasses ona black silk cord.” Described also as “a martinet, and a man of mercurialmoods,” Boldt was a socialite, in certain ways, of the most superficial kind. “Iwould rather see Mrs. Stuyvesant Fish enjoying a cup of tea in an all but emptyPalm room,” Boldt declared, “than a dozen lesserknown guests there feasting.”3The manager also adored mechanical contrivances, sprinkling the hotel withsuch modern conveniences as pneumatic tubes, electric bulb carriage calls,flashing control panels on the elevators, and “his network of hushed butauthoritative buzzers.”4 A few years later, the Waldorf would be the first hotelwith a radio tower. No doubt, Tesla, himself an elitist, was attractive to Boldt.With his position of inventor extraordinaire well established, it is likely that theinventor was accepted in a distinct class above the manager. Once he moved in,Tesla may even have avoided paying rent in lieu of his connection with Astor, orhe may have negotiated a favorable deal.With over nine hundred on staff, the acclaimed “Oscar of the Waldorf” aschef, and Boldt’s capable wife overseeing the decor, there was no finerestablishment. A regal fragrance wafted from every corner of the hotel, withexquisite porcelain, exotic flowers, and expensive furniture decorating the halls,dining rooms, and suites. This was the alley where the peacocks came to strut.At over six feet two inches and dressed in suede high-tops, tails, cane, top hat,and ever-present white gloves, Nikola Tesla was one of the proudest and mostrenowned.The Spanish-American War dragged on through most of 1898 as Teslacontinued to try to exploit his telautomaton for use as a naval weapon. He hadoffered his wireless transmitters to aid in the organizing of ship and troopmovements but was turned down by the secretary of the navy for fear, as Teslareported a year later, “that I might cause a calamity, as sparks are apt to flyanywhere in the neighborhood of such apparatus when it is at work.” Tesla triedto guarantee that he had overcome “these defects and limitations,” but it was tono avail.5 Public demonstrations and photographs of lightning bolts spewingfrom his ingenuity worked to hinder any assurances he might give. Instead,during the conflict, the navy utilized hot-air balloons connected to ships bytelegraph lines instead. Being up in one would “make a man’s hair turn white,”since the balloon was an easy target, but soldiers had to “obey orders, and thatwas all there was to it.”6Tesla contacted shipbuilder Mr. Nixon, designer of the Oregon (the Villardocean liner he had fixed while working for Tom Edison in 1884), and alsosubmarine builder John P. Holland.7 Two years later, Holland would sell thenavy its first submersible; it would weigh a commanding seventy-four tons andbecome a quintessential fighting machine,8 but in 1898 he was still havingdifficulty negotiating a deal. “The Navy Department was obliged to decline…[Holland’s offer] to go into Santiago Harbor and destroy the Spanish warships…as it smacked of privateering and was in violation of international law.”9 AndTesla also invited military personnel to his laboratory, particularly U.S. NavyRear Admiral Francis J. Higginson, chairman of the Light House Board, todiscuss the use of his wireless transmitters. But dealing with the government wasanything but easy.10During this period, in June 1898, Richmond Pearson Hobson rocketed tostardom, capturing the hearts of America through his heroic efforts in the war. Afew months later, Hobson would become the key attraction of the Tesla-Johnsonsocial net, and a decade after that, his fame so well established, he wouldbecome a presidential candidate.11On June 4, the New York Times reported that a bold American fightingfrigate, the Merrimac, had “made a dash” into Santiago Harbor under “a livelycannonade of fire” in attempts to attack the waiting Spanish armada. The shipwas sunk, and “an officer, an engineer and six seamen were taken prisoners.”The Times concluded, “Everybody is astounded at the audacity of the Americanvessel.”12The following day, it was revealed that enemy fire had not sunk the ship atall. Rather, it had been deliberately scuttled by Lieutenant Hobson for thepurpose of locking in the harbor the entire Spanish fleet. “This splendid stroke”effectively removed the feared Admiral Cervera from the war. “In a day, in anhour, the potent, all-pervading force of electricity…flashed his fame over theround world.”13 As Hobson was imprisoned in the dungeon of Morro Castle, hecontinued to make headlines as the world waited for the war to end and hishoped-for release.14As ever, Katharine continued to spread her Irish charms, inviting theSerbian mystic to dinner so that she could be “hypnotized” by his presence.15The very day of the sinking of the Merrimac, the inventor received the followingprovocative missive:June 6, 1898Dear Mr. Tesla,I want very much to see you [tomorrow evening], and will be reallydisappointed if you do not think my request worthy of your consideration.Robert is giving himself a birthday party and he is going to have some ofyour Servian songs sung.You must save this evening for us. After this date I am going away toWashington for a visit, so if anybody cares to see Mrs. Filipov?When you come tomorrow evening, we’ll talk about the hand which isbefore me now but which is doomed to seclusion…I cannot stand it. It istoo strong, too virile—when I enter the room without thinking it makes mestart—It is the only thing in it. But it is not satisfactory for it does not givethe proper idea of your hand which is large and free. Like yourself, thisseems sticky, short, I know what causes this, it is the shadows. You must tryagain and make your hand be as large and grand as it is.Faithfully yours,Katharine Johnson16In January, Tesla had published a full-page photograph of his hand forElectrical Review in his attempts to dramatically display the improvements hehad made in the efficiency of his vacuum lamps.17 Every line on the palm wasvisible, so effective was the illuminant (although, as Katharine points out, theshape is marred by an underlying shadow). The famous palmist Cheiro was therage of the day, having published analyses of the hands of such celebrities asTom Edison, Sarah Bernhardt, and Theosophist Annie Besant. Mark Twaincommented: “Cheiro has exposed my character to me with humiliating accuracy.I ought not to confess this accuracy, still I am moved to do it.”18It seems likely that Tesla’s clever vanity had come upon a way to exploit hisfluorescent tubes and at the same time reveal in a veiled way the magnanimity ofhis being by exposing his hand to the world. Referring to a professional palmist,Tesla’s hand supposedly reveals “a flirtatious streak and hypersensitivity” seenin the Girdle of Venus; from the head line “incessant worries stemming from thepast,” a close association with his mother (because it is tied to the heart line), “anirrational streak and blind spot in his thinking” (due to chaining, an undulatingcourse, and foreshortening of the line); and all of this is counterbalanced by a“remarkable fate line, which, rising like a firm oak tree, reveals stability, vision,creative aspiration, stubbornness and an ability to withstand great stress andturmoil…The fate line is the strongest line in the hand.”19During these months playful banter peaked between the inventor and theelusive Madame Filipov; it seems she tried to get Tesla married. In February,Katharine wrote, “Another charming lady is to be here who does not believe thatyou are my friend, that I even know you. I wish to convince her that you are onmy list and you shall sit beside her. Come and shed the radiance of your happycountenance upon us all especially the Johnsons.”20In March she demands that Tesla join them for luncb to “bring solace toyour friends” and a few days later invites him over again. “A very charming girlis to be here who wants very much to meet Mr. Tesla. A real one, I assureyou.”21 Tesla decides to have everyone for dinner first and writes, “I shall sendmy private equipage…to dine…at the Waldorf and I am getting up the appetitefor the occasion.”22Tesla’s celibacy has always been a question mark. It seems probable that heand Katharine had engaged in a “sticky” liaison a few years earlier, but at thisstage, due in part to Katharine’s arrangements, Tesla had become active withother women, and Katharine had enjoyed his pleasures vicariously. Three ladieswho interested him were Mrs. Winslow, Miss Amatia Kussner, and MissMarguerite Merrington. The first, alas, was married; to the second, Tesla wantedto display his inventions at his laboratory; “There is another reason why sheshould come but that is difficult to say…Well I do not want to say anythingdisparaging of a lady.”23For yet another “Johnson blowout” Tesla wrote, concerning the third lady,“I’d sooner be glad to rely on your choice and only remember to suggest MissMerrington—if she would come. I know I would be her victim—before dinner,but after that I think I could hold my own for she does not drink claret.”24 And afew months later:March 9, 1899My dear Mrs. Johnson,I shall be glad to have any of your friends come but we must have onelady for each gentleman—else you must dine without me…Agnes mustcome by all means and—wouldn’t you invite Miss Merrington? She is sucha wonderfully clever woman. I would say wise had she but married. Really,I would like to have her with us.Sincerely,Nicholas I of Houston St.25Born in England, Marguerite Merrington was raised in a convent in Buffalobefore she studied the piano and became a teacher at her alma mater, NormalCollege. Resigning to move to New York City to follow her passion of “dramaticauthor,” Miss Merrington first made headlines in 1891 with her well-receivedromantic play Letterblair. This success was followed two years later when shewon a $500 prize from the National Conservatory of Music for her librettoDaphne, which was reviewed by, among others, Antonin Dvořák. “Tall, gracefuland charming,” the regal Miss Merrington was a “frequent dinner guest at theJohnson home.” An integral part of the Gramercy Park set, Miss Merringtonaccompanied the young Owen Johnson to Mark Twain’s birthday party in 1905and maintained her creative spark throughout her life, writing a book on GeneralCuster and his wife in 1950, the year before she died, unmarried, at the age ofninety-one.26In August 1898, John Jacob Astor returned from the battlegrounds, but itwas not until December that Tesla met with Astor at his home. While Jack wasconsidered by many to be “cold-hearted, humorless, weak-minded and almostcompletely absent of personality,”27 his wife, Ava, was seen as the mostbeautiful woman in America. Tesla was particularly taken by Lady Astor’sloveliness, and it seems that she was enthralled by the inventor’s experiments.The three dined together on occasion at Delmonico’s or the Waldorf, and whenTesla arrived at the Astor residence, he often brought along a bouquet of flowers.But although “Ava…sparkle[d] at every lighted candle and Jack…followed herabout like a bedraggled and slightly bad tempered spaniel,” all was not well withthe marriage; where Astor was able to leave his exquisite wife for months onend, touring the high seas for adventure and the noble cause, she retreated byentertaining a zealous interest in bridge.28Thus, even though Ava was on his side, the inventor was uncertain of hisstanding. “My dear Astor,” Tesla began, “I would like to explain why I could notgo down to Cuba with you.”“I understand,” Astor replied. “During the gunfire, perhaps that is when itdawned on me, I realized that your life was too precious to risk on such a trip. Isee, however, from recent reports that you have been attacked after all, but it hasbeen by reporters instead.”“I’m glad,” Tesla quipped, “that I am living in a place in which, though theycan roast me in the papers, they cannot burn me at the stake.”29Tesla thereupon called a meeting with Astor and two of his cronies, Mr.Clarence McKay and Mr. Darius Ogden Mills, so that he could display hiscontinuing progress with his oscillators and fluorescent lights as well as showthem patent applications, articles which had appeared in the technical journals,and reports on tests performed by the Royal Society in London and the RoentgenSociety in Germany. “Let me read you the following dispatch from Sir WilliamCrookes,” Tesla said. “Congratulations. The performance of your machine ismarvelous.” And Tesla presented another report, which hailed his oscillator as“one of the most significant of the age.”“You will see how many enterprises can be built up on that novel principle,Colonel. It is for a reason that I am often and violently attacked, because myinventions threaten a number of established industries. My telautomaton, forinstance, opens up a new art which will sooner or later render large guns entirelyuseless, and will make impossible the building of large battleships, and will, as Ihave stated in my patent long before the Czar’s manifesto, compel the nations tocome to an understanding for the maintenance of peace.”30“You are taking too many leaps for me,” Astor said, causing the others toreconsider as well. “Let us stick to oscillators and cold lights. Let me see somesuccess in the marketplace with these two enterprises, before you go off savingthe world with an invention of an entirely different order, and then I will commitmore than my good wishes. Stop in again when you have a sound proposal orcall me on the telephone.”Tesla waited until the new year and then hit the colonel with a directassault. “My dear Astor,” Tesla said, “It has always been my firm belief that youtake a genuine, friendly interest in myself personally as well as in my labors…Now I ask you frankly, when I have a friend like J.J.A., a prince among wealthymen, a patriot ready to risk his life for his country, a man who means every wordhe says—who puts such a value on my labors and who offers repeatedly to backme up—have I not a foundation for believing that he would stand by me when,after several years of hard work I have finally brought to commercial perfectionsome important inventions which, even at the most conservative estimate, mustbe valued at several million dollars.”Informing Astor that George Westinghouse had given him $500,000 for theAC polyphase system and that Edward Dean Adams had invested $100,000 tobecome a partner in his later endeavors when he had “14 [new] U.S. and asmany foreign patents,” Tesla remarked that there was a “powerful clique” whichstill now opposed him. “And it is chiefly for this reason that I want a few friends,like yourself, to give me at this moment their valuable financial and moralsupport.”Having “placed faith” in Astor’s words, Tesla reveals that he had sold offsecurities to buy back control of his company, although “Mr. Adams still has aminority interest.” Having stated that his laboratory in the past has “paid $1500for every $100 invested, on the average,” the inventor proclaims, “I am fullyconfident that the property which I have now in my hands will pay much betterthan this.”“I now produce a light superior by far to that of the incandescent lamp withone third of the expenditure of energy, and as my lamps will last forever, the costof maintenance will be minute. The cost of copper, which in the old system, is amost important item, is in mine reduced to a mere trifle, for I can run on a wiresufficient for one incandescent lamp more than 1000 of my own lamps, givingfully 5000 times as much light. Let me ask you, Colonel, how much is this aloneworth when you consider that there are hundreds of millions of dollars investedto-day in electric light in the various chief countries in which I have patented myinventions in this field?“Sooner or later,” Tesla continues, “my system will be purchased either bythe Whitney Syndicate, G.E. or Westinghouse, for otherwise they will be drivenout of the market.”The inventor closed: “Then consider my oscillators and my system oftransmitting power without wires, my method of directing the movement ofbodies at a distance by wireless telegraphy, the manufactures of fertilizers andnitric acid from the air, the production of ozone…and many other important linesof manufacture as, for instance, cheap refrigeration and cheap manufacture ofliquid air, etc.—and you will see that, putting a fair estimate on all, I cannot offerto sell any considerable amount of my property for less than $1000 a share. I amperfectly sure that I will be able to command that price as soon as some of myinventions are on the market.”Telling Astor that he had contracts pending with “the Creusot Works inFrance, the Helios Company in Germany, Ganz and Company in Austria andother firms,” Tesla requested an investment of $100,000. “If you do not take thatmuch interest you will put me at a great disadvantage.” Should Astor come in,other Astor associates, such as Mr. McKay and Darius Ogden Mills, “would dothe same.” If, Tesla wrote, “after six months you should have any reason to bedissatisfied, it will be my first duty to satisfy you.”31Astor stressed interest in seeing Tesla exploit his fluorescent lights, and theinventor agreed. On January 10, 1899, papers were signed whereby Astor gaveTesla $100,000 for five hundred shares of the Tesla Electric Company; in return,Astor was elected director of the board.32 At the same time, Tesla moved into theWaldorf-Astoria. Tesla also received $10,000 from the dry-goods manufacturerSimpson and Crawford,33 and he may also have received funds from Mr. Millsor Mr. McKay. The old Tesla Company, with William Rankine and Edward D.Adams, was, for all intents and purposes, dissolved, along with his relationshipwith Alfred Brown and Charles Peck, although all of these individuals may havein one way or another been involved in the new enterprise.The first letter on Waldorf stationery written to the Johnsons is datedNovember 3, 1898. It is one of the rare letters in which Tesla refers to Mrs.Johnson as “My dear Kate.” Tesla was about to hook a big fish, perhaps thewealthiest fish on the planet, and his sense of self-importance escalatedaccordingly. In haughty fanfare, the Serbian aristocrat separated his exalted ilkfrom “other social tribolites…plebians, drummers, grocerymen, [and] Jews.”34Anti-Semitic references are rare in the Tesla correspondence, but no doubt hewas anti-Semitic, at least in the social sense, that is, as a common reflection ofthe times. Anti-Semitism against ethnic ghetto dwellers, such as those newlyarrived in Williamsburg, Brooklyn, and New York’s Lower East Side, wascommon among the upper classes, even though the Rothschilds, AugustBelmont, Jacob Schiff, and Bernard Baruch were well respected and known tobe Jewish. It is, however, clear evidence of one of Tesla’s prejudices. The letteralso refers to Tesla’s wish to meet Lieutenant Hobson, whose Cuban exploits hadbeen featured in the Century. “The interest in [Hobson] was at a fever heat [atour offices],” Johnson recalled, “[and] the estimates of the sale of his [proposed]book ran into the hundred thousands.” Unfortunately, shortly after his accountappeared, a scandalous event occurred which was egged on by the “sensationalpress,” and the idea for the book “fell flat.”35 The incident had to do withHobson’s handsome appearance and the inability of women to refrain fromkissing him when he came into their midst.“I would have cut off my right arm rather than to offend one of [thoseladies],” Hobson declared, concluding, “The kissing episodes, what little therewas to them, were entirely beyond my control, and my conscience is clear.”36The dashing lieutenant was well liked by Tesla and the Johnsons, and hisentrée into their circle added a wonderful spark to their lives. He would join agroup that included at this time the Gilders, Miss Kussner, Miss Merrington,Mrs. Winslow, Mrs. Robinson, Mrs. Dodge, Rudyard Kipling, and John Muir.Playful jealousies became evident as Tesla and the Johnsons vied for the warhero’s attention, Tesla daring even to tender to Hobson one lady with whom theinventor may have had intimate relations.“Remember, Luka,” Tesla teased, “Hobson does not belong to the Johnsonsexclusively. I shall avenge myself on Mme. Filipov by introducing him to Mme.Kussner and somebody will be forgotten.”37Tesla spent many “delightful” hours with Hobson, inviting him to thelaboratory, to dinner, and out on the town. “He is a fine fellow,” the inventorconcluded.38 Their friendship would last.Hobson, twenty-eight, a southerner, was a striking presence in his uniform,with deep-set, penetrating eyes, hair swept back, a firm, prominent chin, and ahandlebar mustache. A graduate of the U.S. Naval Academy in 1889, he hadspent three years in Paris studying at a maritime college and had worked for theOffice of Naval Intelligence.Gifted with a keen mind, Hobson had worked for the secretary of the navyduring the China-Japan war. His family, on both sides, included lawyers, judges,a governor, and a general.39 He was a ready-made hero, and he was a socialcatch of the first order.All the pieces of Tesla’s puzzle were now in place. He had obtainedfundamental patents on wireless communication and remote control, he hadcalculated the type of energy he needed in order to disturb the electicalconditions of the planet, he had obtained a sizable sum of working capital fromone of the wealthiest men in the world, he had begun serious negotiations withthe U.S. Navy, and, as a social triumph, he had moved into the Waldorf-Astoria.The budding entrepreneur settled upon a plan for marketing his oscillators andcold lamps—well, they could wait for now—and then Tesla took the next boldstep. He would test his wireless theories on a grand scale.The laboratory at Houston Street was simply too small and vulnerable tofires and potential spies. With few people aware, Tesla had scouted the countryto seek out potential sites for his new “Experimental Station.” George Scherff,his capable secretary, tried to get Tesla to reconsider, to stay in New York and dosomething tangible, something that would pay an immediate return, but he wastalking to a deaf ear. Destiny was urging Tesla westward. 