4TESLA MEETS THE WIZARD OFMENLO PARK (1882-85)O, he’s a great talker, and, say, he’s a great eater too. I remember the firsttime I saw him. We were doing some experimenting in a little place outsideParis, and one day a long, lanky lad came in and said he wanted a job. Weput him to work thinking he would soon tire of his new occupation for wewere putting in 20-24 hours a day, then, but he stuck right to it and afterthings eased up one of my men said to him: “Well, Tesla, you’ve workedpretty hard, now I’m going to take you into Paris and give you a splendidsupper.” So he took him to the most expensive cafe in Paris—a place wherethey broil an extra thick steak between two thin steaks. Tesla stowed awayone of those big fellows without any trouble and my man said to him:“Anything else, my boy? I’m standing treat.” “Well, if you don’t mind, sir,”said my apprentice, “I’ll try another steak.” After he left me he went intoother lines and has accomplished quite a little.THOMAS EDISON1Taking the advice of Ferenc Puskas, Tesla left Budapest for Paris in April 1882delighted with the chance to meet the Edison people from America and ready tobuild his motor and to find investors. Concurrently, he was getting paid for theexperience. Paris in the 1880s was a center of modern fashion: men in theircutaway coats and silk top hats, women with braided hair, in long frilled dresseswith bustles, and wealthy tourists ready to take back the latest fineries to theirrespective nations. Tesla was met by Ferenc’s brother Tivadar Puskas, a harddriver but also a man known to talk in “air balloons.”2 Tesla, whose head couldalso soar into the clouds, had met a powerful ally. Mindful of the need forsecrecy, they discussed strategies for approaching Charles Batchelor, manager ofthe newly formed Compagnie Continental Edison, with Tesla’s new motor as theyoung inventor was introduced to operations.Formerly a resident of Manchester, England, Batchelor, a “mastermechanic,” had been sent to America a decade earlier to present innovativethreadmaking machinery recently created by his employers, the Coates ThreadCompany.3 There he met Edison and shortly became his most trusted associate.Batchelor worked on the first phonographs and on perfecting the filament for thelightbulb. He also ran operations in New Jersey and then in Europe, owning a 10percent share of Edison’s many worldwide companies.4 An open-mindedindividual, Batchelor was approachable, although also rather busy.Anthony Szigeti probably emigrated from Budapest at the same time asTesla, since both were hired by Puskas and “were together almost constantly inParis.” Szigeti wrote, “Tesla [was very]…much excited over the ideas which hethen had of operating motors. He talked with me many times about them andtold me his plan…[of] constructing and operating motors…[and] dispensingwith the commutator.”5Having just purchased a large factory at Ivry-sur-Seine, for the constructionof generators and manufacture of lightbulbs, Batchelor, as Edison’s closestpartner, was planning on erecting central lighting stations throughout Europe. Healso had plans in England, where the Crystal Palace Exposition was thendisplaying Edison’s new incandescent lamp.6 Batchelor would need good men torun the concerns and wrote Edison frequently as to the expertise of the variousworkers. He was particularly impressed with Puskas, who had successfully runthe Edison lighting exhibit at the Paris Exposition of 1881. “Puskas…[is the onlyworker] having any idea of ‘push,’” he wrote, “and I think that you should insiston him [becoming a partner].”7Within six months Edison Continental would be producing lamps superiorto those from America;8 the company would erect central stations in most of themajor cities of Europe for indoor lighting and also administer the large outdoorarc lamps which were being used to illuminate the urban streets. Tesla, who wasworking at Ivry-sur-Seine, would be trained with the other workers to travel outand help run these facilities. “I never can forget the deep impression that magiccity produced on my mind. For several days after my arrival I roamed thru [sic]the streets in utter bewilderment of the new spectacle. The attractions were manyand irresistible, but, alas, the income was spent as soon as received. When Mr.Puskas asked me how I was getting along…I [replied] ‘the last twenty-nine daysof the month are the toughest!’”9In the mornings, before work, Tesla would arise at 5:00 A.M. to swimtwenty-seven laps at a bathhouse on the Seine, and in the evenings he wouldplay billiards with the workers and discuss his new AC invention. “One of them,Mr. D. Cunningham, foreman of the Mechanical Department, offered to form astock company. The proposal seemed to me comical in the extreme. I did nothave the faintest conception of what that meant except that it was the Americanway of doing things.”10T. C. Martin writes: “In fact, but for the solicitations of a few friends incommercial circles who urged him to form a company to exploit the invention,Mr. Tesla, then a youth of little worldly experience, would have sought animmediate opportunity to publish his ideas, believing them to be [a]…radicaladvance in electrical theory as well as destined to have a profound influence onall dynamo electric machinery.”11In his spare time, and as was his custom, Tesla wrote out the specificationsand mathematics of his AC invention in a notebook12 and worked on alternativedesigns for his flying machine. He probably sought out financial backers, for hereceived an invitation to go on a shooting expedition from a “prominent Frenchmanufacturer.”13 Perhaps the inventor had not totally recovered from the strangeillness he had almost succumbed to in Budapest, for after this outing he sufferedthe “sensation that my brain had caught fire. I saw a light as [though] a small sunwas located in it and I [passed] the whole night applying cold compressions tomy tortured head.” Writing this passage almost forty years later, Tesla claimedthat “these luminous phenomena still manifest themselves from time to time, aswhen a new idea opening up possibilities strikes me.”14In the summer he worked on the lighting at the opera house in Paris or wentto Bavaria to help in the wiring of a theater; and in the autumn he may havehelped in the laying of underground cables for the new central station going upin Paris or traveled to Berlin to install incandescent lighting at the cafes.15At the end of the year Tesla “submitted to one of the administrators of theCompany, Mr. Rau, a plan for improving their dynamos, and was given anopportunity.” Louis Rau, who was director of the Compagnie Continental Edisonin rue Montchanien and had “his beautiful home lit with the Edison system,”16allowed Tesla to implement his modernization plan. Shortly thereafter the younginventor’s automatic regulators were completed and accepted gratefully.17 Teslawas probably hoping to be compensated for his new contributions, but he wassent to work in Strasbourg before financial compensation was awarded.In January 1883, Batchelor shipped twelve hundred lamps to the Strasbourgplant, located at the railroad station.18 And within three months Tesla arrived tooversee the operations. There he would stay for the next twelve months.Batchelor had been urging Edison to test the generators coming fromAmerica for at least “two or three days with a [full] load,” as fires from faultyarmatures and poor insulation were becoming too common. The powerhouse atStrasbourg, in particular, had been subject to this type of problem.19 Since “allour plants are differently constructed,”20 it would take well-trained and creativeengineers to run things smoothly. Batchelor demonstrated confidence in Tesla’sabilities by sending him to Strasbourg; however, he seems not to have mentionedTesla in his correspondence with Edison. In any event, Tesla’s account of thesituation in Strasbourg corroborates Batchelor’s: “The wiring was defective andon the occasion of the opening ceremonies a large part of a wall was blown outthru [sic] a short-circuit right in the presence of old Emperor William I. TheGerman Government refused to take the plant and the French Company wasfacing a serious loss. On account of my knowledge of the German language andpast experience, I was entrusted with the difficult task of straightening outmatters.”21Having anticipated a long stay in the region, Tesla had brought with himfrom Paris materials for his first AC motor. As soon as he was able, Teslaconstructed the motor in secret in a closet “in a mechanical shop opposite therailroad station”;22 however, summer would arrive before this first machine wasin operation. Anthony Szigeti, his assistant, forged an iron disk, which Tesla“mounted on a needle,” having surrounded it, in part, with a coil.23 “Finally,”Tesla wrote, “[I] had the satisfaction of seeing rotation effected by alternatingcurrents of different phase, and without sliding contacts or commutator, as I hadconceived a year before. It was an exquisite pleasure, but not to compare withthe delirium of joy following the first revelation.”24Tesla presented his new creation to his friend, Mr. Bauzin, the mayor of thetown, who tried his best to interest wealthy investors; “but to my mortification…[there was] no response.” Upon his return to Paris, he sought promisedcompensation for achieving a difficult success in Strasbourg. Approaching hisemployers, “after several days of…circulus vicious, it dawned on me that myreward was a castle in Spain…Mr. Batchelor [pressed] me to go to America witha view of redesigning the Edison machines; I determined to try my fortunes inthe land of Golden Promise.”25John O’Neill, Tesla’s first major biographer, has suggested that Batchelorwrote a note of introduction to Edison which read, “I know two great men andyou are one of them; the other is this young man.”26 Evidence for the veracity ofthis oft-repeated tale is lacking. Batchelor, for instance, had been back inAmerica for at least three months prior to Tesla’s arrival;27 thus, he would nothave had to write a letter. Furthermore, there is evidence that Edison had alreadymet Tesla in Paris during a littleknown sojourn he took to look over hisEuropean operations at that time.28 O’Neill also refers to Batchelor incorrectlyas Edison’s “former assistant”29 when Batchelor was probably Edison’s closestlifelong colleague. Edison does, however, substantiate that “Tesla worked for mein New York. He was brought over from Paris by Batchelor, my assistant,”30 butthere is no reference to Batchelor’s appreciation of Tesla’s genius. On October28, 1883, fully a year after Tesla began working for Edison Continental, whilehe was stationed in Strasbourg, Batchelor singled out “the names of…two [orthree] I can mention as capable as far as their work shows: Mr. Stout—aninspector; Mr. Vissiere—my assistant; Mr. Geoffrey—whose plants are alwaysspoken well of…There are others capable, but I think these are the best.”31Certainly, had Tesla impressed Batchelor as O’Neill contends, he should havebeen listed in this letter or in numerous other letters to Edison that I havereviewed.Before Tesla left for America, he spent time with a scientist who wasstudying microscopic organisms found in common drinking water. Combinedwith the scare he had with his bout with cholera a few years earlier, Teslaacquired a phobia which led him to shun unpurified water, scour his plates andutensils before eating, and refrain from frequenting unsavory restaurants. Hewould later write, “If you would watch only for a few minutes the horriblecreatures, hairy and ugly beyond anything you can conceive, tearing each otherup with the juices diffusing throughout the water—you would never again drinka drop of unboiled or unsterilized water.”32In the spring of 1884, with funds for the journey supplied by Uncles Petarand Pajo,33 Tesla packed his gear and caught the next boat for America.Although his ticket and money and some of his luggage were stolen, the youngman was not deterred. “Resolve, helped by dexterity, won out in the nick oftime…[and] I managed to embark for New York with the remnants of mybelongings, some poems and articles I had written, and a package of calculationsrelating to solutions of an unsolvable integral and to my flying machine.”34 Thevoyage appears not to have been a happy one; a “mutiny” of sorts occurred onboard, and Tesla was nearly knocked overboard.35In 1808, Sir Humphry Davy created artificial illuminescence by running anelectric current across a small gap between two carbon rods. This simple deviceevolved into the arc lamp, used in English lighthouses in the 1860s anddisplayed at the Philadelphia Exposition of 1876 by Moses Farmer. By 1877numerous investigators were exploring the possibility of placing theincandescent effect within glassed enclosures because they would be much saferthis way for marketing to households, and a race developed between suchinventors as Charles Brush, Thomas Edison, Moses Farmer, St. George Lane-Fox, Hiram Maxim, William Sawyer, and Joseph Swan.“I saw the thing had not gone so far but that I had a chance,” Edison said.36And so he challenged William Wallace, Farmer’s partner, to a race as to whowould be the first man to create an efficient electric light. Boasting that he wouldsoon light up New York City with 500,000 incandescent lamps, Edison and hisbusiness manager, Grosvenor Lowery, were able to secure large amounts ofcapital from such investors as Henry Villard, owner of the first trans-Americanrailroad, and financier J. Pierpont Morgan.In November 1878, after three years of research, a hard-drinkingtelegrapher by the name of William Sawyer and his lawyer-partner Albion Man,applied for a patent for an incandescent lamp with carbon rods (filaments) andfilled with nitrogen. They proclaimed that they had beaten Edison. Joseph Swan,another competitor, removed the nitrogen and kept the carbon filament butcreated a low-resistance lamp. Realizing that the amount of power required tosend electricity a few hundred feet was prodigious using the low-resistancedesign, Edison created, in September 1878, a high-resistance vacuum lamp thatutilized considerably less power. Together with a revolutionary wiring called afeeder line,37 his success was further augmented by a new Sprengel pump, whichWilliam Crookes had been recommending for the creation of vacuums in glass-enclosed tubes. It would be another six months—April 22, 1879—before hewould file for a patent, but his new design would lower power requirements andthereby cut copper costs one hundredfold.38The competition was fierce, and Edison’s financial backers were runningscared. They suggested to Edison that they purchase the Sawyer patents andcombine the two companies. Edison had not yet settled on carbon as a filamentand was exhausting his working capital in experiments with boron, iridium,magnesium, platinum, silicon, and zirconia. At the same time, he had also sentexplorers to the Amazon, Bolivia, Japan, and Sumatra in search of rare forms ofbamboo, which he was also considering. It would not be until 1881 that hefinally settled upon a form of carbonized paper.During this time, however, and without Edison’s knowledge, Sawyer andMan approached Lowery. Their lamp was superior to Edison’s; it was patented,and it worked. Lowery tried to bring Edison in for a four-way discussion;however, Edison sent an emissary who “dared not relay to Edison all Loweryhad said. But Edison heard enough to be jolted from his indecision…Cursingand spraying tobacco juice, he exclaimed it was the old story—lack ofconfidence!”39Edison was adamant about not joining with Sawyer or Swan or anyone else.He continued rash publicity campaigns which announced “a veritable Aladdin’slamp…[It is] Edison’s light, the great inventor’s triumph.”40With the backing of Wall Street moguls, Edison began to illuminate MenloPark and the private homes of the wealthy in New York City. The first was thatof J. Pierpont Morgan, at Thirty-Sixth Street and Madison Avenue. The year was1881.To run the generator Edison designed a steam engine and boiler and placedthe power plant under the stable in a newly dug cellar at the back edge of theproperty. Wires were connected to the new incandescent lights placed in the gasfixtures of the home via a brick-lined tunnel which ran the length of the yard justbeneath the surface. “Of course, there were the frequent short circuits and manybreakdowns on the part of the generating plant. Even at the best, it was a sourceof a good deal of trouble for the family and neighbors. who complained of thenoise of the dynamo. Mrs. James M. Brown next door said that its vibrationsmade her house shake.” Morgan had to pile sandbags around the inside of thecellar and place the machinery on heavy rubber pads “to deaden the noise andthe vibrations. This final experiment restored quiet and brought peace to theneighborhood until the winter, when all the stray cats in the neighborhoodgathered on this warm strip in great numbers and their yowlings gave grounds[from the neighbors] for more complaints.”41The following year, on September 4, 1882, the new Central Station at PearlStreet opened. It provided electric lighting to many Wall Street buildings,including Morgan’s office.Tesla’s ship dropped anchor in New York in late spring of 1884, just as themonumental decade-long project the Brooklyn Bridge was being completed andthe last components of the Statue of Liberty were being hoisted into position.Twenty-eight years old, “tall and spare, [with] thin, refined face”42 and sportinga mustache, Tesla still had the look of an adolescent.His first impression of the New World was that it was uncivilized, ahundred years behind the lifestyle of the great European cities. Deferring hisplanned meeting with Edison one day to look up an old friend, Tesla had thegood fortune to pass by “a small machine shop in which the foreman was tryingto repair an electric machine…He had just given up the task as hopeless.”43 Onerendition of the story has Tesla agreeing to fix the machine “without a thoughtfor compensation.”44 On a separate occasion, Tesla revealed that “it was amachine I had helped design, but I did not tell them that. I asked…‘what wouldyou give me if I fix it?’ ‘Twenty dollars’ was the reply. I took off my coat andwent to work, [and]…had it running perfectly in an hour.”45 The story isimportant because, depending on the rendition, two different Teslas emerge, onemotivated by money and one not.In either case, Tesla was shocked by the rough character of the NewWorld.46 He proceeded cautiously to Edison’s new laboratory, a formerironworks at Goerck Street, situated only a few blocks from the central lightingstation Edison was constructing at Pearl Street.47 Batchelor probably met Teslaand introduced him to the inventor. “I was thrilled to the marrow by meetingEdison,” Tesla said.48Possibly aware of the proximity of Transylvania to Tesla’s birthplace and aresurgence of interest in the tales of Vlad Dracula, the fifteenthcentury allegedvampire who lived in the region, Edison inquired whether or not the“neophyte…had ever tasted human flesh?”49Aghast at the question and Edison’s “utter disregard of the most elementaryrules of hygiene,”50 Tesla replied in the negative and asked what Edison’s dietconsisted of.“You mean to make me so all-fired smart?”Tesla nodded.“Why, I eat a daily regimen of Welsh rabbit,” Edison replied. “It’s the onlybreakfast guaranteed to renew one’s mental faculties after the long vigils of toil.”Wanting to emulate the grand wizard, the neophyte took on the peculiardiet, “accepting as true, in spite of a protesting stomach, the jocularsuggestion.”51Tesla’s various accounts of this meeting differ markedly, depending on hismood at the time of the telling and his awareness of the size and shape of theaudience. For in his autobiography, published in six installments of HugoGernsback’s futuristic magazine Electrical Experimenter, Tesla wrote that ‘themeeting with Edison was a memorable event in my life. I was amazed at thiswonderful man who, without early advantages and scientific training, hadaccomplished so much. I had studied a dozen languages, delved in literature andart, and had spent my best years in libraries…and felt that most of my life hadbeen squandered.”52It wasn’t long before Tesla realized that his academic training andmathematical skills had given him a great engineering advantage over Edison’splodding strategy of trial and error. In a bitter moment of reminiscence, at thetime of Edison’s death in 1931, Tesla said: “If he had a needle to find in ahaystack he would not stop to reason where it was most likely to be, but wouldproceed at once with the feverish diligence of a bee, to examine straw after strawuntil he found the object of his search…I was almost a sorry witness of hisdoings, knowing that just a little theory and calculation would have saved him 90per cent of the labor…Trusting himself entirely to his inventor’s instinct andpractical American sense…the truly prodigious amount of his actualaccomplishments is little short of a miracle.”53It was little wonder that Tesla was completely unsuccessful in describinghis new AC invention to Edison and had to settle for Batchelor’s suggestion thathe redesign the prevailing DC machinery instead. According to Tesla, “theManager had promised me $50,000 on completion of this task,”54 and so Teslaset himself to work, “experiment[ing] day and night, holidays not excepted,” aswas the custom of the factory.55Thomas Alva Edison was an extremely complex fellow. Ornery, ingenious,determined, and unyielding, he was a fierce competitor and the single mostimportant inventive force on the planet. He had descended from a grandfather,John Edison, a Tory who had been tried for treason during the AmericanRevolution and banished to Canada, and a father, Samuel Edison, who had tiedhis son to a whipping post and beaten him publicly after young Al, as he wascalled then, had started a fire in a barn which threatened the rest of the buildingsin the community.56 He had scrapped with and outwitted others on his way toWall Street and had outdistanced competing inventors numerous times. Notcheson Edison’s belt of “better mousetraps” included the telephone transmitter(microphone), an electrical pen, a musical telephone, and the duplex, aningenious device which enabled a telegraph to send four messages in twodirections simultaneously.Edison was known to curse and swap jokes with his men at his research anddevelopment center, the world’s first invention factory. He kept his business freeof cockroaches with a protective electric grid lining the edges of the floor and“electrifried larger varmints” with his “rat paralyzer”; he even occasionallywired the washbasin to keep his men on their toes. Edison was a trickster, astoryteller, and a con artist. The use to the consumer and the cost of productionor “the market test [was] the sole test of achievement…Everything he did wasdirected by [that] realization.”57In an entirely different realm of invention, besides being a better technicianthan anyone else, Edison was a creator; his most original work was a machinethat talked: the phonograph. With this device, Edison had entered the realm ofthe immortal; he was the “Wizard of Menlo Park.”Inviting the public to his laboratory on a number of occasions, Edisonamazed people at all levels of society with machines that sang and reproducedthe sound of birds, artificial lamps that changed the darkness into a light cherryred, and various other mechanical contrivances to make one’s workload easier.The invention of the electric light was to Edison not only a new, clevertechnology; it contained the seeds of a new industry. His mere presence in thefield drove the stocks of the gas-burning companies into the grave. Yet Edisonplanned to utilize their pipes by channeling copper wire through them instead ofdangerous gas and to replace flame by electricity. He moved the center of hisoperation from New Jersey to New York City. There Edison rented a town housefor his wife and family in celebrated Gramercy Park, the abode of suchluminaries as authors Mark Twain and Stephen Crane, sculptor Augustus Saint-Gaudens, architect Stanford White, Century editor Richard Watson Gilder, andpublisher James Harper.58 Edison later described his plans for orchestrating arevolution in home illumination: “I had the central station in mind all the time…I got an insurance map of New York City, laid out a district [bounded by] WallStreet, Canal, Broadway [and the] East River, [and purchased] two old bumbuildings down in Pearl Street. They charged us $75,000 a piece. I tell you itmade my hair stand on end.”59Edison’s financial problems were numerous. Not only were there expensivestart-up costs, there were also problems with the extreme inefficiency of the DCsystem and court battles on invention priorities and marketing battles againstsuch competitors as Brush Electric, Consolidated Electric, Sawyer-Man, SwanIncandescent, Thomson-Houston, United States Electric, and the WestinghouseCorporation.“Tell Westinghouse to stick to air brakes. He knows all about them,” Edisoncomplained;60 but Westinghouse would not listen.Edison’s other major competitor was Elihu Thomson. With Edisonembroiled in a legal contest with Sawyer, Thomson used the ambiguity of themoment to appropriate the incandescent lamp Edison had given him and make itthe template for ones produced and sold by the Thomson-Houston ElectricCompany. On October 8, 1883, the patent office ruled that William Sawyer hadpriority over Edison “for an incandescent lamp with carbon burner.”61 Thisdecision, though later overturned in Edison’s favor, enabled Thomson tocontinue his piracy. Due to Sawyer’s priority, Thomson now saw himself as“ethically in the clear”62 as no clear-cut inventor had supposedly beenestablished.Edison thus came to vigorously dislike Thomson, a man who had betrayedhis trust, and Westinghouse, who was now siding with Sawyer. For safety,aesthetic, and practical reasons, Edison was a proponent of underground cablesand DC. “Nobody hoisted water and gas mains into the air on stilts,” he said.63He publicized the fact that electricians were dying on the dangerous overheadwires of his competitors, but this battle eventually became transformed into DCversus AC; Edison stayed with DC, while Thomson and Westinghouse began toexperiment with AC. As AC utilized much higher voltages, Edison warned thepublic against it. A long legal battle with Westinghouse ensued and ran into themillions of dollars. Thomson again managed quietly to avoid the courts while heexpanded his business.Francis Upton, Edison’s mathematician, graduate of Helmholtz’s laboratory,and contemporary of Tesla’s in terms of European education, had calculated in1879 that to light 8,640 lamps for only nine city blocks, the cost would be$200,812 for the 803,250 pounds of copper required. Through clever wiring,improvements in lamp design, and “an invention corollary to the parallelcircuitry,” Edison had cut copper costs almost 90 percent, but no matter what hedid, a power station could never reach beyond a radius of one or two miles.64Upton, whom Edison affectionately referred to as “Culture,” suggested thatthey look into the new advances in AC, and so he was sent, in 1884, to Europe tonegotiate with Karl Zipernowski, Otto Blathy, and Max Deri, three Hungarianswho had greatly improved the Gaulard-Gibbs AC transformer. Edison even paid$5,000 for an option on this “ZBD” system, but it was mostly to placate Culture.The wizard did not trust AC, and if his “damn fool competitors” were in it, hecertainly didn’t want any part of it. Twenty years of experience, ingenuity, anddoing the impossible with DC had to be worth something. The “bugs” could beworked out.Yet at the same time that Edison constructed DC generators to make theearth tremble65 and competitors stole his ideas or fashioned other primitiveelectric-lighting devices, a Serbian genius in his very midst had designed asystem which made this prevailing technology obsolete.According to W. L. Dickson, one of Edison’s earliest biographers andlongtime employee at Menlo Park and Goerck Street, “Nikola Tesla, thateffulgent star of the scientific heavens, even then gave strong evidence of thegenius that has made him one of the standard authorities of the day.” Tesla’s“brilliant intellect” had held Dickson and the other workers “spellbound” as he“alternately fired [us] with the rapid sketching of his manifold projects or melted[us] into keenest sympathy by pictures of his Herzogovinian home…But likemost holders of God’s intrinsic gifts, he was unostentatious in the extreme, andready to assist with counsel or manual help any perplexed member of thecraft.”66Although unable to interest Edison in his AC motor, Tesla was able “withina few weeks [to win]…Edison’s confidence.” Tesla’s greatest success camewhen he fixed a badly broken set of dynamos on Henry Villard’s ocean liner, theOregon, the first boat ever to have electric lighting. “At five o’clock in themorning, when passing along 5th Avenue on my way to the shop,” Teslarecalled, “I met Edison with Batchelor and a few others who were returning toretire.“‘Here is our Parisian running around at night,’ he said. When I told him Iwas coming from the Oregon and had repaired both machines he looked at me insilence…But when he walked some distance I heard him remark: ‘Batchelor, thisis a damn good man,’ and from that time on I had full freedom in directing thework.”67Alternately spending time at the Pearl Street Station or the Goerckironworks, Tesla installed and fixed indoor incandescent lamps and outdoor arclamps, reassembled many of Edison’s DC generators, and designed twenty-fourdifferent types of machines that became standards which replaced those beingused by Edison.68 At the same time, he worked on patents on arc lamps,regulators, dynamos, and commutators for DC apparatus, trying to devise a wayto approach his boss with his new invention, obtain a raise, and gaincompensation for the lump sum he had allegedly been promised.The atmosphere was informal, Tesla occasionally dining with Edison,Batchelor, and other higher-ups, such as Edward Johnson, president of theEdison Illuminating Company, or Harry Livor, another engineer and small-timeentrepreneur in machine-works manufacturing. Their favorite spot was a smallrestaurant opposite the Edison showroom at 65 Fifth Avenue. There they wouldswap stories and tell jokes.69 Afterward, some would retire to a billiard housewhere Tesla would impress the fellows with his bank shots and vision of thefuture.70Livor boasted of an agreement with Edison and Batchelor resulting in acompany capitalized at $10,000, formed for the manufacture of shafting. Edisonand Batchelor provided the machinery and money, Livor, the tools andservices.71 Impressed, Tesla asked for advice, particularly how to obtain a raisefrom his present modest salary of eighteen dollars per week to a more lucrativetwenty-five dollars. “Livor gladly undertook this service…to intercede withBatchelor…but greatly to his surprise was met with an abrupt refusal.”“No,” replied Batchelor, “the woods are full of men like [Tesla]. I can getany number of them I want for $18 a week.” Tate, who began employment asEdison’s secretary shortly after this episode, which Livor related to him, notedthat Batchelor “must have been referring to the woods I failed to find in thevicinity of Harlem.”72 Tesla’s version of the story is somewhat different: “Fornine months my hours [at the Edison Machine Works] were 10:30 A.M. till 5A.M. the next day. All this time I was getting more and more anxious about theinvention [AC induction motor] and was making up my mind to place it beforeEdison. I still remember an odd incident in this connection. One day in the latterpart of 1884 Mr. Batchelor, the manager of the works, took me to Coney Island,where we met Edison in the company of his former wife. The moment that I waswaiting for was propitious, and I was just about to speak, when a horriblelookingtramp took hold of Edison and drew him away, preventing me from carrying outmy intentions.”73In analyzing this story, a discrepancy as to the timing was discovered, forEdison’s wife caught typhoid fever in July 1884 and died on August 9. SinceTesla had arrived in May or June, and if Edison’s wife was present, then theevent took place in late June or early July, only a few weeks after he began hisemployment. In a close working environment, with the hours as described, evena few weeks could seem like a very long time. One way or another, with thedeath of Edison’s wife and Edison’s extreme dislike of such AC men as ElihuThomson and George Westinghouse, no time for discussing an AC inventionmay have been “propitious.” The “horriblelooking tramp” who grabbed Edisonaway was probably Edison himself, who was known to dress like a “Bowerybum,” Tesla using a euphemism to soften the story. “The manager had promisedme fifty thousand dollars [for redesigning equipment], but when I demandedpayment, he merely laughed. ‘You are still a Parisian,’ remarked Edison. ‘Whenyou become a full-fledged American, you will appreciate an American joke.’”74If a “completion agreement”75 had truly been made with Edison, Teslashould have had it put in writing. It seems unlikely that this amount of money fora somewhat ambiguous bargain would be offered, but it was well withinEdison’s nature to make “expensive if indefinite promises of rewards as a way ofgetting the men to work for low wages.” Edison, who could be more deaf thanhe actually was, at times, was known to “put on” his college-educated ‘sperts, aswhen he convinced the chemist Martin Rosanoff that his first lightbulb filamentwas made out of Limburger cheese! Deeply hurt, Tesla left the company and setout on his own.76 