2AFRICATHE PUBLIC FIRST MET ELON REEVE MUSK IN 1984. The SouthAfrican trade publication PC and Office Technology published the source code toa video game Musk had designed. Called Blastar, the science-fiction-inspiredspace game required 167 lines of instructions to run. This was back in the daywhen early computer users were required to type out commands to make theirmachines do much of anything. In that context, Musk’s game did not shine as amarvel of computer science but it certainly surpassed what most twelve-year-olds were kicking out at the time. Its coverage in the magazine netted Musk fivehundred dollars and provided some early hints about his character. The Blastarspread on page 69 of the magazine shows that the young man wanted to go bythe sci-fi-author-sounding name E. R. Musk and that he already had visions ofgrand conquests dancing in his head. The brief explainer states, “In this gameyou have to destroy an alien space freighter, which is carrying deadly HydrogenBombs and Status Beam Machines. This game makes good use of sprites andanimation, and in this sense makes the listing worth reading.” (As of this writing,not even the Internet knows what “status beam machines” are.)A boy fantasizing about space and battles between good and evil is anythingbut amazing. A boy who takes these fantasies seriously is more remarkable. Suchwas the case with the young Elon Musk. By the middle of his teenage years,Musk had blended fantasy and reality to the point that they were hard to separatein his mind. Musk came to see man’s fate in the universe as a personalobligation. If that meant pursuing cleaner energy technology or buildingspaceships to extend the human species’s reach, then so be it. Musk would find away to make these things happen. “Maybe I read too many comics as a kid,”Musk said. “In the comics, it always seems like they are trying to save the world.It seemed like one should try to make the world a better place because theinverse makes no sense.”At around age fourteen, Musk had a full-on existential crisis. He tried to dealwith it like many gifted adolescents do, turning to religious and philosophicaltexts. Musk sampled a handful of ideologies and then ended up more or lessback where he had started, embracing the sci-fi lessons found in one of the mostinfluential books in his life: The Hitchhiker’s Guide to the Galaxy, by DouglasAdams. “He points out that one of the really tough things is figuring out whatquestions to ask,” Musk said. “Once you figure out the question, then the answeris relatively easy. I came to the conclusion that really we should aspire toincrease the scope and scale of human consciousness in order to betterunderstand what questions to ask.” The teenage Musk then arrived at hisultralogical mission statement. “The only thing that makes sense to do is strivefor greater collective enlightenment,” he said.It’s easy enough to spot some of the underpinnings of Musk’s search forpurpose. Born in 1971, he grew up in Pretoria, a large city in the northeasternpart of South Africa, just an hour’s drive from Johannesburg. The specter ofapartheid was present throughout his childhood, as South Africa frequentlyboiled over with tension and violence. Blacks and whites clashed, as did blacksof different tribes. Musk turned four years old just days after the SowetoUprising, in which hundreds of black students died while protesting decrees ofthe white government. For years South Africa faced sanctions imposed by othernations due to its racist policies. Musk had the luxury of traveling abroad duringhis childhood and would have gotten a flavor for how outsiders viewed SouthAfrica.But what had even more of an impact on Musk’s personality was the whiteAfrikaner culture so prevalent in Pretoria and the surrounding areas.Hypermasculine behavior was celebrated and tough jocks were revered. WhileMusk enjoyed a level of privilege, he lived as an outsider whose reservedpersonality and geeky inclinations ran against the prevailing attitudes of thetime. His notion that something about the world had gone awry receivedconstant reinforcement, and Musk, almost from his earliest days, plotted anescape from his surroundings and dreamed of a place that would allow hispersonality and dreams to flourish. He saw America in its most clichéd form, asthe land of opportunity and the most likely stage for making the realization of hisdreams possible. This is how it came to pass that a lonesome, gawky SouthAfrican boy who talked with the utmost sincerity about pursuing “collectiveenlightenment” ended up as America’s most adventurous industrialist.When Musk did finally reach the United States in his twenties, it marked areturn to his ancestral roots. Family trees suggest that ancestors bearing theSwiss German surname of Haldeman on the maternal side of Musk’s family leftEurope for New York during the Revolutionary War. From New York, theyspread out to the prairies of the Midwest—Illinois and Minnesota, in particular.“We had people that fought on both sides of the Civil War apparently and were afamily of farmers,” said Scott Haldeman, Musk’s uncle and the unofficial familyhistorian.Throughout his childhood, boys teased Musk because of his unusual name. Heearned the first part of it from his great-grandfather John Elon Haldeman, whowas born in 18721 and grew up in Illinois before heading to Minnesota. There hewould meet his wife, Almeda Jane Norman, who was five years younger. By1902, the couple had settled down in a log cabin in the central Minnesota townof Pequot and given birth to their son Joshua Norman Haldeman, Musk’sgrandfather. He would grow up to become an eccentric and exceptional man anda model for Musk.*Joshua Norman Haldeman is described as an athletic, self-reliant boy. In 1907,his family moved to the prairies of Saskatchewan, and his father died shortlythereafter when Joshua was just seven, leaving the boy to help run the house. Hetook to the wide-open land and picked up bronco horseback riding, boxing, andwrestling. Haldeman would break in horses for local farmers, often hurtinghimself in the process, and he organized one of Canada’s first rodeos. Familypictures show Joshua dressed in a decorative pair of chaps demonstrating hisrope-spinning skills. As a teenager, Haldeman left home to get a degree from thePalmer School of Chiropractic in Iowa and then returned to Saskatchewan tobecome a farmer.When the depression hit in the 1930s, Haldeman fell into a financial crisis. Hecould not afford to keep up with bank loans on his equipment and had fivethousand acres of land seized. “From then on, Dad didn’t believe in banks orholding on to money,” said Scott Haldeman, who would go on to receive hischiropractic degree from the same school as his father and become one of theworld’s top spinal pain experts. After losing the farm around 1934, Haldemanlived something of a nomadic existence that his grandson would replicate inCanada decades later. Standing six feet, three inches, he did odd jobs as aconstruction worker and rodeo performer before settling down as achiropractor.*By 1948, Haldeman had married a Canadian dance studio instructor,Winnifred Josephine Fletcher, or Wyn, and built a booming chiropractic practice.That year, the family, which already included a son and a daughter, welcomedtwin daughters Kaye and Maye, Musk’s mother. The children lived in a three-story, twenty-room house that included a dance studio to let Wyn keep teachingstudents. Ever in search of something new to do, Haldeman had picked up flyingand bought his own plane. The family gained some measure of notoriety aspeople heard about Haldeman and his wife packing their kids into the back of thesingle-engine craft and heading off on excursions all around North America.Haldeman would often show up at political and chiropractic meetings in theplane and later wrote a book with his wife called The Flying Haldemans: Pitythe Poor Private Pilot.Haldeman seemed to have everything going for him when, in 1950, hedecided to give it all away. The doctor-cum-politician had long railed againstgovernment interference in the lives of individuals and had come to see theCanadian bureaucracy as too meddlesome. A man who forbade swearing,smoking, Coca-Cola, and refined flour at his house, Haldeman contended thatthe moral character of Canada had started to decline. Haldeman also possessedan enduring lust for adventure. And so, over the course of a few months, thefamily sold their house and dance and chiropractic practices and decided tomove to South Africa—a place Haldeman had never been. Scott Haldemanremembers helping his father disassemble the family’s Bellanca Cruisair (1948)airplane and put it into crates before shipping it to Africa. Once in South Africa,the family rebuilt the plane and used it to scour the country for a nice place tolive, ultimately settling on Pretoria, where Haldeman set up a new chiropracticpractice.The family’s spirit for adventure seemed to know no bounds. In 1952, Joshuaand Wyn made a 22,000-mile round-trip journey in their plane, flying up throughAfrica to Scotland and Norway. Wyn served as the navigator and, though not alicensed pilot, would sometimes take over the flying duties. The couple toppedthis effort in 1954, flying 30,000 miles to Australia and back. Newspapersreported on the couple’s trip, and they’re believed to be the only private pilots toget from Africa to Australia in a single-engine plane.*When not up in the air, the Haldemans were out in the bush going on great,monthlong expeditions to find the Lost City of the Kalahari Desert, a supposedabandoned city in southern Africa. A family photo from one of these excursionsshows the five children in the middle of the African bush. They have gatheredaround a large metal pot being warmed by the embers of a campfire. Thechildren look relaxed as they sit in folding chairs, legs crossed and readingbooks. Behind them is the ruby-red Bellanca plane, a tent, and a car. Thetranquility of the scene belies how dangerous these trips were. During oneincident, the family’s truck hit a tree stump and forced the bumper through theradiator. Stuck in the middle of nowhere with no means of communication,Joshua worked for three days to fix the truck, while the family hunted for food.At other times, hyenas and leopards would circle the campfire at night, and, onemorning, the family woke to find a lion three feet away from their main table.Joshua grabbed the first object he could find—a lamp—waved it, and told thelion to go away. And it did.*The Haldemans had a laissez-faire approach to raising their children, whichwould extend over the generations to Musk. Their kids were never punished, asJoshua believed they would intuit their way to proper behavior. When mom anddad went off on their tremendous flights, the kids were left at home. ScottHaldeman can’t remember his father setting foot at his school a single time eventhough his son was captain of the rugby team and a prefect. “To him, that was alljust anticipated,” said Scott Haldeman. “We were left with the impression thatwe were capable of anything. You just have to make a decision and do it. In thatsense, my father would be very proud of Elon.”Haldeman died in 1974 at the age of seventy-two. He’d been doing practicelandings in his plane and didn’t see a wire attached to a pair of poles. The wirecaught the plane’s wheels and flipped the craft, and Haldeman broke his neck.Elon was a toddler at the time. But throughout his childhood, Elon heard manystories about his grandfather’s exploits and sat through countless slide shows thatdocumented his travels and trips through the bush. “My grandmother told thesetales of how they almost died several times along their journeys,” Musk said.“They were flying in a plane with literally no instruments—not even a radio, andthey had road maps instead of aerial maps, and some of those weren’t evencorrect. My grandfather had this desire for adventure, exploration doing crazythings.” Elon buys into the idea that his unusual tolerance for risk may well havebeen inherited directly from his grandfather. Many years after the last slide show,Elon tried to find and purchase the red Bellanca plane but could not locate it.Maye Musk, Elon’s mother, grew up idolizing her parents. In her youth, shewas considered a nerd. She liked math and science and did well at thecoursework. By the age of fifteen, however, people had taken notice of some ofher other attributes. Maye was gorgeous. Tall with ash-blond hair, Maye had thehigh cheekbones and angular features that would make her stand out anywhere.A friend of the family ran a modeling school, and Maye took some courses. Onthe weekends, she did runway shows, magazine shoots, occasionally showed upat a senator’s or ambassador’s home for an event, and ended up as a finalist forMiss South Africa. (Maye has continued to model into her sixties, appearing onthe covers of magazines like New York and Elle and in Beyoncé’s music videos.)Maye and Elon’s father, Errol Musk, grew up in the same neighborhood. Theymet for the first time when Maye, born in 1948, was about eleven. Errol was thecool kid to Maye’s nerd but had a crush on her for years. “He fell in love withme because of my legs and my teeth,” said Maye. The two would date on and offthroughout their time at university. And, according to Maye, Errol spent aboutseven years as a relentless suitor seeking her hand in marriage and eventuallybreaking her will. “He just never stopped proposing,” she said.Their marriage was complicated from the start. Maye became pregnant duringthe couple’s honeymoon and gave birth to Elon on June 28, 1971, nine monthsand two days after her wedding day. While they may not have enjoyed maritalbliss, the couple carved out a decent life for themselves in Pretoria. Errol workedas a mechanical and electrical engineer and handled large projects such as officebuildings, retail complexes, residential subdivisions, and an air force base, whileMaye set up a practice as a dietician. A bit more than a year after Elon’s birthcame his brother Kimbal, and soon thereafter came their sister Tosca.Elon exhibited all the traits of a curious, energetic tot. He picked things upeasily, and Maye, like many mothers do, pegged her son as brilliant andprecocious. “He seemed to understand things quicker than the other kids,” shesaid. The perplexing thing was that Elon seemed to drift off into a trance attimes. People spoke to him, but nothing got through when he had a certain,distant look in his eyes. This happened so often that Elon’s parents and doctorsthought he might be deaf. “Sometimes, he just didn’t hear you,” said Maye.Doctors ran a series of tests on Elon, and elected to remove his adenoid glands,which can improve hearing in children. “Well, it didn’t change,” said Maye.Elon’s condition had far more to do with the wiring of his mind than how hisauditory system functioned. “He goes into his brain, and then you just see he isin another world,” Maye said. “He still does that. Now I just leave him bebecause I know he is designing a new rocket or something.”Other children did not respond well to these dreamlike states. You could dojumping jacks right beside Musk or yell at him, and he would not even notice.He kept right on thinking, and those around him judged that he was either rudeor really weird. “I do think Elon was always a little different but in a nerdy way,”Maye said. “It didn’t endear him to his peers.”For Musk, these pensive moments were wonderful. At five and six, he hadfound a way to block out the world and dedicate all of his concentration to asingle task. Part of this ability stemmed from the very visual way in whichMusk’s mind worked. He could see images in his mind’s eye with a clarity anddetail that we might associate today with an engineering drawing produced bycomputer software. “It seems as though the part of the brain that’s usuallyreserved for visual processing—the part that is used to process images coming infrom my eyes—gets taken over by internal thought processes,” Musk said. “Ican’t do this as much now because there are so many things demanding myattention but, as a kid, it happened a lot. That large part of your brain that’s usedto handle incoming images gets used for internal thinking.” Computers split theirhardest jobs between two types of chips. There are graphics chips that deal withprocessing the images produced by a television show stream or video game andcomputational chips that handle general purpose tasks and mathematicaloperations. Over time, Musk has ended up thinking that his brain has theequivalent of a graphics chip. It allows him to see things out in the world,replicate them in his mind, and imagine how they might change or behave wheninteracting with other objects. “For images and numbers, I can process theirinterrelationships and algorithmic relationships,” Musk said. “Acceleration,momentum, kinetic energy—how those sorts of things will be affected byobjects comes through very vividly.”The most striking part of Elon’s character as a young boy was his compulsionto read. From a very young age, he seemed to have a book in his hands at alltimes. “It was not unusual for him to read ten hours a day,” said Kimbal. “If itwas the weekend, he could go through two books in a day.” The family went onnumerous shopping excursions in which they realized mid-trip that Elon hadgone missing. Maye or Kimbal would pop into the nearest bookstore and findElon somewhere near the back sitting on the floor and reading in one of histrancelike states.As Elon got older, he would take himself to the bookstore when school endedat 2 P.M. and stay there until about 6 P.M., when his parents returned home fromwork. He plowed through fiction books and then comics and then nonfictiontitles. “Sometimes they kicked me out of the store, but usually not,” Elon said.He listed The Lord of the Rings, Isaac Asimov’s Foundation series, and RobertHeinlein’s The Moon Is a Harsh Mistress as some of his favorites, alongside TheHitchhiker’s Guide to the Galaxy. “At one point, I ran out of books to read at theschool library and the neighborhood library,” Musk said. “This is maybe thethird or fourth grade. I tried to convince the librarian to order books for me. Sothen, I started to read the Encyclopaedia Britannica. That was so helpful. Youdon’t know what you don’t know. You realize there are all these things outthere.”Elon, in fact, churned through two sets of encyclopedias—a feat that did littleto help him make friends. The boy had a photographic memory, and theencyclopedias turned him into a fact factory. He came off as a classic know-it-all. At the dinner table, Tosca would wonder aloud about the distance from Earthto the Moon. Elon would spit out the exact measurement at perigee and apogee.“If we had a question, Tosca would always say, ‘Just ask genius boy,’” Mayesaid. “We could ask him about anything. He just remembered it.” Elon cementedhis bookworm reputation through his clumsy ways. “He’s not very sporty,” saidMaye.Maye tells the story of Elon playing outside one night with his siblings andcousins. When one of them complained of being frightened by the dark, Elonpointed out that “dark is merely the absence of light,” which did little to reassurethe scared child. As a youngster, Elon’s constant yearning to correct people andhis abrasive manner put off other kids and added to his feelings of isolation. Elongenuinely thought that people would be happy to hear about the flaws in theirthinking. “Kids don’t like answers like that,” said Maye. “They would say,‘Elon, we are not playing with you anymore.’ I felt very sad as a mother becauseI think he wanted friends. Kimbal and Tosca would bring home friends, and Elonwouldn’t, and he would want to play with them. But he was awkward, youknow.” Maye urged Kimbal and Tosca to include Elon. They responded as kidswill. “But Mom, he’s not fun.” As he got older, however, Elon would havestrong, affectionate attachments to his siblings and cousins—his mother’s sister’ssons. Though he kept to himself at school, Elon had an outgoing nature withmembers of his family and eventually took on the role of elder and chiefinstigator among them.For a while, life inside the Musk household was quite good. The familyowned one of the biggest houses in Pretoria thanks to the success of Errol’sengineering business. There’s a portrait of the three Musk children taken whenElon was about eight years old that shows three blond, fit children sitting next toeach other on a brick porch with Pretoria’s famous purple jacaranda trees in thebackground. Elon has large, rounded cheeks and a broad smile.Then, not long after the photo was taken, the family fell apart. His parentsseparated and divorced within the year. Maye moved with the kids to thefamily’s holiday home in Durban, on South Africa’s eastern coast. After a coupleof years of this arrangement, Elon decided he wanted to live with his father. “Myfather seemed sort of sad and lonely, and my mom had three kids, and he didn’thave any,” Musk said. “It seemed unfair.” Some members of Musk’s family havebought into this idea that Elon’s logical nature propelled him, while others claimthat his father’s mother, Cora, exerted a lot of pressure on the boy. “I could notunderstand why he would leave this happy home I made for him—this reallyhappy home,” said Maye. “But Elon is his own person.” Justine Musk, Elon’sex-wife and the mother of his five boys, theorized that Elon identified more withthe alpha male of the house and wasn’t bothered by the emotional aspect of thedecision. “I don’t think he was particularly close with either parent,” Justinesaid, while describing the Musk clan overall as being cool and the opposite ofdoting. Kimbal later opted to live with Errol as well, saying simply that bynature a son wants to live with his father.Whenever the topic of Errol arrives, members of Elon’s family clam up.They’re in agreement that he is not a pleasant man to be around but havedeclined to elaborate. Errol has since been remarried, and Elon has two, youngerhalf sisters of whom he’s quite protective. Elon and his siblings seem determinednot to bad-mouth Errol publicly, so as not to upset the sisters.The basics are as follows: Errol’s side of the family has deep South Africanroots. The Musk clan can trace its presence in the country back about twohundred years and claim an entry in Pretoria’s first phone book. Errol’s father,Walter Henry James Musk, was an army sergeant. “I remember him almost nevertalking,” Elon said. “He would just drink whiskey and be grumpy and was verygood at doing crossword puzzles.” Cora Amelia Musk, Errol’s mother, was bornin England to a family famed for its intellectual genes. She embraced both thespotlight and her grandchildren. “Our grandmother had this very dominantpersonality and was quite an enterprising woman,” said Kimbal. “She was a verybig influence in our lives.” Elon considered his relationship with Cora—or Nana,as he called her—particularly tight. “After the divorce, she took care of me quitea lot,” he said. “She would pick me up from school, and I would hang out withher playing Scrabble and that type of thing.”On the surface, life at Errol’s house seemed grand. He had plenty of books forElon to read from cover to cover and money to buy a computer and other objectsthat Elon desired. Errol took his children on numerous trips overseas. “It was anamazingly fun time,” said Kimbal. “I have a lot of fun memories from that.”Errol also impressed the kids with his intellect and dealt out some practicallessons. “He was a talented engineer,” Elon said. “He knew how every physicalobject worked.” Both Elon and Kimbal were required to go to the sites of Errol’sengineering jobs and learn how to lay bricks, install plumbing, fit windows, andput in electrical wiring. “There were fun moments,” Elon said.Errol was what Kimbal described as “ultra-present and very intense.” Hewould sit Elon and Kimbal down and lecture at them for three to four hourswithout the boys being able to respond. He seemed to delight in being hard onthe boys and sucked the fun out of common childhood diversions. From time totime, Elon tried to convince his dad to move to America and often talked abouthis intentions to live in the United States later in life. Errol countered suchdreams by trying to teach Elon a lesson. He sent the housekeepers away and hadElon do all the chores to let him know what it was like “to play American.”While Elon and Kimbal declined to provide an exact recounting, they clearlyexperienced something awful and profound during those years with their father.They both talk about having to endure some form of psychological torture. “Hedefinitely has serious chemical stuff,” said Kimbal. “Which I am sure Elon and Ihave inherited. It was a very emotionally challenging upbringing, but it made uswho we are today.” Maye bristled when the subject of Errol came up. “Nobodygets along with him,” she said. “He is not nice to anyone. I don’t want to tellstories because they are horrendous. You know, you just don’t talk about it.There are kids and grandkids involved.”When asked to chat about Elon, Errol responded via e-mail: “Elon was a veryindependent and focused child at home with me. He loved computer sciencebefore anyone even knew what it was in South Africa and his ability was widelyrecognized by the time he was 12 years old. Elon and his brother Kimbal’sactivities as children and young men were so many and varied that it’s difficultto name just one, as they travelled together with me extensively in S. Africa andthe world at large, visiting all the continents regularly from the age of sixonwards. Elon and his brother and sister were and continue to be exemplary, inevery way a father could want. I’m very proud of what Elon’s accomplished.”Errol copied Elon on this e-mail, and Elon warned me off corresponding withhis father, insisting that his father’s take on past events could not be trusted. “Heis an odd duck,” Musk said. But, when pressed for more information, Muskdodged. “It would certainly be accurate to say that I did not have a goodchildhood,” he said. “It may sound good. It was not absent of good, but it wasnot a happy childhood. It was like misery. He’s good at making life miserable—that’s for sure. He can take any situation no matter how good it is and make itbad. He’s not a happy man. I don’t know . . . fuck . . . I don’t know howsomeone becomes like he is. It would just cause too much trouble to tell you anymore.” Elon and Justine have vowed that their children will not be allowed tomeet Errol.When Elon was nearly ten years old, he saw a computer for the first time, atthe Sandton City Mall in Johannesburg. “There was an electronics store thatmostly did hi-fi-type stuff, but then, in one corner, they started stocking a fewcomputers,” Musk said. He felt awed right away—“It was like, ‘Whoa. Holyshit!’”—by this machine that could be programmed to do a person’s bidding. “Ihad to have that and then hounded my father to get the computer,” Musk said.Soon he owned a Commodore VIC-20, a popular home machine that went onsale in 1980. Elon’s computer arrived with five kilobytes of memory and aworkbook on the BASIC programming language. “It was supposed to take likesix months to get through all the lessons,” Elon said. “I just got super OCD on itand stayed up for three days with no sleep and did the entire thing. It seemed likethe most super-compelling thing I had ever seen.” Despite being an engineer,Musk’s father was something of a Luddite and dismissive of the machine. Elonrecounted that “he said it was just for games and that you’d never be able to doreal engineering on it. I just said, ‘Whatever.’”While bookish and into his new computer, Elon quite often led Kimbal and hiscousins (Kaye’s children) Russ, Lyndon, and Peter Rive on adventures. Theydabbled one year in selling Easter eggs door-to-door in the neighborhood. Theeggs were not well decorated, but the boys still marked them up a few hundredpercent for their wealthy neighbors. Elon also spearheaded their work withhomemade explosives and rockets. South Africa did not have the Estes rocketkits popular among hobbyists, so Elon would create his own chemicalcompounds and put them inside of canisters. “It is remarkable how many thingsyou can get to explode,” Elon said. “Saltpeter, sulfur, and charcoal are the basicingredients for gunpowder, and then if you combine a strong acid with a strongalkaline, that will generally release a lot of energy. Granulated chlorine withbrake fluid—that’s quite impressive. I’m lucky I have all my fingers.” When nothandling explosives, the boys put on layers of clothing and goggles and shoteach other with pellet guns. Elon and Kimbal raced dirt bikes against each otherin sandlots until Kimbal flew off his bike one day and hurtled into a barbed wirefence.As the years went on, the cousins took their entrepreneurial pursuits moreseriously, even attempting at one point to start a video arcade. Without anyparents knowing, the boys picked out a spot for their arcade, got a lease, andstarted navigating the permit process for their business. Eventually, they had toget someone over eighteen to sign a legal document, and neither the Rives’father nor Errol would oblige. It would take a couple of decades, but Elon andthe Rives would eventually go into business together.The boys’ most audacious exploits may have been their trips between Pretoriaand Johannesburg. During the 1980s, South Africa could be a terribly violentplace, and the thirty-five-mile train trip linking Pretoria and Johannesburg stoodout as one of the world’s more dangerous rides. Kimbal counted the trainjourneys as formative experiences for him and Elon. “South Africa was not ahappy-go-lucky place, and that has an impact on you. We saw some really roughstuff. It was part of an atypical upbringing—just this insane set of experiencesthat changes how you view risk. You don’t grow up thinking getting a job is thehard part. That’s not interesting enough.”The boys ranged in age from about thirteen to sixteen and chased a mix ofparties and geeky exploits in Johannesburg. During one jaunt, they went to aDungeons & Dragons tournament. “That was us being nerd master supremes,”Musk said. All of the boys were into the role-playing game, which requiressomeone to help set the mood for a contest by imagining and then describing ascene. “You have entered a room, and there is a chest in the corner. What willyou do? . . . You open the chest. You’ve sprung a trap. Dozens of goblins are onthe loose.” Elon excelled at this Dungeon Master role and had memorized thetexts detailing the powers of monsters and other characters. “Under Elon’sleadership, we played the role so well and won the tournament,” said Peter Rive.“Winning requires this incredible imagination, and Elon really set the tone forkeeping people captivated and inspired.”The Elon that his peers encountered at school was far less inspirational.Throughout middle and high school, Elon bounced around a couple ofinstitutions. He spent the equivalent of eighth and ninth grades at BryanstonHigh School. One afternoon Elon and Kimbal were sitting at the top of a flightof concrete stairs eating when a boy decided to go after Elon. “I was basicallyhiding from this gang that was fucking hunting me down for God knows fuckingwhy. I think I accidentally bumped this guy at assembly that morning and he’dtaken some huge offense at that.” The boy crept up behind Musk, kicked him inthe head, and then shoved him down the stairs. Musk tumbled down the entireflight, and a handful of boys pounced on him, some of them kicking Musk in theside and the ringleader bashing his head against the ground. “They were a bunchof fucking psychos,” Musk said. “I blacked out.” Kimbal watched in horror andfeared for Elon’s life. He rushed down the stairs to find Elon’s face bloodied andswollen. “He looked like someone who had just been in the boxing ring,”Kimbal said. Elon then went to the hospital. “It was about a week before I couldget back to school,” Musk said. (During a news conference in 2013, Elondisclosed that he’d had a nose job to deal with the lingering effects of thisbeating.)For three or four years, Musk endured relentless hounding at the hands ofthese bullies. They went so far as to beat up a boy that Musk considered his bestfriend until the child agreed to stop hanging out with Musk. “Moreover, they gothim—they got my best fucking friend—to lure me out of hiding so they couldbeat me up,” Musk said. “And that fucking hurt.” While telling this part of thestory, Musk’s eyes welled up and his voice quivered. “For some reason, theydecided that I was it, and they were going to go after me nonstop. That’s whatmade growing up difficult. For a number of years, there was no respite. You getchased around by gangs at school who tried to beat the shit out of me, and thenI’d come home, and it would just be awful there as well. It was just like nonstophorrible.”Musk spent the latter stages of his high school career at Pretoria Boys HighSchool, where a growth spurt and the generally better behavior of the studentsmade life more bearable. While a public school by definition, Pretoria Boys hasfunctioned more like a private school for the last hundred years. It’s the placeyou send a young man to get him ready to attend Oxford or Cambridge.The boys from Musk’s class remember him as a likable, quiet, unspectacularstudent. “There were four or five boys that were considered the very brightest,”said Deon Prinsloo, who sat behind Elon in some classes. “Elon was not one ofthem.” Such comments were echoed by a half dozen boys who also noted thatMusk’s lack of interest in sports left him isolated in the midst of an athletics-obsessed culture. “Honestly, there were just no signs that he was going to be abillionaire,” said Gideon Fourie, another classmate. “He was never in aleadership position at school. I was rather surprised to see what has happened tohim.”While Musk didn’t have any close friends at school, his eccentric interests didleave an impression. One boy—Ted Wood—remembered Musk bringing modelrockets to school and blasting them off during breaks. This was not the only hintof his aspirations. During a science-class debate, Elon gained attention forrailing against fossil fuels in favor of solar power—an almost sacrilegious stancein a country devoted to mining the earth’s natural resources. “He always hadfirm views on things,” said Wood. Terency Beney, a classmate who stayed intouch with Elon over the years, claimed that Musk had started fantasizing aboutcolonizing other planets in high school as well.In another nod to the future, Elon and Kimbal were chatting during a classbreak outdoors when Wood interrupted them and asked what they were going onabout. “They said, ‘We are talking about whether there is a need for branchbanking in the financial industry and whether we will move to paperlessbanking.’ I remember thinking that was such an absurd comment to make. I said,‘Yeah, that’s great.’”*While Musk might not have been among the academic elite in his class, hewas among a handful of students with the grades and self-professed interest to beselected for an experimental computer program. Students were plucked out of anumber of schools and brought together to learn the BASIC, COBOL, andPascal programming languages. Musk continued to augment these technologicalleanings with his love of science fiction and fantasy and tried his hand at writingstories that involved dragons and supernatural beings. “I wanted to writesomething like Lord of the Rings,” he said.Maye viewed these high school years through a mother’s eyes and recountedplenty of tales of Musk performing spectacular academic feats. The video gamehe wrote, she said, impressed much older, more experienced techies. He acedmath exams well beyond his years. And he had that incredible memory. The onlyreason he did not outrank the other boys was a lack of interest in the workprescribed by the school.As Musk saw it, “I just look at it as ‘What grades do I need to get where Iwant to go?’ There were compulsory subjects like Afrikaans, and I just didn’t seethe point of learning that. It seemed ridiculous. I’d get a passing grade and thatwas fine. Things like physics and computers—I got the highest grade you canget in those. There needs to be a reason for a grade. I’d rather play video games,write software, and read books than try and get an A if there’s no point in gettingan A. I can remember failing subjects in like fourth and fifth grade. Then, mymother’s boyfriend told me I’d be held back if I didn’t pass. I didn’t actuallyknow you had to pass the subjects to move to the next grade. I got the bestgrades in class after that.”At seventeen, Musk left South Africa for Canada. He has recounted thisjourney quite often in the press and typically leans on two descriptions of themotivation for his flight. The short version is that Musk wanted to get to theUnited States as quickly as possible and could use Canada as a pit stop via hisCanadian ancestry. The second go-to story that Musk relies on has more of asocial conscience. South Africa required military service at the time. Muskwanted to avoid joining the military, he has said, because it would have forcedhim to participate in the apartheid regime.What rarely gets mentioned is that Musk attended the University of Pretoriafor five months before heading off on his grand adventure. He began pursuingphysics and engineering but put lackluster effort into the work and soon droppedout of school. Musk characterized the time at university as just something to dowhile he awaited his Canadian documentation. In addition to being aninconsequential part of his life, Musk lazing through school to avoid SouthAfrica’s required military service rather undermines the tale of a brooding,adventurous youth that he likes to tell, which is likely why the stint at theUniversity of Pretoria never seems to come up.There’s no question, though, that Musk had been pining to get to the UnitedStates on a visceral level for a long time. Musk’s early inclination towardcomputers and technology had fostered an intense interest in Silicon Valley, andhis trips overseas had reinforced the idea that America was the place to getthings done. South Africa, by contrast, presented far less opportunity for anentrepreneurial soul. As Kimbal put it, “South Africa was like a prison forsomeone like Elon.”Musk’s opportunity to flee arrived with a change in the law that allowed Mayeto pass her Canadian citizenship to her children. Musk immediately beganresearching how to complete the paperwork for this process. It took about a yearto receive the approvals from the Canadian government and to secure a Canadianpassport. “That’s when Elon said, ‘I’m leaving for Canada,’” Maye said. In thesepre-Internet days, Musk had to wait three agonizing weeks to get a plane ticket.Once it arrived, and without flinching, he left home for good.