6MICE IN SPACEELON MUSK TURNED THIRTY IN JUNE 2001, and the birthday hit himhard. “I’m no longer a child prodigy,” he told Justine, only half joking. Thatsame month X.com officially changed its name to PayPal, providing a harshreminder that the company had been ripped away from Musk and given tosomeone else to run. The startup life, which Musk described as akin to “eatingglass and staring into the abyss,”4 had gotten old and so had Silicon Valley. It feltlike Musk was living inside a trade show where everyone worked in thetechnology industry and talked all the time about funding, IPOs, and chasing bigpaydays. People liked to brag about the crazy hours they worked, and Justinewould just laugh, knowing Musk had lived a more extreme version of the SiliconValley lifestyle than they could imagine. “I had friends who complained thattheir husbands came home at seven or eight,” she said. “Elon would come homeat eleven and work some more. People didn’t always get the sacrifice he made inorder to be where he was.”The idea of escaping this incredibly lucrative rat race started to grow moreand more appealing. Musk’s entire life had been about chasing a bigger stage,and Palo Alto seemed more like a stepping-stone than a final destination. Thecouple decided to move south and begin their family and the next chapter oftheir lives in Los Angeles.“There’s an element to him that likes the style and the excitement and color ofa place like L.A.,” said Justine. “Elon likes to be where the action is.” A smallgroup of Musk’s friends who felt similarly had also decamped to Los Angelesfor what would be a wild couple of years.It wasn’t just Los Angeles’s glitz and grandeur that attracted Musk. It was alsothe call of space. After being pushed out of PayPal, Musk had started to revisithis childhood fantasies around rocket ships and space travel and to think that hemight have a greater calling than creating Internet services. The changes in hisattitude and thinking soon became obvious to his friends, including a group ofPayPal executives who had gathered in Las Vegas one weekend to celebrate thecompany’s success. “We’re all hanging out in this cabana at the Hard Rock Cafe,and Elon is there reading some obscure Soviet rocket manual that was all moldyand looked like it had been bought on eBay,” said Kevin Hartz, an early PayPalinvestor. “He was studying it and talking openly about space travel and changingthe world.”Musk had picked Los Angeles with intent. It gave him access to space or atleast the space industry. Southern California’s mild, consistent weather had madeit a favored city of the aeronautics industry since the 1920s, when the LockheedAircraft Company set up shop in Hollywood. Howard Hughes, the U.S. AirForce, NASA, Boeing, and myriad other people and organizations haveperformed much of their manufacturing and cutting-edge experimentation in andaround Los Angeles. Today the city remains a major hub for the military’saeronautics work and commercial activity. While Musk didn’t know exactlywhat he wanted to do in space, he realized that just by being in Los Angeles hewould be surrounded by the world’s top aeronautics thinkers. They could helphim refine any ideas, and there would be plenty of recruits to join his nextventure.Musk’s first interactions with the aeronautics community were with aneclectic collection of space enthusiasts, members of a nonprofit group called theMars Society. Dedicated to exploring and settling the Red Planet, the MarsSociety planned to hold a fundraiser in mid-2001. The $500-per-plate event wasto take place at the house of one of the well-off Mars Society members, andinvitations to the usual characters had been mailed out. What stunned RobertZubrin, the head of the group, was the reply from someone named Elon Musk,whom no one could remember inviting. “He gave us a check for five thousanddollars,” Zubrin said. “That made everyone take notice.” Zubrin beganresearching Musk, determined he was rich, and invited him for coffee ahead ofthe dinner. “I wanted to make sure he knew the projects we had under way,”Zubrin said. He proceeded to regale Musk with tales of the research center thesociety had built in the Arctic to mimic the tough conditions of Mars and theexperiments they had been running for something called the Translife Mission,in which there would be a spinning capsule orbiting Earth that was piloted by acrew of mice. “It would spin to give them one-third gravity—the same youwould have on Mars—and they would live there and reproduce,” Zubrin toldMusk.When it was time for dinner, Zubrin placed Musk at the VIP table next tohimself, the director and space buff James Cameron, and Carol Stoker, aplanetary scientist for NASA with a deep interest in Mars. “Elon is so youthful-looking and at that time he looked like a little boy,” Stoker said. “Cameron waschatting him up right away to invest in his next movie, and Zubrin was trying toget him to make a big donation to the Mars Society.” In return for being houndedfor cash, Musk probed about for ideas and contacts. Stoker’s husband was anaerospace engineer at NASA working on a concept for an airplane that wouldglide over Mars looking for water. Musk loved that. “He was much more intensethan some of the other millionaires,” Zubrin said. “He didn’t know a lot aboutspace, but he had a scientific mind. He wanted to know exactly what was beingplanned in regards to Mars and what the significance would be.” Musk took tothe Mars Society right away and joined its board of directors. He donatedanother $100,000 to fund a research station in the desert as well.Musk’s friends were not entirely sure what to make of his mental state. He’dlost a tremendous amount of weight fighting off malaria and looked almostskeletal. With little prompting, Musk would start expounding on his desire to dosomething meaningful with his life—something lasting. His next move had to beeither in solar or in space. “He said, ‘The logical thing to happen next is solar,but I can’t figure out how to make any money out of it,’” said George Zachary,the investor and close friend of Musk’s, recalling a lunch date at the time. “Thenhe started talking about space, and I thought he meant office space like a realestate play.” Musk had actually started thinking bigger than the Mars Society.Rather than send a few mice into Earth’s orbit, Musk wanted to send them toMars. Some very rough calculations done at the time suggested that the journeywould cost $15 million. “He asked if I thought that was crazy,” Zachary said. “Iasked, ‘Do the mice come back? Because, if they don’t, yeah, most people willthink that’s crazy.’” As it turned out, the mice were not only meant to go to Marsand come back but were also meant to procreate along the way, during a journeythat would take months. Jeff Skoll, another one of Musk’s friends who made afortune at eBay, pointed out that the fornicating mice would need a hell of a lotof cheese and bought Musk a giant wheel of Le Brouère, a type of Gruyère.Musk did not mind becoming the butt of cheese jokes. The more he thoughtabout space, the more important its exploration seemed to him. He felt as if thepublic had lost some of its ambition and hope for the future. The average personmight see space exploration as a waste of time and effort and rib him for talkingabout the subject, but Musk thought about interplanetary travel in a very earnestway. He wanted to inspire the masses and reinvigorate their passion for science,conquest, and the promise of technology.His fears that mankind had lost much of its will to push the boundaries werereinforced one day when Musk went to the NASA website. He’d expected tofind a detailed plan for exploring Mars and instead found bupkis. “At first Ithought, jeez, maybe I’m just looking in the wrong place,” Musk once toldWired. “Why was there no plan, no schedule? There was nothing. It seemedcrazy.” Musk believed that the very idea of America was intertwined withhumanity’s desire to explore. He found it sad that the American agency taskedwith doing audacious things in space and exploring new frontiers as its missionseemed to have no serious interest in investigating Mars at all. The spirit ofManifest Destiny had been deflated or maybe even come to a depressing end,and hardly anyone seemed to care.Like so many quests to revitalize America’s soul and bring hope to all ofmankind, Musk’s journey began in a hotel conference room. By this time, Muskhad built up a decent network of contacts in the space industry, and he broughtthe best of them together at a series of salons—sometimes at the Renaissancehotel at the Los Angeles airport and sometimes at the Sheraton hotel in PaloAlto. Musk had no formal business plan for these people to debate. He mostlywanted them to help him develop the mice-to-Mars idea or at least to come upwith something comparable. Musk hoped to hit on a grand gesture for mankind—some type of event that would capture the world’s attention, get peoplethinking about Mars again, and have them reflect on man’s potential. Thescientists and luminaries at the meetings were to figure out a spectacle thatwould be technically feasible at a price tag of approximately $20 million. Muskresigned from his position as a director of the Mars Society and announced hisown organization—the Life to Mars Foundation.The collection of talent attending these sessions in 2001 was impressive.Scientists showed up from NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory, or JPL. JamesCameron appeared, lending some celebrity to the affair. Also attending wasMichael Griffin, whose academic credentials were spectacular and includeddegrees in aerospace engineering, electrical engineering, civil engineering, andapplied physics. Griffin had worked for the CIA’s venture capital arm called In-Q-Tel, at NASA, and at JPL and was just in the process of leaving OrbitalSciences Corporation, a maker of satellites and spacecraft, where he had beenchief technical officer and the general manager of the space systems group. Itcould be argued that no one on the planet knew more about the realities ofgetting things into space than Griffin, and he was working for Musk as spacethinker in chief. (Four years later, in 2005, Griffin took over as head of NASA.)The experts were thrilled to have another rich guy appear who was willing tofund something interesting in space. They happily debated the merits andfeasibility of sending up rodents and watching them hump. But, as the discussionwore on, a consensus started to build around pursuing a different project—something called “Mars Oasis.” Under this plan, Musk would buy a rocket anduse it to shoot what amounted to a robotic greenhouse to Mars. A group ofresearchers had already been working on a space-ready growth chamber forplants. The idea was to modify their structure, so that it could open up brieflyand suck in some of the Martian regolith, or soil, and then use it to grow a plant,which would in turn produce the first oxygen on Mars. Much to Musk’s liking,this new plan seemed both ostentatious and feasible.Musk wanted the structure to have a window and a way to send a videofeedback to Earth, so that people could watch the plant grow. The group alsotalked about sending out kits to students around the country who would growtheir own plants simultaneously and take notice, for example, that the Martianplant could grow twice as high as its Earth-bound counterpart in the sameamount of time. “This concept had been floating around in various forms for awhile,” said Dave Bearden, a space industry veteran who attended the meetings.“It would be, yes, there is life on Mars, and we put it there. The hope was that itmight turn on a light for thousands of kids that this place is not that hostile. Thenthey might start thinking, Maybe we should go there.” Musk’s enthusiasm for theidea started to inspire the group, many of whom had grown cynical aboutanything novel happening in space again. “He’s a very smart, very driven guywith a huge ego,” Bearden said. “At one point someone mentioned that he mightbecome Time magazine’s Man of the Year, and you could see him light up. Hehas this belief that he is the guy who can change the world.”The main thing troubling the space experts was Musk’s budget. Following thesalons, it seemed like Musk wanted to spend somewhere between $20 millionand $30 million on the stunt, and everyone knew that the cost of a rocket launchalone would eat up that money and then some. “In my mind, you needed twohundred million dollars to do it right,” Bearden said. “But people were reluctantto bring too much reality into the situation too early and just get the whole ideakilled.” Then there were the immense engineering challenges that would needsolving. “To have a big window on this thing was a real thermal problem,”Bearden said. “You could not keep the container warm enough to keep anythingalive.” Scooping Martian soil into the structure seemed not only hard to dophysically but also like a flat-out bad idea since the regolith would be toxic. Fora while, the scientists debated growing the plant in a nutrient-rich gel instead,but that felt like cheating and like it might undermine the whole point of theendeavor. Even the optimistic moments were awash in unknowns. One scientistfound some very resilient mustard seeds and thought they could possibly survivea treated version of the Martian soil. “There was a pretty big downside if theplant didn’t survive,” Bearden said. “You have this dead garden on Mars thatends up giving off the opposite of the intended effect.”*Musk never flinched. He turned some of the volunteer thinkers intoconsultants, and put them to work on the plant machine’s design. He also plotteda trip to Russia to find out exactly how much a launch would cost. Muskintended to buy a refurbished intercontinental ballistic missile, or ICBM, fromthe Russians and use that as his launch vehicle. For help with this, Musk reachedout to Jim Cantrell, an unusual fellow who had done a mix of classified andunclassified work for the United States and other governments. Among otherclaims to fame, Cantrell had been accused of espionage and placed under housearrest in 1996 by the Russians after a satellite deal went awry. “After a couple ofweeks, Al Gore made some calls, and it got worked out,” Cantrell said. “I didn’twant anything to do with the Russians again—ever.” Musk had other ideas.Cantrell was driving his convertible on a hot July evening in Utah when a callcame in. “This guy in a funny accent said, ‘I really need to talk to you. I am abillionaire. I am going to start a space program.’” Cantrell could not hear Muskwell—he thought his name was Ian Musk—and said he would call back once hegot home. The two men didn’t exactly trust each other at the outset. Muskrefused to give Cantrell his cell phone number and made the call from his faxmachine. Cantrell found Musk both intriguing and all too eager. “He asked ifthere was an airport near me and if I could meet the next day,” Cantrell said.“My red flags started going off.” Fearing one of his enemies was trying toorchestrate an elaborate setup, Cantrell told Musk to meet him at the Salt LakeCity airport, where he would rent a conference room near the Delta lounge. “Iwanted him to meet me behind security so he couldn’t pack a gun,” Cantrellsaid. When the meeting finally took place, Musk and Cantrell hit it off. Muskrolled out his “humans need to become a multiplanetary species” speech, andCantrell said that if Musk was really serious, he’d be willing to go to Russia—again—and help buy a rocket.In late October 2001, Musk, Cantrell, and Adeo Ressi, Musk’s friend fromcollege, boarded a commercial flight to Moscow. Ressi had been playing the roleof Musk’s guardian and trying to ascertain whether his best friend had started tolose his mind. Compilation videos of rockets exploding were made, andinterventions were held with Musk’s friends trying to talk him out of wasting hismoney. While these measures failed, Adeo went along to Russia to try to containMusk as best as he could. “Adeo would call me to the side and say, ‘What Elonis doing is insane. A philanthropic gesture? That’s crazy,’” Cantrell said. “Hewas seriously worried but was down with the trip.” And why not? The men wereheading to Russia at the height of its freewheeling post-Soviet days when richguys could apparently buy space missiles on the open market.Team Musk would grow to include Mike Griffin, and meet with the Russiansthree times over a period of four months.* The group set up a few meetings withcompanies like NPO Lavochkin, which had made probes intended for Mars andVenus for the Russian Federal Space Agency, and Kosmotras, a commercialrocket launcher. The appointments all seemed to go the same way, followingRussian decorum. The Russians, who often skip breakfast, would ask to meetaround 11 A.M. at their offices for an early lunch. Then there would be small talkfor an hour or more as the meeting attendees picked over a spread ofsandwiches, sausages, and, of course, vodka. At some point during this process,Griffin usually started to lose his patience. “He suffers fools very poorly,”Cantrell said. “He’s looking around and wondering when we’re going to getdown to fucking business.” The answer was not soon. After lunch came alengthy smoking and coffee-drinking period. Once all of the tables were cleared,the Russian in charge would turn to Musk and ask, “What is it you’re interestedin buying?” The big windup may not have bothered Musk as much if theRussians had taken him more seriously. “They looked at us like we were notcredible people,” Cantrell said. “One of their chief designers spit on me and Elonbecause he thought we were full of shit.”The most intense meeting occurred in an ornate, neglected, prerevolutionarybuilding near downtown Moscow. The vodka shots started—“To space!” “ToAmerica!”—while Musk sat on $20 million, which he hoped would be enough tobuy three ICBMs that could be retooled to go to space. Buzzed from the vodka,Musk asked point-blank how much a missile would cost. The reply: $8 millioneach. Musk countered, offering $8 million for two. “They sat there and looked athim,” Cantrell said. “And said something like, ‘Young boy. No.’ They alsointimated that he didn’t have the money.” At this point, Musk had decided theRussians were either not serious about doing business or determined to part adot-com millionaire from as much of his money as possible. He stormed out ofthe meeting.The Team Musk mood could not have been worse. It was near the end ofFebruary 2002, and they went outside to hail a cab and drove straight to theairport surrounded by the snow and dreck of the Moscow winter. Inside the cab,no one talked. Musk had come to Russia filled with optimism about putting on agreat show for mankind and was now leaving exasperated and disappointed byhuman nature. The Russians were the only ones with rockets that could possiblyfit within Musk’s budget. “It was a long drive,” Cantrell said. “We sat there insilence looking at the Russian peasants shopping in the snow.” The sombermood lingered all the way to the plane, until the drink cart arrived. “You alwaysfeel particularly good when the wheels lift off in Moscow,” Cantrell said. “It’slike, ‘My God. I made it.’ So, Griffin and I got drinks and clinked our glasses.”Musk sat in the row in front of them, typing on his computer. “We’re thinking,Fucking nerd. What can he be doing now?” At which point Musk wheeledaround and flashed a spreadsheet he’d created. “Hey, guys,” he said, “I think wecan build this rocket ourselves.”Griffin and Cantrell had downed a couple of drinks by this time and were toodeflated to entertain a fantasy. They knew all too well the stories of gung-homillionaires who thought they could conquer space only to lose their fortunes.Just the year before, Andrew Beal, a real estate and finance whiz in Texas,folded his aerospace company after having poured millions into a massive testsite. “We’re thinking, Yeah, you and whose fucking army,” Cantrell said. “But,Elon says, ‘No, I’m serious. I have this spreadsheet.’” Musk passed his laptopover to Griffin and Cantrell, and they were dumbfounded. The documentdetailed the costs of the materials needed to build, assemble, and launch a rocket.According to Musk’s calculations, he could undercut existing launch companiesby building a modest-sized rocket that would cater to a part of the market thatspecialized in carrying smaller satellites and research payloads to space. Thespreadsheet also laid out the hypothetical performance characteristics of therocket in fairly impressive detail. “I said, ‘Elon, where did you get this?’”Cantrell said.Musk had spent months studying the aerospace industry and the physicsbehind it. From Cantrell and others, he’d borrowed Rocket Propulsion Elements,Fundamentals of Astrodynamics, and Aerothermodynamics of Gas Turbine andRocket Propulsion, along with several more seminal texts. Musk had reverted tohis childhood state as a devourer of information and had emerged from thismeditative process with the realization that rockets could and should be mademuch cheaper than what the Russians were offering. Forget the mice. Forget theplant with its own video feed growing—or possibly dying—on Mars. Muskwould inspire people to think about exploring space again by making it cheaperto explore space.As word traveled around the space community about Musk’s plans, there wasa collective ho-hum. People like Zubrin had seen this show many times before.“There was a string of zillionaires that got sold a good story by an engineer,”Zubrin said. “Combine my brains and your money, and we can build a rocketship that will be profitable and open up the space frontier. The techies usuallyended up spending the rich guy’s money for two years, and then the rich guy getsbored and shuts the thing down. With Elon, everyone gave a sigh and said, ‘Ohwell. He could have spent ten million dollars to send up the mice, but insteadhe’ll spend hundreds of millions and probably fail like all the others thatproceeded him.’”While well aware of the risks tied to starting a rocket company, Musk had atleast one reason to think he might succeed where others had failed. That reason’sname was Tom Mueller.Mueller grew up the son of a logger in the tidy Idaho town of St. Maries,where he developed a reputation as an oddball. While the rest of the kids wereoutside exploring the woods in winter, Mueller stayed warm in the libraryreading books or watching Star Trek at his house. He also tinkered. Walking tograde school one day, Mueller discovered a smashed clock in an alley and turnedit into a pet project. Each day, he fixed some part of the clock—a gear, a spring—until he got it working. A similar thing happened with the family’s lawnmower, which Mueller disassembled one afternoon on the front lawn for fun.“My dad came home and was so mad because he thought he’d have to buy a newmower,” Mueller said. “But I put it back together, and it ran.” Mueller then gotstuck on rockets. He started buying mail order kits and following the instructionsto build small rockets. Rather quickly, Mueller graduated to constructing his owndevices. At the age of twelve, he crafted a mock-up space shuttle that could beattached to a rocket, sent up into the air, and then glide back to the ground. For ascience project a couple of years later, Mueller borrowed his dad’s oxyacetylenewelding equipment to make a rocket engine prototype. Mueller cooled the deviceby placing it upside down in a coffee can full of water—“I could run it like thatall day long”—and invented equally creative ways to measure its performance.The machine was good enough for Mueller to win a couple of regional sciencefair competitions and end up at an international event. “That’s where I promptlygot my ass kicked,” Mueller said.Tall, lanky, and with a rectangular face, Mueller is an easygoing sort whomuddled through college for a bit, teaching his friends how to make smokebombs, and then eventually settled down and did well as a mechanicalengineering student. Fresh out of college, he worked for Hughes Aircraft onsatellites—“It wasn’t rockets, but it was close”—and then went to TRW Space &Electronics. It was the latter half of the 1980s, and Ronald Reagan’s Star Warsprogram had the space gearheads dreaming about kinetic weapons and all sortsof mayhem. At TRW, Mueller experimented with crazy types of propellants andoversaw the development of the company’s TR-106 engine, a giant machinefueled by liquid oxygen and hydrogen. As a hobby, Mueller hung out with acouple hundred amateur rocketry buffs in the Reaction Research Society, a groupformed in 1943 to encourage the building and firing of rockets. On theweekends, Mueller traveled out to the Mojave Desert with the other RRSmembers to push the limits of amateur machines. Mueller was one of the club’sstandouts, able to build things that actually worked, and could experiment withsome of the more radical concepts that were quashed by his conservative bossesat TRW. His crowning achievement was an eighty-pound engine that couldproduce thirteen thousand pounds of thrust and earned accolades as the world’slargest liquid-fuel rocket engine built by an amateur. “I still keep the rocketshanging in my garage,” Mueller said.In January 2002, Mueller was hanging out in the workshop of John Garvey,who had left a job at the aerospace company McDonnell Douglas to startbuilding his own rockets. Garvey’s facility was in Huntington Beach, where herented an industrial space about the size of a six-car garage. The two men werefiddling around with the eighty-pound engine when Garvey mentioned that a guynamed Elon Musk might be stopping by. The amateur rocketry scene is tight,and it was Cantrell who recommended that Musk check out Garvey’s workshopand see Mueller’s designs. On a Sunday, Musk arrived with a pregnant Justine,wearing a stylish black leather trench coat and looking like a high-paid assassin.Mueller had the eighty-pound engine on his shoulder and was trying to bolt it toa support structure when Musk began peppering him with questions. “He askedme how much thrust it had,” Mueller said. “He wanted to know if I had everworked on anything bigger. I told him that yeah, I’d worked on a 650,000-poundthrust engine at TRW and knew every part of it.” Mueller set the engine downand tried to keep up with Musk’s interrogation. “How much would that bigengine cost?” Musk asked. Mueller told him TRW built it for about $12 million.Musk shot back, “Yeah, but how much could you really do it for?”Mueller ended up chatting with Musk for hours. The next weekend, Muellerinvited Musk to his house to continue their discussion. Musk knew he had foundsomeone who really knew the ins and outs of making rockets. After that, Muskintroduced Mueller to the rest of his roundtable of space experts and theirstealthy meetings. The caliber of the people impressed Mueller, who had turneddown past job offers from Beal and other budding space magnates because oftheir borderline insane ideas. Musk, by contrast, seemed to know what he wasdoing, weeding out the naysayers meeting by meeting and forming a crew ofbright, committed engineers.Mueller had helped Musk fill out that spreadsheet around the performance andcost metrics of a new, low-cost rocket, and, along with the rest of Team Musk,had subsequently refined the idea. The rocket would not carry truck-sizedsatellites like some of the monster rockets flown by Boeing, Lockheed, theRussians, and others countries. Instead, Musk’s rocket would be aimed at thelower end of the satellite market, and it could end up as ideal for an emergingclass of smaller payloads that capitalized on the massive advances that had takenplace in recent years in computing and electronics technology. The rocket wouldcater directly to a theory in the space industry that a whole new market mightopen for both commercial and research payloads if a company could drasticallylower the price per launch and perform launches on a regular schedule. Muskrelished the idea of being at the forefront of this trend and developing theworkhorse of a new era in space. Of course, all of this was theoretical—andthen, suddenly, it wasn’t. PayPal had gone public in February with its sharesshooting up 55 percent, and Musk knew that eBay wanted to buy the company aswell. While noodling on the rocket idea, Musk’s net worth had increased fromtens of millions to hundreds of millions. In April 2002, Musk fully abandonedthe publicity-stunt idea and committed to building a commercial space venture.He pulled aside Cantrell, Griffin, Mueller, and Chris Thompson, an aerospaceengineer at Boeing, and told the group, “I want to do this company. If you guysare in, let’s do it.” (Griffin wanted to join but ended up declining when Muskrebuffed his request to live on the East Coast, and Cantrell only stuck around fora few months after this meeting, seeing the venture as too risky.)Founded in June 2002, Space Exploration Technologies came to life inhumble settings. Musk acquired an old warehouse at 1310 East Grand Avenue inEl Segundo, a suburb of Los Angeles humming with the activity of the aerospaceindustry. The previous tenant of the 75,000-square-foot building had done lots ofshipping and had used the south side of the facility as a logistics depot, outfittingit with several receiving bays for delivery trucks. This allowed Musk to drive hissilver McLaren right into the building. Beyond that the surroundings were sparse—just a dusty floor and a forty-foot-high ceiling with its wooden beams andinsulation exposed and which curved at the top to give the place a hangarlikefeel. The north side of the building was an office space with cubicles and roomfor about fifty people. During the first week of SpaceX’s operations, deliverytrucks showed up packed full of Dell laptops and printers and folding tables thatwould serve as the first desks. Musk walked over to one of the loading docks,rolled up the door, and off-loaded the equipment himself.Musk had soon transformed the SpaceX office with what has become hissignature factory aesthetic: a glossy epoxy coating applied over concrete on thefloors, and a fresh coat of white paint slathered onto the walls. The white colorscheme was intended to make the factory look clean and feel cheerful. Deskswere interspersed around the factory so that Ivy League computer scientists andengineers designing the machines could sit with the welders and machinistsbuilding the hardware. This approach stood as SpaceX’s first major break withtraditional aerospace companies that prefer to cordon different engineeringgroups off from each other and typically separate engineers and machinists bythousands of miles by placing their factories in locations where real estate andlabor run cheap.As the first dozen or so employees came to the offices, they were told thatSpaceX’s mission would be to emerge as the “Southwest Airlines of Space.”SpaceX would build its own engines and then contract with suppliers for theother components of the rocket. The company would gain an edge over thecompetition by building a better, cheaper engine and by fine-tuning the assemblyprocess to make rockets faster and cheaper than anyone else. This visionincluded the construction of a type of mobile launch vehicle that could travel tovarious sites, take the rocket from a horizontal to vertical position, and send itoff to space—no muss, no fuss. SpaceX was meant to get so good at this processthat it could do multiple launches a month, make money off each one, and neverneed to become a huge contractor dependent on government funds.SpaceX was to be America’s attempt at a clean slate in the rocket business, amodernized reset. Musk felt that the space industry had not really evolved inabout fifty years. The aerospace companies had little competition and tended tomake supremely expensive products that achieved maximum performance. Theywere building a Ferrari for every launch, when it was possible that a HondaAccord might do the trick. Musk, by contrast, would apply some of the startuptechniques he’d learned in Silicon Valley to run SpaceX lean and fast andcapitalize on the huge advances in computing power and materials that had takenplace over the past couple of decades. As a private company, SpaceX would alsoavoid the waste and cost overruns associated with government contractors. Muskdeclared that SpaceX’s first rocket would be called the Falcon 1, a nod to StarWars’ Millennium Falcon and his role as the architect of an exciting future. At atime when the cost of sending a 550-pound payload started at $30 million, hepromised that the Falcon 1 would be able to carry a 1,400-pound payload for$6.9 million.Bowing to his nature, Musk set an insanely ambitious timeline for all of this.One of the earliest SpaceX presentations suggested that the company wouldcomplete its first engine in May 2003, a second engine in June, the body of therocket in July, and have everything assembled in August. A launchpad wouldthen be prepared by September, and the first launch would take place inNovember 2003, or about fifteen months after the company started. A trip toMars was naturally slated for somewhere near the end of the decade. This wasMusk the logical, naïve optimist tabulating how long it should take peoplephysically to perform all of this work. It’s the baseline he expects of himself andone that his employees, with their human foibles, are in a never-ending struggleto match.As space enthusiasts started to learn about the new company, they didn’t reallyobsess over whether Musk’s delivery schedule sounded realistic or not. Theywere just thrilled that someone had decided to take the cheap and fast approach.Some members of the military had already been promoting the idea of giving thearmed forces more aggressive space capabilities, or what they called “responsivespace.” If a conflict broke out, the military wanted the ability to respond withpurpose-built satellites for that mission. This would mean moving away from amodel where it takes ten years to build and deploy a satellite for a specific job.Instead, the military desired cheaper, smaller satellites that could be reconfiguredthrough software and sent up on short notice, almost like disposable satellites.“If we could pull that off, it would be really game-changing,” said Pete Worden,a retired air force general, who met with Musk while serving as a consultant tothe Defense Department. “It could make our response in space similar to whatwe do on land, sea and in the air.” Worden’s job required him to look at radicaltechnologies. While many of the people he encountered came off as eccentricdreamers, Musk seemed grounded, knowledgeable, and capable. “I talked topeople building ray guns and things in their garages. It was clear that Elon wasdifferent. He was a visionary who really understood the rocket technology, and Iwas impressed with him.”Like the military, scientists wanted cheap, quick access to space and theability to send up experiments and get data back on a regular basis. Somecompanies in the medical and consumer-goods industries were also interested inrides to space to study how a lack of gravity affected the properties of theirproducts.As good as a cheap launch vehicle sounded, the odds of a private citizenbuilding one that worked were beyond remote. A quick search on YouTube for“rocket explosions” turns up thousands of compilation videos documenting U.S.and Soviet launch disasters that have occurred over the decades. From 1957 to1966, the United States alone tried to blast more than 400 rockets into orbit andabout 100 of them crashed and burned.5 The rockets used to transport things tospace are mostly modified missiles developed through all of this trial and errorand funded by billions upon billions of government dollars. SpaceX had theadvantage of being able to learn from this past work and having a few people onstaff that had overseen rocket projects at companies like Boeing and TRW. Thatsaid, the startup did not have a budget that could support a string of explosions.At best, SpaceX would have three or four shots at making the Falcon 1 work.“People thought we were just crazy,” Mueller said. “At TRW, I had an army ofpeople and government funding. Now we were going to make a low-cost rocketfrom scratch with a small team. People just didn’t think it could be done.”In July 2002, Musk was gripped by the excitement of this daring enterprise,and eBay made its aggressive move to buy PayPal for $1.5 billion. This dealgave Musk some liquidity and supplied him with more than $100 million tothrow at SpaceX. With such a massive up-front investment, no one would beable to wrestle control of SpaceX away from Musk as they had done at Zip2 andPayPal. For the employees who had agreed to accompany Musk on thisseemingly impossible journey, the windfall provided at least a couple of years ofjob security. The acquisition also upped Musk’s profile and celebrity, which hecould leverage to score meetings with top government officials and to swaysuppliers.And then all of a sudden none of this seemed to matter. Justine had given birthto a son—Nevada Alexander Musk. He was ten weeks old when, just as theeBay deal was announced, he died. The Musks had tucked Nevada in for a napand placed the boy on his back as parents are taught to do. When they returnedto check on him, he was no longer breathing and had suffered from what thedoctors would term a sudden infant death syndrome–related incident. “By thetime the paramedics resuscitated him, he had been deprived of oxygen for solong that he was brain-dead,” Justine wrote in her article for Marie Claire. “Hespent three days on life support in a hospital in Orange County before we madethe decision to take him off it. I held him in my arms when he died. Elon made itclear that he did not want to talk about Nevada’s death. I didn’t understand this,just as he didn’t understand why I grieved openly, which he regarded as‘emotionally manipulative.’ I buried my feelings instead, coping with Nevada’sdeath by making my first visit to an IVF clinic less than two months later. Elonand I planned to get pregnant again as swiftly as possible. Within the next fiveyears, I gave birth to twins, then triplets.” Later, Justine chalked up Musk’sreaction to a defense mechanism that he’d learned from years of suffering as akid. “He doesn’t do well in dark places,” she told Esquire magazine. “He’sforward-moving, and I think it’s a survival thing with him.”Musk did open up to a couple of close friends and expressed the depth of hismisery. But for the most part, Justine read her husband right. He didn’t see thevalue in grieving publicly. “It made me extremely sad to talk about it,” Musksaid. “I’m not sure why I’d want to talk about extremely sad events. It does nogood for the future. If you’ve got other kids and obligations, then wallowing insadness does no good for anyone around you. I’m not sure what should be donein such situations.”Following Nevada’s death, Musk threw himself at SpaceX and rapidlyexpanded the company’s goals. His conversations with aerospace contractorsaround possible work for SpaceX left Musk disenchanted. It sounded like theyall charged a lot of money and worked slowly. The plan to integrate componentsmade by these types of companies gave way to the decision to make as much aspractical right at SpaceX. “While drawing upon the ideas of many prior launchvehicle programs from Apollo to the X-34/Fastrac, SpaceX is privatelydeveloping the entire Falcon rocket from the ground up, including both engines,the turbo-pump, the cryogenic tank structure and the guidance system,” thecompany announced on its website. “A ground up internal developmentincreases difficulty and the required investment, but no other path will achievethe needed improvement in the cost of access to space.”The SpaceX executives Musk hired were an all-star crew. Mueller set to workright away building the two engines—Merlin and Kestrel, named after two typesof falcons. Chris Thompson, a onetime marine who had managed the productionof the Delta and Titan rockets at Boeing, joined as the vice president ofoperations. Tim Buzza also came from Boeing, where he’d earned a reputationas one of the world’s leading rocket testers. Steve Johnson, who had worked atJPL and at two commercial space companies, was tapped as the seniormechanical engineer. The aerospace engineer Hans Koenigsmann came on todevelop the avionics, guidance, and control systems. Musk also recruitedGwynne Shotwell, an aerospace veteran who started as SpaceX’s firstsalesperson and rose in the years that followed to be president and Musk’s right-hand woman.These early days also marked the arrival of Mary Beth Brown, a now-legendary character in the lore of both SpaceX and Tesla. Brown—or MB, aseveryone called her—became Musk’s loyal assistant, establishing a real-lifeversion of the relationship between Iron Man’s Tony Stark and Pepper Potts. IfMusk worked a twenty-hour day, so too did Brown. Over the years, she broughtMusk meals, set up his business appointments, arranged time with his children,picked out his clothes, dealt with press requests, and when necessary yankedMusk out of meetings to keep him on schedule. She would emerge as the onlybridge between Musk and all of his interests and was an invaluable asset to thecompanies’ employees.Brown played a key role in developing SpaceX’s early culture. She paidattention to small details like the office’s red spaceship trash cans and helpedbalance the vibe around the office. When it came to matters related directly toMusk, Brown put on her firm countenance and no-nonsense attitude. The rest ofthe time she usually had a warm, broad smile and a disarming charm. “It wasalways, ‘Oh, dear. How are you, dear?’” recalled a SpaceX technician. Browncollected the weird e-mails that arrived for Musk and sent them out as “Kook ofthe Week” missives to make people laugh. One of the better entries included apencil sketch of a lunar spacecraft that had a red spot on the page. The personwho sent in the letter had circled the spot on his own drawing and then written“What is that? Blood?” next to it. In other letters there were plans for a perpetualmotion machine and a proposal for a giant inflatable rabbit that could be used toplug oil spills. For a short time, Brown’s duties extended to managing SpaceX’sbooks and handling the flow of business in Musk’s absence. “She pretty muchcalled the shots,” the technician said. “She would say, ‘This is what Elon wouldwant.’”Her greatest gift, though, may have been reading Musk’s moods. At bothSpaceX and Tesla, Brown placed her desk a few feet in front of Musk’s, so thatpeople had to pass her before having a meeting with him. If someone needed torequest permission to buy a big-ticket item, they would stop for a moment infront of Brown and wait for a nod to go see Musk or the shake-off to go awaybecause Musk was having a bad day. This system of nods and shakes becameparticularly important during periods of romantic strife for Musk, when hisnerves were on edge more than usual.The rank-and-file engineers at SpaceX tended to be young, maleoverachievers. Musk would personally reach out to the aerospace departments oftop colleges and inquire about the students who had finished with the best markson their exams. It was not unusual for him to call the students in their dormrooms and recruit them over the phone. “I thought it was a prank call,” saidMichael Colonno, who heard from Musk while attending Stanford. “I did notbelieve for a minute that he had a rocket company.” Once the students lookedMusk up on the Internet, selling them on SpaceX was easy. For the first time inyears if not decades, young aeronautics whizzes who pined to explore space hada really exciting company to latch on to and a path toward designing a rocket oreven becoming an astronaut that did not require them to join a bureaucraticgovernment contractor. As word of SpaceX’s ambitions spread, top engineersfrom Boeing, Lockheed Martin, and Orbital Sciences with a high tolerance forrisk fled to the upstart, too.Throughout the first year at SpaceX, one or two new employees joined almostevery week. Kevin Brogan was employee No. 23 and came from TRW, wherehe’d been used to various internal policies blocking him from doing work. “Icalled it the country club,” he said. “Nobody did anything.” Brogan started atSpaceX the day after his interview and was told to go hunting in the office for acomputer to use. “It was go to Fry’s and get whatever you need and go to Staplesand get a chair,” Brogan said. He immediately felt in over his head and wouldwork for twelve hours, drive home, sleep for ten hours, and then head right backto the factory. “I was exhausted and out of shape mentally,” he said. “But soon Iloved it and got totally hooked.”One of the first projects SpaceX decided to tackle was the construction of agas generator, a machine not unlike a small rocket engine that produces hot gas.Mueller, Buzza, and a couple of young engineers assembled the generator in LosAngeles and then packed it into the back of a pickup truck and drove it out toMojave, California, to test it. A desert town about one hundred miles from LosAngeles, Mojave had become a hub for aerospace companies like ScaledComposites and XCOR. A lot of the aerospace projects were based out of theMojave airport, where companies had their workshops and sent up all manner ofcutting-edge airplanes and rockets. The SpaceX team fit right into thisenvironment and borrowed a test stand from XCOR that was just about theperfect size to hold the gas generator. The first ignition run took place at 11 A.M.and lasted ninety seconds. The gas generator worked, but it had let out abillowing black smoke cloud that on this windless day parked right over theairport tower. The airport manager came down to the test area and lit intoMueller and Buzza. The airport official and some of the guys from XCOR whohad been helping out urged the SpaceX engineers to take it easy and wait untilthe next day to run another test. Instead, Buzza a strong leader ready to putSpaceX’s relentless ethos into play, coordinated a couple of trucks to pick upmore fuel, talked the airport manager down, and got the test stand ready foranother fire. In the days that followed, SpaceX’s engineers perfected a routinethat let them do multiple tests a day—an unheard-of practice at the airport—andhad the gas generator tuned to their liking after two weeks of work.They made a few more trips to Mojave and some other spots, including a teststand at Edwards Air Force Base and another in Mississippi. While on thiscountrywide rocketry tour, the SpaceX engineers came across a three-hundred-acre test site in McGregor, Texas, a small city near the center of the state. Theyreally liked this spot, and talked Musk into buying it. The navy had testedrockets on the land years before and so too had Andrew Beal before hisaerospace company collapsed. “After Beal saw it was going to cost him $300million to develop a rocket capable of sending sizeable satellites into orbit, hecalled it quits, leaving behind a lot of useful infrastructure for SpaceX, includinga three-story concrete tripod with legs as big around as redwood tree trunks,”wrote journalist Michael Belfiore in Rocketeers, a book that captured the rise ofa handful of private space companies.Jeremy Hollman was one of the young engineers who soon found himselfliving in Texas and customizing the test site to SpaceX’s needs. Hollmanexemplified the kind of recruit Musk wanted: he’d earned an aerospaceengineering degree from Iowa State University and a master’s in astronauticalengineering from the University of Southern California. He’d spent a couple ofyears working as a test engineer at Boeing dealing with jets, rockets, andspacecraft.*The stint at Boeing had left Hollman unimpressed with big aerospace. His firstday on the job came right as Boeing completed its merger with McDonnellDouglas. The resultant mammoth government contractor held a picnic to boostmorale but ended up failing at even this simple exercise. “The head of one of thedepartments gave a speech about it being one company with one vision and thenadded that the company was very cost constrained,” Hollman said. “He askedthat everyone limit themselves to one piece of chicken.” Things didn’t improvemuch from there. Every project at Boeing felt large, cumbersome, and costly. So,when Musk came along selling radical change, Hollman bit. “I thought it was anopportunity I could not pass up,” he said. At twenty-three, Hollman was young,single, and willing to give up any semblance of having a life in favor of workingat SpaceX nonstop, and he became Mueller’s second in command.Mueller had developed a pair of three-dimensional computer models of thetwo engines he wanted to build. Merlin would be the engine for the first stage ofthe Falcon 1, which lifted it off the ground, and Kestrel would be the smallerengine used to power the upper, second stage of the rocket and guide it in space.Together, Hollman and Mueller figured out which parts of the engines SpaceXwould build at the factory and which parts it would try to buy. For the purchasedparts, Hollman had to head out to various machine shops and get quotes anddelivery dates for the hardware. Quite often, the machinists told Hollman thatSpaceX’s timelines were nuts. Others were more accommodating and would tryto bend an existing product to SpaceX’s needs instead of building somethingfrom scratch. Hollman also found that creativity got him a long way. Hediscovered, for example, that changing the seals on some readily available carwash valves made them good enough to be used with rocket fuel.After SpaceX completed its first engine at the factory in California, Hollmanloaded it and mounds of other equipment into a U-Haul trailer. He hitched the U-Haul to the back of a white Hummer H2 and drove four thousand pounds ofgear* across Interstate 10 from Los Angeles to Texas and the test site. Thearrival of the engine in Texas kicked off one of the great bonding exercises inSpaceX’s history. Amid rattlesnakes, fire ants, isolation, and searing heat, thegroup led by Buzza and Mueller began the process of exploring every intricacyof the engines. It was a high-pressure slog full of explosions—or what theengineers politely called “rapid unscheduled disassemblies”—that woulddetermine whether a small band of engineers really could match the effort andskill of nation-states. The SpaceX employees christened the site in fittingfashion, downing a $1,200 bottle of Rémy Martin cognac out of paper cups andpassing a sobriety test on the drive back to the company apartments in theHummer. From that point on, the trek from California to the test site becameknown as the Texas Cattle Haul. The SpaceX engineers would work for ten daysstraight, come back to California for a weekend, and then head back. To ease theburden of travel, Musk sometimes let them use his private jet. “It carried sixpeople,” Mueller said. “Well, seven if someone sat in the toilet, which happenedall the time.”While the navy and Beal had left some testing apparatus, SpaceX had to builda large amount of custom gear. One of the largest of these structures was ahorizontal test stand about 30 feet long, 15 feet wide, and 15 feet tall. Then therewas the complementary vertical test stand that stood two stories high. When anengine needed to be fired, it would be fastened to one of the test stands, outfittedwith sensors to collect data, and monitored via several cameras. The engineerstook shelter in a bunker protected on one side by a dirt embankment. Ifsomething went wrong, they would look at feeds from the webcams or slowlylift one of the bunker’s hatches to listen for any clues. The locals in town rarelycomplained about the noise, although the animals on nearby farms seemed lessimpressed. “Cows have this natural defense mechanism where they gather andstart running in a circle,” Hollman said. “Every time we fired an engine, thecows scattered and then got in that circle with the younger ones placed in themiddle. We set up a cow cam to watch them.”Both Kestrel and Merlin came with challenges, and they were treated asalternating engineering exercises. “We would run Merlin until we ran out ofhardware or did something bad,” Mueller said. “Then we’d run Kestrel and therewas never a shortage of things to do.” For months, the SpaceX engineers arrivedat the site at 8 A.M. and spent twelve hours there working on the engines beforeretiring to the Outback Steakhouse for dinner. Mueller had a particular knack forlooking over test data and spotting some place where the engine ran hot or coldor had another flaw. He would call California and prescribe hardware changes,and engineers would refashion parts and send them off to Texas. Often theworkers in Texas modified parts themselves using a mill and lathe that Muellerhad brought out. “Kestrel started out as a real dog, and one of my proudestmoments was taking it from terrible to great performance with stuff we boughtonline and did in the machine shop,” Mueller said. Some members of the Texascrew honed their skills to the point that they could build a test-worthy engine inthree days. These same people were required to be adept at software. They’d pullan all-nighter building a turbo pump for the engine and then dig in the next nightto retool a suite of applications used to control the engines. Hollman did thistype of work all the time and was an all-star, but he was not alone among thisgroup of young, nimble engineers who crossed disciplines out of necessity andthe spirit of adventure. “There was an almost addictive quality to theexperience,” Hollman said. “You’re twenty-four or twenty-five, and they’retrusting you with so much. It was very empowering.”To get to space, the Merlin engine would need to burn for 180 seconds. Thatseemed like an eternity for the engineers at the outset of their stint in Texas,when the engine would burn for only a half second before it conked out.Sometimes Merlin vibrated too much during the tests. Sometimes it respondedbadly to a new material. Sometimes it cracked and needed major part upgrades,like moving from an aluminum manifold to a manifold made out of the moreexotic Inconel, an alloy suited to extreme temperatures. On one occasion, a fuelvalve refused to open properly and caused the whole engine to blow up. Anothertest gone wrong ended up with the whole test stand burning down. It usuallycame to Buzza and Mueller to make the unpleasant call back to Musk and recapthe day’s foibles. “Elon had pretty good patience,” Mueller said. “I rememberone time we had two test stands running and blew up two things in one day. Itold Elon we could put another engine on there, but I was really, really frustratedand just tired and mad and was kinda short with Elon. I said, ‘We can putanother fucking thing on there, but I’ve blown up enough shit today.’ He said,‘Okay, all right, that’s fine. Just calm down. We’ll do it again tomorrow.’”Coworkers in El Segundo later reported that Musk had been near tears duringthis call after hearing the frustration and agony in Mueller’s voice.What Musk would not tolerate were excuses or the lack of a clear plan ofattack. Hollman was one of many engineers who arrived at this realization afterfacing one of Musk’s trademark grillings. “The worst call was the first one,”Hollman said. “Something had gone wrong, and Elon asked me how long itwould take to be operational again, and I didn’t have an immediate answer. Hesaid, ‘You need to. This is important to the company. Everything is riding onthis. Why don’t you have an answer?’ He kept hitting me with pointed, directquestions. I thought it was more important to let him know quickly whathappened, but I learned it was more important to have all the information.”From time to time, Musk participated in the testing process firsthand. One ofthe more memorable examples of this came as SpaceX tried to perfect a coolingchamber for its engines. The company had bought several of these chambers at$75,000 a pop and needed to put them under pressure with water to gauge theirability to handle stress. During the initial test, one of the pricey chamberscracked. Then the second one broke in the same place. Musk ordered a third test,as the engineers looked on in horror. They thought the test might be putting thechamber under undue stress and that Musk was burning through essentialequipment. When the third chamber cracked, Musk flew the hardware back toCalifornia, took it to the factory floor, and, with the help of some engineers,started to fill the chambers with an epoxy to see if it would seal them. “He’s notafraid to get his hands dirty,” Mueller said. “He’s out there with his nice Italianshoes and clothes and has epoxy all over him. They were there all night andtested it again and it broke anyway.” Musk, clothes ruined, had decided thehardware was flawed, tested his hypothesis, and moved on quickly, asking theengineers to come up with a new solution.These incidents were all part of a trying but productive process. SpaceX haddeveloped the feeling of a small, tight-knit family up against the world. In late2002, the company had an empty warehouse. One year later, the facility lookedlike a real rocket factory. Working Merlin engines were arriving back fromTexas, and being fed into an assembly line where machinists could connect themto the main body, or first stage, of the rocket. More stations were set up to linkthe first stage with the upper stage of the rocket. Cranes were placed on the floorto handle the heavy lifting of components, and blue metal transport tracks werepositioned to guide the rocket’s body through the factory from station to station.SpaceX had also started to build the fairing, or case, that protects payloads atopthe rocket during launch and then opens up like a clam in space to let out thecargo.SpaceX had picked up a customer as well. According to Musk, its first rocketwould launch in “early 2004” from Vandenberg Air Force Base, carrying asatellite called TacSat-1 for the Department of Defense. With this goal looming,twelve-hour days, six days a week were considered the norm, although manypeople worked longer than that for extended periods of time. Respites, as far asthey existed, came around 8 P.M. on some weeknights when Musk would alloweveryone to use their work computers to play first-person-shooter video gameslike Quake III Arena and Counter-Strike against each other. At the appointedhour, the sound of guns loading would cascade throughout the office as close totwenty people armed themselves for battle. Musk—playing under the handleRandom9—often won the games, talking trash and blasting away his employeeswithout mercy. “The CEO is there shooting at us with rockets and plasma guns,”said Colonno. “Worse, he’s almost alarmingly good at these games and hasinsanely fast reactions. He knew all the tricks and how to sneak up on people.”The pending launch ignited Musk’s salesman instincts. He wanted to show thepublic what his tireless workers had accomplished and drum up some excitementaround SpaceX. Musk decided to unveil a prototype of Falcon 1 to the public inDecember 2003. The company would haul the seven-story-high Falcon 1 acrossthe country on a specially built rig and leave it—and the SpaceX mobile launchsystem—outside of the Federal Aviation Administration’s headquarters inWashington, D.C. An accompanying press conference would make it clear toWashington that a modern, smarter, cheaper rocket maker had arrived.This marketing song and dance didn’t sound sensible to SpaceX’s engineers.They were working more than one hundred hours per week to make the actualrocket that SpaceX would need to be in business. Musk wanted them to do thatand build a slick-looking mock-up. Engineers were called back from Texas andassigned another ulcer-inducing deadline to craft this prop. “In my mind, it was aboondoggle,” Hollman said. “It wasn’t advancing anything. In Elon’s mind, itwould get us a lot of backing from important people in the government.”While making the prototype for the event, Hollman experienced the fullspectrum of highs and lows that came with working for Musk. The engineer hadlost his regular glasses weeks earlier when they slipped off his face and felldown a flame duct at the Texas test site. Hollman had since made do by wearingan old pair of prescription safety glasses,* but they too were ruined when hescratched the lenses while trying to duck under an engine at the SpaceX factory.Without a spare moment to visit an optometrist, Hollman started to feel hissanity fray. The long hours, the scratch, the publicity stunt—they were all toomuch.He vented about this in the factory one night, unaware that Musk stood nearbyand could hear everything. Two hours later, Mary Beth Brown appeared with anappointment card to see a Lasik eye surgery specialist. When Hollman visitedthe doctor, he discovered that Musk had already agreed to pay for the surgery.“Elon can be very demanding, but he’ll make sure the obstacles in your way areremoved,” Hollman said. Upon reflection, he also warmed to the long-termthinking behind Musk’s Washington plan. “I think he wanted to add an elementof realism to SpaceX, and if you park a rocket in someone’s front yard, it’s hardto deny it,” Hollman said.The event in Washington ended up being well received, and just a few weeksafter it took place, SpaceX made another astonishing announcement. Despite nothaving even flown a rocket yet, SpaceX revealed plans for a second rocket.Along with the Falcon 1, it would build the Falcon 5. Per the name, this rocketwould have five engines and could carry more weight—9,200 pounds—to loworbit around Earth. Crucially, the Falcon 5 could also theoretically reach theInternational Space Station for resupply missions—a capability that would openup SpaceX for some large NASA contracts. And, in a nod to Musk’s obsessionwith safety, the rocket was said to be able to complete its missions even if threeof the five engines failed, which was a level of added reliability that had notbeen seen in the market in decades.The only way to keep up with all of this work was to do what SpaceX hadpromised from the beginning: operate in the spirit of a Silicon Valley startup.Musk was always looking for brainy engineers who had not just done well atschool but had done something exceptional with their talents. When he foundsomeone good, Musk was relentless in courting him or her to come to SpaceX.Bryan Gardner, for example, first met Musk at a space rave in the hangars at theMojave airport and a short while later started talking about a job. Gardner washaving some of his academic work sponsored by Northrop Grumman. “Elonsaid, ‘We’ll buy them out,’” Gardner said. “So, I emailed him my resume at twothirty A.M., and he replied back in thirty minutes addressing everything I put inthere point by point. He said, ‘When you interview make sure you can talkconcretely about what you do rather than use buzzwords.’ It floored me that hewould take the time to do this.” After being hired, Gardner was tasked withimproving the system for testing the valves on the Merlin engine. There weredozens of valves, and it took three to five hours to manually test each one. Sixmonths later, Gardner had built an automated system for testing the valves inminutes. The testing machine tracked the valves individually, so that an engineerin Texas could request what the metrics had been on a specific part. “I had beenhanded this redheaded stepchild that no one else wanted to deal with andestablished my engineering credibility,” Gardner said.As the new hires arrived, SpaceX moved beyond its original building to fill upseveral buildings in the El Segundo complex. The engineers were runningdemanding software and rendering large graphics files and needed high-speedconnections between all of these offices. But SpaceX had neighbors who wereblocking an initiative to connect all of its buildings via fiber optic lines. Insteadof taking the time to haggle with the other companies for right of way, the ITchief Branden Spikes, who had worked with Musk at Zip2 and PayPal, came upwith a quicker, more devious solution. A friend of his worked for the phonecompany and drew a diagram that demonstrated a way to squeeze a networkingcable safely between the electricity, cable, and phone wires on a telephone pole.At 2 A.M., an off-the-books crew showed up with a cherry picker and ran fiber tothe telephone poles and then ran cables straight to the SpaceX buildings. “Wedid that over a weekend instead of taking months to get permits,” Spikes said.“There was always this feeling that we were facing a sort of insurmountablechallenge and that we had to band together to fight the good fight.” SpaceX’slandlord, Alex Lidow, chuckled when thinking back to all of the antics ofMusk’s team. “I know they did a lot of hanky stuff at night,” he said. “They weresmart, needed to get things done, and didn’t always have time to wait for thingslike city permits.”Musk never relented in asking his employees to do more and be better,whether it was at the office or during extracurricular activities. Part of Spikes’sduties included building custom gaming PCs for Musk’s home that pushed theircomputational power to the limits and needed to be cooled with water runningthrough a series of tubes inside the machines. When one of these gaming rigskept breaking, Spikes figured out that Musk’s mansion had dirty power lines andhad a second, dedicated power circuit built for the gaming room to correct theproblem. Doing this favor bought Spikes no special treatment. “SpaceX’s mailserver crashed one time, and Elon word for word said, ‘Don’t ever fucking letthat happen again,’” Spikes said. “He had a way of looking at you—a glare—and would keep looking at you until you understood him.”Musk had tried to find contractors that could keep up with SpaceX’s creativityand pace. Instead of always hitting up aerospace guys, for example, he locatedsuppliers with similar experience from different fields. Early on, SpaceX neededsomeone to build the fuel tanks, essentially the main body of the rocket, andMusk ended up in the Midwest talking to companies that had made large, metalagricultural tanks used in the dairy and food processing businesses. Thesesuppliers also struggled to keep up with SpaceX’s schedule, and Musk foundhimself flying across the country to pay visits—sometimes surprise ones—on thecontractors to check on their progress. One such inspection took place at acompany in Wisconsin called Spincraft. Musk and a couple of SpaceXemployees flew his jet across the country and arrived late at night expecting tosee a shift of workers doing extra duty to get the fuel tanks completed. WhenMusk discovered that Spincraft was well behind schedule, he turned to aSpincraft employee and informed him, “You’re fucking us up the ass, and itdoesn’t feel good.” David Schmitz was a general manager at Spincraft and saidMusk earned a reputation as a fearsome negotiator who did indeed follow up onthings personally. “If Elon was not happy, you knew it,” Schmitz said. “Thingscould get nasty.” In the months that followed that meeting, SpaceX increased itsinternal welding capabilities so that it could make the fuel tanks in El Segundoand ditch Spincraft.Another salesman flew down to SpaceX to sell the company on sometechnology infrastructure equipment. He was doing the standard relationship-building exercise practiced by salespeople for centuries. Show up. Speak for awhile. Feel each other out. Then, start doing business down the road. Musk washaving none of it. “The guy comes in, and Elon asks him why they’re meeting,”Spikes said. “He said, ‘To develop a relationship.’ Elon replied, ‘Okay. Nice tomeet you,’ which basically meant, ‘Get the fuck out of my office.’ This guy hadspent four hours traveling for what ended up as a two-minute meeting. Elon justhas no tolerance for that kind of stuff.” Musk could be equally brisk withemployees who were not hitting his standards. “He would often say, ‘The longeryou wait to fire someone the longer it has been since you should have firedthem,’” Spikes said.Most of the SpaceX employees were thrilled to be part of the company’sadventure and tried not to let Musk’s grueling demands and harsh behavior get tothem. But there were some moments where Musk went too far. The engineeringcorps flew into a collective rage every time they caught Musk in the pressclaiming to have designed the Falcon rocket more or less by himself. Musk alsohired a documentary crew to follow him around for a while. This audaciousgesture really grated on the people toiling away in the SpaceX factory. They feltlike Musk’s ego had gotten the best of him and that he was presenting SpaceX asthe conqueror of the aerospace industry when the company had yet to launchsuccessfully. Employees who made detailed cases around what they saw as flawsin the Falcon 5 design or presented practical suggestions to get the Falcon 1 outthe door more quickly were often ignored or worse. “The treatment of staff wasnot good for long stretches of this era,” said one engineer. “Many goodengineers, who everyone beside ‘management’ felt were assets to the company,were forced out or simply fired outright after being blamed for things they hadn’tdone. The kiss of death was proving Elon wrong about something.”Early 2004, when SpaceX had hoped to launch its rocket, came and went. TheMerlin engine that Mueller and his team had built appeared to be among themost efficient rocket engines ever made. It was just taking longer than Musk hadexpected to pass tests needed to clear the engine for a launch. Finally, in the fallof 2004, the engines were burning consistently and meeting all theirrequirements. This meant that Mueller and his team could breathe easy and thateveryone else at SpaceX should prepare to suffer. Mueller had spent SpaceX’sentire existence as the “critical path”—the person holding up the company fromachieving its next steps—working under Musk’s scrutiny. “With the engineready, it was time for mass panic,” Mueller said. “No one else knew what it waslike to be on critical path.”Lots of people soon found out, as major problems abounded. The avionics,which included the electronics for the navigation, communication, and overallmanagement of the rocket, turned into a nightmare. Seemingly trivial things likegetting a flash storage drive to talk to the rocket’s main computer failed forundetectable reasons. The software needed to manage the rocket also became amajor burden. “It’s like anything else where you find out that the last ten percentis where all the integration happens and things don’t play together,” Muellersaid. “This process went on for six months.” Finally, in May 2005, SpaceXtransported the rocket 180 miles north to Vandenberg Air Force Base for a testfire and completed a five-second burn on the launchpad.Launching from Vandenberg would have been very convenient for SpaceX.The site is close to Los Angeles and has several launchpads to pick from.SpaceX, though, became an unwelcome guest. The air force gave the newcomera cool welcome, and the people assigned to manage the launch sites did not goout of their way help SpaceX. Lockheed and Boeing, which fly $1 billion spysatellites for the military from Vandenberg, didn’t care for SpaceX’s presence,either—in part because SpaceX represented a threat to their business and in partbecause this startup was mucking around near their precious cargo. As SpaceXstarted to move from the testing phase to the launch, it was told to get in line.They would have to wait months to launch. “Even though they said we could fly,it was clear that we would not,” said Gwynne Shotwell.Searching for a new site, Shotwell and Hans Koenigsmann put a Mercatorprojection of the world up on the wall and looked for a name they recognizedalong the equator, where the planet spins faster and gives rockets an added boost.The first name that jumped out was Kwajalein Island—or Kwaj—the largestisland in an atoll between Guam and Hawaii in the Pacific Ocean and part of theRepublic of the Marshall Islands. This spot registered with Shotwell because theU.S. Army had used it for decades as a missile test site. Shotwell looked up thename of a colonel at the test site and sent him an e-mail, and three weeks latergot a call back with the army saying they would love to have SpaceX fly fromthe islands. In June 2005, SpaceX’s engineers began to fill containers with theirequipment to ship them to Kwaj.About one hundred islands make up the Kwajalein Atoll. Many of themstretch for just a few hundred yards and are much longer than they are wide.“From the air, the place looks like these beautiful beads on a string,” said PeteWorden, who visited the site in his capacity as a Defense Department consultant.Most of the people in the area live on an island called Ebeye, while the U.S.military has taken over Kwajalein, the southernmost island, and turned it intopart tropical paradise and part Dr. Evil’s secret lair. The United States spentyears lobbing its ICBMs from California at Kwaj and used the island to runexperiments on its space weapons during the “Star Wars” period. Laser beamswould be aimed at Kwaj from space in a bid to see if they were accurate andresponsive enough to take out an ICBM hurtling toward the islands. The militarypresence resulted in a weird array of buildings including hulking, windowlesstrapezoidal concrete structures clearly conceived by someone who deals withdeath for a living.To get to Kwaj, the SpaceX employees either flew on Musk’s jet or tookcommercial flights through Hawaii. The main accommodations were two-bedroom affairs on Kwajalein Island that looked more like dormitories than hotelrooms, with their military-issued dressers and desks. Any materials that theengineers needed had to be flown in on Musk’s plane or were more oftenbrought by boat from Hawaii or the mainland United States. Each day, theSpaceX crew gathered their gear and took a forty-five-minute boat ride toOmelek, a seven-acre, palm-tree-and vegetation-covered island that would betransformed into their launchpad. Over the course of several months, a smallteam of people cleared the brush, poured concrete to support the launchpad, andconverted a double-wide trailer into offices. The work was grueling and tookplace in soul-sapping humidity under a sun powerful enough to burn the skinthrough a T-shirt. Eventually, some of the workers preferred to spend the nighton Omelek rather than make the journey through rough waters back to the mainisland. “Some of the offices were turned into bedrooms with mattresses andcots,” Hollman said. “Then we shipped over a very nice refrigerator and a goodgrill and plumbed in a shower. We tried to make it less like camping and morelike living.”The sun rose at 7 A.M. each day, and that’s when the SpaceX team got to work.A series of meetings would take place with people listing what needed to getdone, and debating solutions to lingering problems. As the large structuresarrived, the workers placed the body of the rocket horizontally in a makeshifthangar and spent hours melding together all of its parts. “There was alwayssomething to do,” Hollman said. “If the engine wasn’t a problem, then there wasan avionics problem or a software problem.” By 7 P.M., the engineers wounddown their work. “One or two people would decide it was their night to cook,and they would make steak and potatoes and pasta,” Hollman said. “We had abunch of movies and a DVD player, and some of us did a lot of fishing off thedocks.” For many of the engineers, this was both a torturous and magicalexperience. “At Boeing you could be comfortable, but that wasn’t going tohappen at SpaceX,” said Walter Sims, a SpaceX tech expert who found time toget certified to dive while on Kwaj. “Every person on that island was a fuckingstar, and they were always holding seminars on radios or the engine. It was suchan invigorating place.”The engineers were constantly baffled by what Musk would fund and what hewouldn’t. Back at headquarters, someone would ask to buy a $200,000 machineor a pricey part that they deemed essential to Falcon 1’s success, and Muskwould deny the request. And yet he was totally comfortable paying a similaramount to put a shiny surface on the factory floor to make it look nice. OnOmelek, the workers wanted to pave a two-hundred-yard pathway between thehangar and the launchpad to make it easier to transport the rocket. Musk refused.This left the engineers moving the rocket and its wheeled support structure in thefashion of the ancient Egyptians. They laid down a series of wooden planks androlled the rocket across them, grabbing the last piece of wood from the back andrunning it forward in a continuous cycle.The whole situation was ludicrous. A startup rocket company had ended up inthe middle of nowhere trying to pull off one of the most difficult feats known toman, and, truth be told, only a handful of the SpaceX team had any idea how tomake a launch happen. Time and again, the rocket would get marched out to thelaunchpad and hoisted vertical for a couple of days, while technical and safetychecks would reveal a litany of new problems. The engineers worked on therocket for as long as they could before laying it horizontal and marching it backto the hangar to avoid damage from the salty air. Teams that had workedseparately for months back at the SpaceX factory—propulsion, avionics,software—were thrust together on the island and forced to become aninterdisciplinary whole. The sum total was an extreme learning and bondingexercise that played like a comedy of errors. “It was like Gilligan’s Island exceptwith rockets,” Hollman said.In November 2005, about six months after they had first gotten to the island,the SpaceX team felt ready to give launching a shot. Musk flew in with hisbrother, Kimbal, and joined the majority of the SpaceX team in the barracks onKwaj. On November 26, a handful of people woke up at 3 A.M. and filled therocket with liquid oxygen. They then scampered off to an island about threemiles away for protection, while the rest of the SpaceX team monitored thelaunch systems from a control room twenty-six miles away on Kwaj. Themilitary gave SpaceX a six-hour launch window. Everyone was hoping to see thefirst stage take off and reach about 6,850 miles per hour before giving way to thesecond stage, which would ignite up in the air and reach 17,000 miles per hour.But, while going through the pre-launch checks, the engineers detected a majorproblem: a valve on a liquid oxygen tank would not close, and the LOX wasboiling off into the air at 500 gallons per hour. SpaceX scrambled to fix the issuebut lost too much of its fuel to launch before the window closed.With that mission aborted, SpaceX ordered major LOX reinforcements fromHawaii and prepared for another attempt in mid-December. High winds, faultyvalves, and other errors thwarted that launch attempt. Before another attemptcould be made, SpaceX discovered on a Saturday night that the rocket’s powerdistribution systems had started malfunctioning and would need new capacitors.On Sunday morning, the rocket was lowered and split into its two stages so thata technician could slide in and remove the electrical boards. Someone found anelectronics supplier that was open on Sunday in Minnesota, and off a SpaceXemployee flew to get some fresh capacitors. By Monday he was in Californiaand testing the parts at SpaceX’s headquarters to make sure they passed variousheat and vibration checks, then on a plane again back to the islands. In undereighty hours, the electronics had been returned in working order and installed inthe rocket. The dash to the United States and back showed that SpaceX’s thirty-person team had real pluck in the face of adversity and inspired everyone on theisland. A traditional three-hundred-person-strong aerospace launch crew wouldnever have tried to fix a rocket like that on the fly. But the energy, smarts, andresourcefulness of the SpaceX team still could not overcome their inexperienceor the difficult conditions. More problems arose and blocked any thoughts of alaunch.Finally, on March 24, 2006, it was all systems go. The Falcon 1 stood on itssquare launchpad and ignited. It soared into the sky, turning the island below itinto a green spec amid a vast, blue expanse. In the control room, Musk paced ashe watched the action, wearing shorts, flip-flops, and a T-shirt. Then, abouttwenty-five seconds in, it became clear that all was not well. A fire broke outabove the Merlin engine and suddenly this machine that had been flying straightand true started to spin and then tumble uncontrollably back to Earth. The Falcon1 ended up falling directly down onto the launch site. Most of the debris wentinto a reef 250 feet from the launchpad, and the satellite cargo smashed throughSpaceX’s machine shop roof and landed more or less intact on the floor. Some ofthe engineers put on their snorkeling and scuba gear and recovered the pieces,fitting all of the rocket’s remnants into two refrigerator-sized crates. “It isperhaps worth noting that those launch companies that succeeded also took theirlumps along the way,” Musk wrote in a postmortem. “A friend of mine wrote toremind me that only 5 of the first 9 Pegasus launches succeeded; 3 of 5 forAriane; 9 of 20 for Atlas; 9 of 21 for Soyuz; and 9 of 18 for Proton. Havingexperienced firsthand how hard it is to reach orbit, I have a lot of respect forthose that persevered to produce the vehicles that are mainstays of space launchtoday.” Musk closed the letter writing, “SpaceX is in this for the long haul and,come hell or high water, we are going to make this work.”Musk and other SpaceX executives blamed the crash on an unnamedtechnician. They said this technician had done some work on the rocket one daybefore the launch and failed to properly tighten a fitting on a fuel pipe, whichcaused the fitting to crack. The fitting in question was something basic—analuminum b-nut that’s often used to connect a pair of tubes. The technician wasHollman. In the aftermath of the rocket crash, Hollman flew to Los Angeles toconfront Musk directly. He’d spent years working day and night on the Falcon 1and felt enraged that Musk had called out him and his team in public. Hollmanknew that he’d fastened the b-nut correctly and that observers from NASA hadbeen looking over his shoulder to check the work. When Hollman charged intoSpaceX’s headquarters with a head full of fury, Mary Beth Brown tried to calmhim and stop him from seeing Musk. Hollman kept going anyway, and the twoof them proceeded to have a shouting match at Musk’s cubicle.After all the debris was analyzed, it turned out that the b-nut had almostcertainly cracked due to corrosion from the months in Kwaj’s salty atmosphere.“The rocket was literally crusted with salt on one side, and you had to scrape itoff,” Mueller said. “But we had done a static fire three days earlier, andeverything was fine.” SpaceX had tried to save about fifty pounds of weight byusing aluminum components instead of stainless steel. Thompson, the formermarine, had seen the aluminum parts work just fine in helicopters that sat onaircraft carriers, and Mueller had seen aircraft resting outside of Cape Canaveralfor forty years with aluminum b-nuts in fine condition. Years later, a number ofSpaceX’s executives still agonize over the way Hollman and his team weretreated. “They were our best guys, and they kind of got blamed to get an answerout to the world,” Mueller said. “That was really bad. We found out later that itwas dumb luck.”*After the crash, there was a lot of drinking at a bar on the main island. Muskwanted to launch again within six months, but putting together a new machinewould again require an immense amount of work. SpaceX had some pieces forthe vehicle ready in El Segundo but certainly not a ready-to-fire rocket. As theydowned drinks, the engineers vowed to take a more disciplined approach withtheir next craft and to work better as a collective. Worden hoped the SpaceXengineers would raise their game as well. He’d been observing them for theDefense Department and loved the energy of the young engineers but not theirmethodology. “It was being done like a bunch of kids in Silicon Valley would dosoftware,” Worden said. “They would stay up all night and try this and try that.I’d seen hundreds of these types of operations, and it struck me that it wouldn’twork.” Leading up to the first launch, Worden tried to caution Musk, sending aletter to him and the director of DARPA, the research arm of the DefenseDepartment, that made his views clear. “Elon didn’t react well. He said, ‘Whatdo you know? You’re just an astronomer,’” Worden said. But, after the rocketblew up, Musk recommended that Worden perform an investigation for thegovernment. “I give Elon huge credit for that,” Worden said.Almost exactly a year later, SpaceX was ready to try another launch. OnMarch 15, 2007, a successful test fire took place. Then, on March 21, the Falcon1 finally behaved. From its launchpad surrounded by palm trees, the Falcon 1surged up and toward space. It flew for a couple of minutes with engineers nowand again reporting that the systems were “nominal,” or in good shape. At threeminutes into the flight, the first stage of the rocket separated and fell back toEarth, and the Kestrel engine kicked in as planned to carry the second stage intoorbit. Ecstatic cheers went out in the control room. Next, at the four-minutemark, the fairing atop the rocket separated as planned. “It was doing exactlywhat it was supposed to do,” said Mueller. “I was sitting next to Elon and lookedat him and said, ‘We’ve made it.’ We’re hugging and believe it’s going to make itto orbit. Then, it starts to wiggle.” For more than five glorious minutes, theSpaceX engineers got to feel like they had done everything right. A camera onboard the Falcon 1 pointed down and showed Earth getting smaller and smalleras the rocket made its way methodically into space. But then that wiggle thatMueller noticed turned into flailing, and the machine swooned, started to breakapart, and then blew up. This time the SpaceX engineers were quick to figure outwhat went wrong. As the propellant was consumed, what was left started tomove around the tank and slosh against the sides, much like wine spinningaround a glass. The sloshing propellant triggered the wobbling, and at one pointit sloshed enough to leave an opening to the engine exposed. When the enginesucked in a big breath of air, it flamed out.The failure was another crushing blow to SpaceX’s engineers. Some of themhad spent close to two years shuffling back and forth between California,Hawaii, and Kwaj. By the time SpaceX could attempt another launch, it wouldbe about four years after Musk’s original target, and the company had beenchewing through his Internet fortune at a worrying rate. Musk had vowedpublicly that he would see this thing through to the end, but people inside andoutside the company were doing back-of-the-envelope math and could tell thatSpaceX likely could only afford one more attempt—maybe two. To the extentthat the financial situation unnerved Musk, he rarely if ever let it show toemployees. “Elon did a great job of not burdening people with those worries,”said Spikes. “He always communicated the importance of being lean and ofsuccess, but it was never ‘if we fail, we’re done for.’ He was very optimistic.”The failures seemed to do little to curtail Musk’s vision for the future or raisedoubts about his capabilities. In the midst of the chaos, he took a tour of theislands with Worden. Musk began thinking aloud about how the islands could beunified into one landmass. He suggested that walls could be built through thesmall channels between the islands, and the water could be pumped out in thespirit of the manmade systems in the Netherlands. Worden, also known for hisout-there ideas, was attracted to Musk’s bravado. “That he is thinking of thisstuff is kind of cool,” Worden said. “From that point on, he and I discussedsettling Mars. It really impressed me that this is a guy that thinks big.”PHOTOGRAPHIC INSERTThe Haldeman children had lots of downtime in the African bush while on wild adventures with theirparents. ©Maye MuskAs a toddler, Musk would often drift off into his own world and ignore those around him. Doctors theorizedthat he might be hard of hearing and had his adenoid glands removed. ©Maye MuskMusk was a loner throughout grade school and suffered for years at the hands of bullies. ©Maye MuskMusk’s original videogame code for Blastar, the game he wrote as a twelve-year-old and published in alocal magazine. ©Maye Musk(From left to right:) Elon, Kimbal, and Tosca at their house in South Africa. All three children now live inthe United States. ©Maye MuskMusk ran away on his own to Canada and ended up at Queen’s University in Ontario, living in a dormitoryfor foreign students. ©Maye MuskJ. B. Straubel puts together one of Tesla Motors’ early battery packs at his house. Photograph courtesy ofTesla MotorsA handful of engineers built the first Tesla Roadster in a Silicon Valley warehouse that they had turned intoa garage workshop and research lab. Photograph courtesy of Tesla MotorsMusk and Martin Eberhard prepare to take the early Roadster for a test-drive. The relationship between thetwo men would fall apart in the years to come. Photograph courtesy of Tesla MotorsSpaceX built its rocket factory from the ground up in a Los Angeles warehouse to give birth to the Falcon 1rocket. Photograph courtesy of SpaceXTom Mueller (far right, gray shirt) led the design, testing, and construction of SpaceX’s engines.Photograph courtesy of SpaceXSpaceX had to conduct its first flights from Kwajalein Atoll (or Kwaj) in the Marshall Islands. The islandexperience was a difficult but ultimately fruitful adventure for the engineers. Photograph courtesy ofSpaceXSpaceX built a mobile mission-control trailer, and Musk and Mueller used it to monitor the later launchesfrom Kwaj. Photograph courtesy of SpaceXMusk hired Franz von Holzhausen in 2008 to design the Tesla Model S. The two men speak almost everyday, as can be seen in this meeting in Musk’s SpaceX cubicle. ©Steve JurvetsonSpaceX’s ambitions grew over the years to include the construction of the Dragon capsule, which could takepeople to the International Space Station and beyond. ©Steve JurvetsonMusk has long had a thing for robots and is always evaluating new machines for both the SpaceX and Teslafactories. ©Steve JurvetsonWhen SpaceX moved to a new factory in Hawthorne, California, it was able to scale out its assembly lineand work on multiple rockets and capsules at the same time. ©Steve JurvetsonSpaceX tests new engines and crafts at a site in McGregor, Texas. Here the company is testing a reusablerocket, code-named “Grasshopper,” that can land itself. Photograph courtesy of SpaceXMusk has a tradition of visiting Dairy Queen ahead of test flights in Texas, in this case with SpaceXinvestor and board member Steve Jurvetson (left) and fellow investor Randy Glein (right). ©SteveJurvetsonWith a Dragon capsule hanging overhead, SpaceX employees peer into the company’s mission controlcenter at the Hawthorne factory. Photograph courtesy of SpaceXGwynne Shotwell is Musk’s right-hand woman at SpaceX and oversees the day-to-day operations of thecompany, including monitoring a launch from mission control. Photograph courtesy of SpaceXTesla took over the New United Motor Manufacturing Inc. (or NUMMI) car factory in Fremont, California,which is where workers produce the Model S sedan. Photograph courtesy of Tesla MotorsTesla began shipping the Model S sedan in 2012. The car ended up winning most of the automotiveindustry’s major awards. Photograph courtesy of Tesla MotorsThe Tesla Model S sedan with its electric motor (near the rear) and battery pack (bottom) exposed.Photograph courtesy of Tesla MotorsTesla’s next car will be the Model X SUV with its signature “falcon-wing doors.” Photograph courtesy ofTesla MotorsIn 2013, Musk visited Cuba with Sean Penn (driving) and the investor Shervin Pishevar (back seat next toMusk). They met with students and members of the Castro family, and tried to free an American prisoner.©Shervin PishevarMusk unveiled the Hyperloop in 2013. He proposed it as a new mode of transportation, and multiple groupshave now set to work on building it. Photograph courtesy of SpaceXIn 2014, Musk unveiled a radical new take on the space capsule—the Dragon V2. It comes with a drop-down touchscreen display and slick interior. Photograph courtesy of SpaceXThe Dragon V2 will be able to return to Earth and land with pinpoint accuracy. Photograph courtesy ofSpaceXMusk is a nonstop traveler. Here’s a look at one year in his life via records obtained through a Freedom ofInformation Act request.Musk married, divorced, remarried, and then divorced the actress Talulah Riley. Photograph courtesy ofTalulah RileyMusk and Riley relax at home in Los Angeles. Musk shares the home with his five young boys. Photographcourtesy of Talulah Riley