3CANADAMUSK’S GREAT ESCAPE TO CANADA WAS NOT WELL THOUGHTOUT. He knew of a great-uncle in Montreal, hopped on a flight and hoped forthe best. Upon landing in June 1988, Musk found a pay phone and tried to usedirectory assistance to find his uncle. When that didn’t work, he called hismother collect. She had bad news. Maye had sent a letter to the uncle beforeMusk left and received a reply while her son was in transit. The uncle had goneto Minnesota, meaning Musk had nowhere to stay. Bags in hand, Musk headedfor a youth hostel.After spending a few days in Montreal exploring the city, Musk tried to comeup with a long-term plan. Maye had family scattered all across Canada, andMusk began reaching out to them. He bought a countrywide bus ticket that lethim hop on and off as he pleased for one hundred dollars, and opted to head toSaskatchewan, the former home of his grandfather. After a 1,900-mile bus ride,he ended up in Swift Current, a town of fifteen thousand people. Musk called asecond cousin out of the blue from the bus station and hitched a ride to hishouse.Musk spent the next year working a series of odd jobs around Canada. Hetended vegetables and shoveled out grain bins at a cousin’s farm located in thetiny town of Waldeck. Musk celebrated his eighteenth birthday there, sharing acake with the family he’d just met and a few strangers from the neighborhood.After that, he learned to cut logs with a chain saw in Vancouver, BritishColumbia. The hardest job Musk took came after a visit to the unemploymentoffice. He inquired about the job with the best wage, which turned out to be a gigcleaning the boiler room of a lumber mill for eighteen dollars an hour. “You haveto put on this hazmat suit and then shimmy through this little tunnel that you canbarely fit in,” Musk said. “Then, you have a shovel and you take the sand andgoop and other residue, which is still steaming hot, and you have to shovel itthrough the same hole you came through. There is no escape. Someone else onthe other side has to shovel it into a wheelbarrow. If you stay in there for morethan thirty minutes, you get too hot and die.” Thirty people started out at thebeginning of the week. By the third day, five people were left. At the end of theweek, it was just Musk and two other men doing the work.As Musk made his way around Canada, his brother, sister, and mother werefiguring out how to get there as well.* When Kimbal and Elon eventuallyreunited in Canada, their headstrong, playful natures bloomed. Elon ended upenrolling at Queen’s University in Kingston, Ontario, in 1989. (He pickedQueen’s over the University of Waterloo because he felt there were more good-looking women at Queen’s.)2 Outside of his studies, Elon would read thenewspaper alongside Kimbal, and the two of them would identify interestingpeople they would like to meet. They then took turns cold-calling these people toask if they were available to have lunch. Among the harassed was the head ofmarketing for the Toronto Blue Jays baseball team, a business writer for theGlobe and Mail, and a top executive at the Bank of Nova Scotia, PeterNicholson. Nicholson remembered the boys’ call well. “I was not in the habit ofgetting out-of-the-blue requests,” he said. “I was perfectly prepared to havelunch with a couple of kids that had that kind of gumption.” It took six months toget on Nicholson’s calendar, but, sure enough, the Musk brothers made a three-hour train ride and showed up on time.Nicholson’s first exposure to the Musk brothers left him with an impressionmany would share. Both presented themselves well and were polite. Elon,though, clearly came off as the geekier, more awkward counterpoint to thecharismatic, personable Kimbal. “I became more impressed and fascinated as Italked to them,” Nicholson said. “They were so determined.” Nicholson endedup offering Elon a summer internship at the bank and became his trusted advisor.Not long after their initial meeting, Elon invited Peter Nicholson’s daughterChristie to his birthday party. Christie showed up at Maye’s Toronto apartmentwith a jar of homemade lemon curd in hand and was greeted by Elon and aboutfifteen other people. Elon had never met Christie before, but he went right up toher and led her to a couch. “Then, I believe the second sentence out of his mouthwas ‘I think a lot about electric cars,’” Christie said. “And then he turned to meand said, ‘Do you think about electric cars?’” The conversation left Christie,who is now a science writer, with the distinct impression that Musk washandsome, affable, and a tremendous nerd. “For whatever reason, I was so struckby that moment on the sofa,” she said. “You could tell that this person was verydifferent. He captivated me in that way.”With her angular features and blond hair, Christie fit Musk’s type, and the twostayed in touch during Musk’s time in Canada. They never really dated, butChristie found Musk interesting enough to have lengthy conversations with himon the phone. “One night he told me, ‘If there was a way that I could not eat, so Icould work more, I would not eat. I wish there was a way to get nutrientswithout sitting down for a meal.’ The enormity of his work ethic at that age andhis intensity jumped out. It seemed like one of the more unusual things I hadever heard.”A deeper relationship during this stint in Canada arose between Musk andJustine Wilson, a fellow student at Queen’s. Leggy with long, brown hair,Wilson radiated romance and sexual energy. Justine had already fallen in lovewith an older man and then ditched him to go to college. Her next conquest wasmeant to wear a leather jacket and be a damaged, James Dean sort. As fortunewould have it, however, the clean-cut, posh-sounding Musk spotted Wilson oncampus and went right to work trying to date her. “She looked pretty great,”Musk said. “She was also smart and this intellectual with sort of an edge. Shehad a black belt in tae kwon do and was semi-bohemian and, you know, like thehot chick on campus.” He made his first move just outside of her dorm, where hepretended to have bumped into her by accident and then reminded her that theyhad met previously at a party. Justine, only one week into school, agreed toMusk’s proposal of an ice cream date. When he arrived to pick up Wilson, Muskfound a note on the dorm room door, notifying him that he’d been stood up. “Itsaid that she had to go study for an exam and couldn’t make it and that she wassorry,” Musk said. Musk then hunted down Justine’s best friend and did someresearch, asking where Justine usually studied and what her favorite flavor of icecream was. Later, as Justine hid in the student center studying Spanish, Muskappeared behind her with a couple of melting chocolate chip ice cream cones inhand.Wilson had dreamed of having a torrid romance with a writer. “I wanted to beSylvia and Ted,” she said. What she fell for instead was a relentless, ambitiousgeek. The pair attended the same abnormal-psychology class and compared theirgrades following an exam. Justine notched a 97, Musk a 98. “He went back tothe professor, and talked his way into the two points he lost and got a hundred,”Justine said. “It felt like we were always competing.” Musk had a romantic sideas well. One time he sent Wilson a dozen roses, each with its own note, and healso gifted Wilson a copy of The Prophet filled with handwritten romanticmusings. “He can sweep you off your feet,” Justine said.During their university years, the two youngsters were off and on, with Muskhaving to work hard to keep the relationship going. “She was hip and dated thecoolest guys and wasn’t interested in Elon at all,” Maye said. “So that was hardon him.” Musk pursued a couple of other girls, but kept returning to Justine. Anytime she acted cool toward him, Musk responded with his usual show of force.“He would call very insistently,” she said. “You always knew it was Elonbecause the phone would never stop ringing. The man does not take no for ananswer. You can’t blow him off. I do think of him as the Terminator. He locks hisgaze on to something and says, ‘It shall be mine.’ Bit by bit, he won me over.”College suited Musk. He worked on being less of a know-it-all, while alsofinding a group of people who respected his intellectual abilities. The universitystudents were less inclined to laugh off or deride his opinionated takes on energy,space, and whatever else was captivating him at the moment. Musk had foundpeople who responded to his ambition rather than mocking it, and he fed on thisenvironment.Navaid Farooq, a Canadian who grew up in Geneva, ended up in Musk’sfreshman-year dormitory in the fall of 1990. Both men were placed in theinternational section where a Canadian student would get paired with a studentfrom overseas. Musk sort of broke the system, since he technically counted as aCanadian but knew almost nothing about his surroundings. “I had a roommatefrom Hong Kong, and he was a really nice guy,” Musk said. “He religiouslyattended every lecture, which was helpful, since I went to the least number ofclasses possible.” For a time, Musk sold computer parts and full PCs in the dormto make some extra cash. “I could build something to suit their needs like atricked-out gaming machine or a simple word processor that cost less than whatthey could get in a store,” Musk said. “Or if their computer didn’t boot properlyor had a virus, I’d fix it. I could pretty much solve any problem.” Farooq andMusk bonded over their backgrounds living abroad and a shared interest instrategy board games. “I don’t think he makes friends easily, but he is very loyalto those he has,” Farooq said. When the video game Civilization was released,the college chums spent hours building their empire, much to the dismay ofFarooq’s girlfriend, who was forgotten in another room. “Elon could lose himselffor hours on end,” Farooq said. The students also relished their loner lifestyles.“We are the kinds of people that can be by ourselves at a party and not feelawkward,” Farooq said. “We can think to ourselves and not feel socially weirdabout it.”Musk was more ambitious in college than he’d been in high school. Hestudied business, competed in public speaking contests, and began to display thebrand of intensity and competitiveness that marks his behavior today. After oneeconomics exam, Musk, Farooq, and some other students in class came back tothe dorms and began comparing notes to try to ascertain how well they did onthe test. It soon became clear that Musk had a firmer grasp on the material thananyone else. “This was a group of fairly high achievers, and Elon stood wayoutside of the bell curve,” Farooq said. Musk’s intensity has continued to be aconstant in their long relationship. “When Elon gets into something, he developsjust this different level of interest in it than other people. That is whatdifferentiates Elon from the rest of humanity.”In 1992, having spent two years at Queen’s, Musk transferred to theUniversity of Pennsylvania on a scholarship. Musk saw the Ivy League school aspossibly opening some additional doors and went off in pursuit of dual degrees—first an economics degree from the Wharton School and then a bachelor’sdegree in physics. Justine stayed at Queen’s, pursuing her dream of becoming awriter, and maintained a long-distance relationship with Musk. Now and again,she would visit him, and the two would sometimes head off to New York for aromantic weekend.Musk blossomed even more at Penn, and really started to feel comfortablewhile hanging out with his fellow physics students. “At Penn, he met people thatthought like him,” Maye said. “There were some nerds there. He so enjoyedthem. I remember going for lunch with them, and they were talking physicsthings. They were saying, ‘A plus B equals pi squared’ or whatever. They wouldlaugh out loud. It was cool to see him so happy.” Once again, however, Musk didnot make many friends among the broader school body. It’s difficult to findformer students who remember him being there at all. But he did make one veryclose friend named Adeo Ressi, who would go on to be a Silicon Valleyentrepreneur in his own right and is to this day as tight with Elon as anyone.Ressi is a lanky guy well over six feet tall and possesses an eccentric air. Hewas the artistic, colorful foil to the studious, more buttoned-up Musk. Both ofthe young men were transfer students and ended up being placed in the funkyfreshman dorm. The lackluster social scene did not live up to Ressi’sexpectations, and he talked Musk into renting a large house off campus. Theygot the ten-bedroom home relatively cheap, since it was a frat house that hadgone unrented. During the week, Musk and Ressi would study, but as theweekend approached, Ressi, in particular, would transform the house into anightclub. He covered the windows with trash bags to make it pitch black insideand decorated the walls with bright paints and whatever objects he could find. “Itwas a full-out, unlicensed speakeasy,” Ressi said. “We would have as many asfive hundred people. We would charge five dollars, and it would be pretty muchall you could drink—beer and Jell-O shots and other things.”Come Friday night, the ground around the house would shake from theintensity of the bass being pumped out by Ressi’s speakers. Maye visited one ofthe parties and discovered that Ressi had hammered objects into the walls andlacquered them with glow-in-the-dark paint. She ended up working the door asthe coat check/money taker and grabbed a pair of scissors for protection as thecash piled up in a shoe box.A second house had fourteen rooms. Musk, Ressi, and one other person livedthere. They fashioned tables by laying plywood on top of used kegs and came upwith other makeshift furniture ideas. Musk returned home one day to find thatRessi had nailed his desk to the wall and then painted it in Day-Glo colors. Muskretaliated by pulling his desk down, painting it black, and studying. “I’m like,‘Dude, that’s installation art in our party house,’” said Ressi. Remind Musk ofthis incident and he’ll respond matter-of-factly, “It was a desk.”Musk will have the occasional vodka and Diet Coke, but he’s not a big drinkerand does not really care for the taste of alcohol. “Somebody had to stay soberduring these parties,” Musk said. “I was paying my own way through collegeand could make an entire month’s rent in one night. Adeo was in charge of doingcool shit around the house, and I would run the party.” As Ressi put it, “Elonwas the most straight-laced dude you have ever met. He never drank. He neverdid anything. Zero. Literally nothing.” The only time Ressi had to step in andmoderate Musk’s behavior came during video game binges that could go on fordays.Musk’s longtime interest in solar power and in finding other new ways toharness energy expanded at Penn. In December 1994, he had to come up with abusiness plan for one of his classes and ended up writing a paper titled “TheImportance of Being Solar.” The document started with a bit of Musk’s wrysense of humor. At the top of the page, he wrote: “The sun will come outtomorrow. . . .”—Little Orphan Annie on the subject of renewable energy. Thepaper went on to predict a rise in solar power technology based on materialsimprovements and the construction of large-scale solar plants. Musk delveddeeply into how solar cells work and the various compounds that can make themmore efficient. He concluded the paper with a drawing of the “power station ofthe future.” It depicted a pair of giant solar arrays in space—each four kilometersin width—sending their juice down to Earth via microwave beams to a receivingantenna with a seven-kilometer diameter. Musk received a 98 on what hisprofessor deemed a “very interesting and well written paper.”A second paper talked about taking research documents and books andelectronically scanning them, performing optical character recognition, andputting all of the information in a single database—much like a mix betweentoday’s Google Books and Google Scholar. And a third paper dwelled on anotherof Musk’s favorite topics—ultracapacitors. In the forty-four-page document,Musk is plainly jubilant over the idea of a new form of energy storage that wouldsuit his future pursuits with cars, planes, and rockets. Pointing to the latestresearch coming out of a lab in Silicon Valley, he wrote: “The end resultrepresents the first new means of storing significant amounts of electrical energysince the development of the battery and fuel cell. Furthermore, because theUltracapacitor retains the basic properties of a capacitor, it can deliver its energyover one hundred times faster than a battery of equivalent weight, and berecharged just as quickly.” Musk received a 97 for this effort and praise for “avery thorough analysis” with “excellent financials!”The remarks from the professor were spot-on. Musk’s clear, concise writing isthe work of a logician, moving from one point to the next with precision. Whattruly stood out, though, was Musk’s ability to master difficult physics conceptsin the midst of actual business plans. Even then, he showed an unusual knack forbeing able to perceive a path from a scientific advance to a for-profit enterprise.As Musk began to think more seriously about what he would do after college,he briefly considered getting into the videogame business. He’d been obsessedwith video games since his childhood and had held a gaming internship. But hecame to see them as not quite grand enough a pursuit. “I really like computergames, but then if I made really great computer games, how much effect wouldthat have on the world,” he said. “It wouldn’t have a big effect. Even though Ihave an intrinsic love of video games, I couldn’t bring myself to do that as acareer.”In interviews, Musk often makes sure that people know he had some truly bigideas on his mind during this period of his life. As he tells it, he would daydreamat Queen’s and Penn and usually end up with the same conclusion: he viewed theInternet, renewable energy, and space as the three areas that would undergosignificant change in the years to come and as the markets where he could makea big impact. He vowed to pursue projects in all three. “I told all my ex-girlfriends and my ex-wife about these ideas,” he said. “It probably sounded likesuper-crazy talk.”Musk’s insistence on explaining the early origins of his passion for electriccars, solar energy, and rockets can come off as insecure. It feels as if Musk istrying to shape his life story in a forced way. But for Musk, the distinctionbetween stumbling into something and having intent is important. Musk has longwanted the world to know that he’s different from the run-of-the-millentrepreneur in Silicon Valley. He wasn’t just sniffing out trends, and he wasn’tconsumed by the idea of getting rich. He’s been in pursuit of a master plan allalong. “I really was thinking about this stuff in college,” he said. “It is not someinvented story after the fact. I don’t want to seem like a Johnny-come-lately orthat I’m chasing a fad or just being opportunistic. I’m not an investor. I like tomake technologies real that I think are important for the future and useful insome sort of way.”