1ELON’S WORLDDO YOU THINK I’M INSANE?”This question came from Elon Musk near the very end of a long dinner weshared at a high-end seafood restaurant in Silicon Valley. I’d gotten to therestaurant first and settled down with a gin and tonic, knowing Musk would—asever—be late. After about fifteen minutes, Musk showed up wearing leathershoes, designer jeans, and a plaid dress shirt. Musk stands six foot one but askanyone who knows him and they’ll confirm that he seems much bigger than that.He’s absurdly broad-shouldered, sturdy, and thick. You’d figure he would usethis frame to his advantage and perform an alpha-male strut when entering aroom. Instead, he tends to be almost sheepish. It’s head tilted slightly downwhile walking, a quick handshake hello after reaching the table, and then butt inseat. From there, Musk needs a few minutes before he warms up and looks atease.Musk asked me to dinner for a negotiation of sorts. Eighteen months earlier,I’d informed him of my plans to write a book about him, and he’d informed meof his plans not to cooperate. His rejection stung but thrust me into doggedreporter mode. If I had to do this book without him, so be it. Plenty of peoplehad left Musk’s companies, Tesla Motors and SpaceX, and would talk, and Ialready knew a lot of his friends. The interviews followed one after another,month after month, and two hundred or so people into the process, I heard fromMusk once again. He called me at home and declared that things could go one oftwo ways: he could make my life very difficult or he could help with the projectafter all. He’d be willing to cooperate if he could read the book before it went topublication, and could add footnotes throughout it. He would not meddle withmy text, but he wanted the chance to set the record straight in spots that hedeemed factually inaccurate. I understood where this was coming from. Muskwanted a measure of control over his life’s story. He’s also wired like a scientistand suffers mental anguish at the sight of a factual error. A mistake on a printedpage would gnaw at his soul—forever. While I could understand his perspective,I could not let him read the book, for professional, personal, and practicalreasons. Musk has his version of the truth, and it’s not always the version of thetruth that the rest of the world shares. He’s prone to verbose answers to even thesimplest of questions as well, and the thought of thirty-page footnotes seemed alltoo real. Still, we agreed to have dinner, chat all this out, and see where it left us.Our conversation began with a discussion of public-relations people. Muskburns through PR staffers notoriously fast, and Tesla was in the process ofhunting for a new communications chief. “Who is the best PR person in theworld?” he asked in a very Muskian fashion. Then we talked about mutualacquaintances, Howard Hughes, and the Tesla factory. When the waiter stoppedby to take our order, Musk asked for suggestions that would work with his low-carb diet. He settled on chunks of fried lobster soaked in black squid ink. Thenegotiation hadn’t begun, and Musk was already dishing. He opened up aboutthe major fear keeping him up at night: namely that Google’s cofounder andCEO Larry Page might well have been building a fleet of artificial-intelligence-enhanced robots capable of destroying mankind. “I’m really worried about this,”Musk said. It didn’t make Musk feel any better that he and Page were very closefriends and that he felt Page was fundamentally a well-intentioned person andnot Dr. Evil. In fact, that was sort of the problem. Page’s nice-guy nature left himassuming that the machines would forever do our bidding. “I’m not asoptimistic,” Musk said. “He could produce something evil by accident.” As thefood arrived, Musk consumed it. That is, he didn’t eat it as much as he made itdisappear rapidly with a few gargantuan bites. Desperate to keep Musk happyand chatting, I handed him a big chunk of steak from my plate. The plan worked. . . for all of ninety seconds. Meat. Hunk. Gone.It took awhile to get Musk off the artificial intelligence doom-and-gloom talkand to the subject at hand. Then, as we drifted toward the book, Musk started tofeel me out, probing exactly why it was that I wanted to write about him andcalculating my intentions. When the moment presented itself, I moved in andseized the conversation. Some adrenaline released and mixed with the gin, and Ilaunched into what was meant to be a forty-five-minute sermon about all thereasons Musk should let me burrow deep into his life and do so while gettingexactly none of the controls he wanted in return. The speech revolved around theinherent limitations of footnotes, Musk coming off like a control freak and myjournalistic integrity being compromised. To my great surprise, Musk cut me offafter a couple of minutes and simply said, “Okay.” One thing that Musk holds inthe highest regard is resolve, and he respects people who continue on after beingtold no. Dozens of other journalists had asked him to help with a book before,but I’d been the only annoying asshole who continued on after Musk’s initialrejection, and he seemed to like that.The dinner wound down with pleasant conversation and Musk laying waste tothe low-carb diet. A waiter showed up with a giant yellow cotton candy desertsculpture, and Musk dug into it, ripping off handfuls of the sugary fluff. It wassettled. Musk granted me access to the executives at his companies, his friends,and his family. He would meet me for dinner once a month for as long as it took.For the first time, Musk would let a reporter see the inner workings of his world.Two and a half hours after we started, Musk put his hands on the table, made amove to get up, and then paused, locked eyes with me, and busted out thatincredible question: “Do you think I’m insane?” The oddity of the moment leftme speechless for a beat, while my every synapse fired trying to figure out if thiswas some sort of riddle, and, if so, how it should be answered artfully. It wasonly after I’d spent lots of time with Musk that I realized the question was morefor him than me. Nothing I said would have mattered. Musk was stopping onelast time and wondering aloud if I could be trusted and then looking into myeyes to make his judgment. A split second later, we shook hands and Musk droveoff in a red Tesla Model S sedan.ANY STUDY OF ELON MUSK must begin at the headquarters of SpaceX, inHawthorne, California—a suburb of Los Angeles located a few miles from LosAngeles International Airport. It’s there that visitors will find two giant postersof Mars hanging side by side on the wall leading up to Musk’s cubicle. Theposter to the left depicts Mars as it is today—a cold, barren red orb. The posteron the right shows a Mars with a humongous green landmass surrounded byoceans. The planet has been heated up and transformed to suit humans. Muskfully intends to try and make this happen. Turning humans into space colonizersis his stated life’s purpose. “I would like to die thinking that humanity has abright future,” he said. “If we can solve sustainable energy and be well on ourway to becoming a multiplanetary species with a self-sustaining civilization onanother planet—to cope with a worst-case scenario happening and extinguishinghuman consciousness—then,” and here he paused for a moment, “I think thatwould be really good.”If some of the things that Musk says and does sound absurd, that’s because onone level they very much are. On this occasion, for example, Musk’s assistanthad just handed him some cookies-and-cream ice cream with sprinkles on top,and he then talked earnestly about saving humanity while a blotch of the desserthung from his lower lip.Musk’s ready willingness to tackle impossible things has turned him into adeity in Silicon Valley, where fellow CEOs like Page speak of him in reverentialawe, and budding entrepreneurs strive “to be like Elon” just as they had beenstriving in years past to mimic Steve Jobs. Silicon Valley, though, operateswithin a warped version of reality, and outside the confines of its shared fantasy,Musk often comes off as a much more polarizing figure. He’s the guy with theelectric cars, solar panels, and rockets peddling false hope. Forget Steve Jobs.Musk is a sci-fi version of P. T. Barnum who has gotten extraordinarily rich bypreying on people’s fear and self-hatred. Buy a Tesla. Forget about the messyou’ve made of the planet for a while.I’d long been a subscriber to this latter camp. Musk had struck me as a well-intentioned dreamer—a card-carrying member of Silicon Valley’s techno-utopian club. This group tends to be a mix of Ayn Rand devotees and engineerabsolutists who see their hyperlogical worldviews as the Answer for everyone. Ifwe’d just get out of their way, they’d fix all our problems. One day, soonenough, we’ll be able to download our brains to a computer, relax, and let theiralgorithms take care of everything. Much of their ambition proves inspiring andtheir works helpful. But the techno-utopians do get tiresome with their platitudesand their ability to prattle on for hours without saying much of substance. Moredisconcerting is their underlying message that humans are flawed and ourhumanity is an annoying burden that needs to be dealt with in due course. WhenI’d caught Musk at Silicon Valley events, his highfalutin talk often soundedstraight out of the techno-utopian playbook. And, most annoyingly, his world-saving companies didn’t even seem to be doing all that well.Yet, in the early part of 2012, the cynics like me had to take notice of whatMusk was actually accomplishing. His once-beleaguered companies weresucceeding at unprecedented things. SpaceX flew a supply capsule to theInternational Space Station and brought it safely back to Earth. Tesla Motorsdelivered the Model S, a beautiful, all-electric sedan that took the automotiveindustry’s breath away and slapped Detroit sober. These two feats elevated Muskto the rarest heights among business titans. Only Steve Jobs could claim similarachievements in two such different industries, sometimes putting out a newApple product and a blockbuster Pixar movie in the same year. And yet, Muskwas not done. He was also the chairman and largest shareholder of SolarCity, abooming solar energy company poised to file for an initial public offering. Muskhad somehow delivered the biggest advances the space, automotive, and energyindustries had seen in decades in what felt like one fell swoop.It was in 2012 that I decided to see what Musk was like firsthand and to writea cover story about him for Bloomberg Businessweek. At this point in Musk’slife, everything ran through his assistant/loyal appendage Mary Beth Brown. Sheinvited me to visit what I’ve come to refer to as Musk Land.Anyone arriving at Musk Land for the first time will have the same head-scratching experience. You’re told to park at One Rocket Road in Hawthorne,where SpaceX has its HQ. It seems impossible that anything good could callHawthorne home. It’s a bleak part of Los Angeles County in which groupings ofrundown houses, rundown shops, and rundown eateries surround huge, industrialcomplexes that appear to have been built during some kind of architecturalBoring Rectangle movement. Did Elon Musk really stick his company in themiddle of this dreck? Then, okay, things start to make more sense when you seeone 550,000-square-foot rectangle painted an ostentatious hue of “Unity ofBody, Soul, and Mind” white. This is the main SpaceX building.It was only after going through the front doors of SpaceX that the grandeur ofwhat this man had done became apparent. Musk had built an honest-to-Godrocket factory in the middle of Los Angeles. And this factory was not makingone rocket at a time. No. It was making many rockets—from scratch. Thefactory was a giant, shared work area. Near the back were massive delivery baysthat allowed for the arrival of hunks of metal, which were transported to two-story-high welding machines. Over to one side were technicians in white coatsmaking motherboards, radios, and other electronics. Other people were in aspecial, airtight glass chamber, building the capsules that rockets would take tothe Space Station. Tattooed men in bandanas were blasting Van Halen andthreading wires around rocket engines. There were completed bodies of rocketslined up one after the other ready to be placed on trucks. Still more rockets, inanother part of the building, awaited coats of white paint. It was difficult to takein the entire factory at once. There were hundreds of bodies in constant motionwhirring around a variety of bizarre machines.This is just building number one of Musk Land. SpaceX had acquired severalbuildings that used to be part of a Boeing factory, which made the fuselages for747s. One of these buildings has a curved roof and looks like an airplane hangar.It serves as the research, development, and design studio for Tesla. This is wherethe company came up with the look for the Model S sedan and its follow-on, theModel X SUV. In the parking lot outside the studio, Tesla has built one of itsrecharging stations where Los Angeles drivers can top up with electricity forfree. The charging center is easy enough to spot because Musk has installed awhite and red obelisk branded with the Tesla logo that sits in the middle of aninfinity pool.It was in my first interview with Musk, which took place at the design studio,that I began to get a sense of how he talked and operated. He’s a confident guy,but does not always do a good job of displaying this. On initial encounter, Muskcan come off as shy and borderline awkward. His South African accent remainspresent but fading, and the charm of it is not enough to offset the halting natureof Musk’s speech pattern. Like many an engineer or physicist, Musk will pausewhile fishing around for exact phrasing, and he’ll often go rumbling down anesoteric, scientific rabbit hole without providing any helping hands or simplifiedexplanations along the way. Musk expects you to keep up. None of this is off-putting. Musk, in fact, will toss out plenty of jokes and can be downrightcharming. It’s just that there’s a sense of purpose and pressure hanging over anyconversation with the man. Musk doesn’t really shoot the shit. (It would end uptaking about thirty hours of interviews for Musk to really loosen up and let meinto a different, deeper level of his psyche and personality.)Most high-profile CEOs have handlers all around them. Musk mostly movesabout Musk Land on his own. This is not the guy who slinks into the restaurant.It’s the guy who owns the joint and strides about with authority. Musk and Italked, as he made his way around the design studio’s main floor, inspectingprototype parts and vehicles. At each station, employees rushed up to Musk anddisgorged information. He listened intently, processed it, and nodded whensatisfied. The people moved away and Musk moved to the next informationdump. At one point, Tesla’s design chief, Franz von Holzhausen, wanted Musk’stake on some new tires and rims that had come in for the Model S and on theseating arrangements for the Model X. They spoke, and then they went into aback room where executives from a seller of high-end graphics software hadprepared a presentation for Musk. They wanted to show off new 3-D renderingtechnology that would allow Tesla to tweak the finish of a virtual Model S andsee in great detail how things like shadows and streetlights played off the car’sbody. Tesla’s engineers really wanted the computing systems and needed Musk’ssign-off. The men did their best to sell Musk on the idea while the sound of drillsand giant industrial fans drowned out their shtick. Musk, wearing leather shoes,designer jeans, and a black T-shirt, which is essentially his work uniform, had todon 3-D goggles for the demonstration and seemed unmoved. He told them he’dthink about it and then walked toward the source of the loudest noise—aworkshop deep in the design studio where Tesla engineers were building thescaffolding for the thirty-foot decorative towers that go outside the chargingstations. “That thing looks like it could survive a Category Five hurricane,”Musk said. “Let’s thin it up a bit.” Musk and I eventually hop into his car—ablack Model S—and zip back to the main SpaceX building. “I think there areprobably too many smart people pursuing Internet stuff, finance, and law,” Musksaid on the way. “That is part of the reason why we haven’t seen as muchinnovation.”MUSK LAND WAS A REVELATION.I’d come to Silicon Valley in 2000 and ended up living in the Tenderloinneighborhood of San Francisco. It’s the one part of the city that locals willimplore you to avoid. Without trying very hard, you can find someone pullingdown his pants and pooping in between parked cars or encounter some derangedsort bashing his head into the side of a bus stop. At dive bars near the local stripclubs, transvestites hit on curious businessmen and drunks fall asleep on couchesand soil themselves as part of their lazy Sunday ritual. It’s the gritty, knife-stabbypart of San Francisco and turned out to be a great place to watch the dotcomdream die.San Francisco has an enduring history with greed. It became a city on the backof the gold rush, and not even a catastrophic earthquake could slow SanFrancisco’s economic lust for long. Don’t let the granola vibes fool you. Boomsand busts are the rhythm of this place. And, in 2000, San Francisco had beenovertaken by the boom of all booms and consumed by avarice. It was awonderful time to be alive with just about the entire populace giving in to afantasy—a get-rich-quick, Internet madness. The pulses of energy from thisshared delusion were palpable, producing a constant buzz that vibrated acrossthe city. And here I was in the center of the most depraved part of San Francisco,watching just how high and low people get when consumed by excess.Stories tracking the insanity of business in these times are well-known. Youno longer had to make something that other people wanted to buy in order tostart a booming company. You just had to have an idea for some sort of Internetthing and announce it to the world in order for eager investors to fund yourthought experiment. The whole goal was to make as much money as possible inthe shortest amount of time because everyone knew on at least a subconsciouslevel that reality had to set in eventually.Valley denizens took very literally the cliché of working as hard as you play.People in their twenties, thirties, forties, and fifties were expected to pull all-nighters. Cubicles were turned into temporary homes, and personal hygiene wasabandoned. Oddly enough, making Nothing appear to be Something took a lot ofwork. But when the time to decompress arrived, there were plenty of options fortotal debauchery. The hot companies and media powers of the time seemedlocked in a struggle to outdo each other with ever-fancier parties. Old-linecompanies trying to look “with it” would regularly buy space at a concert venueand then order up some dancers, acrobats, open bars, and the Barenaked Ladies.Young technologists would show up to pound their free Jack and Cokes andsnort their cocaine in porta-potties. Greed and self-interest were the only thingsthat made any sense back then.While the good times have been well chronicled, the subsequent bad timeshave been—unsurprisingly—ignored. It’s more fun to reminiscence on irrationalexuberance than the mess that gets left behind.Let it be said for the record, then, that the implosion of the get-rich-quickInternet fantasy left San Francisco and Silicon Valley in a deep depression. Theendless parties ended. The prostitutes no longer roamed the streets of theTenderloin at 6 A.M. offering pre-commute love. (“Come on, honey. It’s betterthan coffee!”) Instead of the Barenaked Ladies, you got the occasional NeilDiamond tribute band at a trade show, some free T-shirts, and a lump of shame.The technology industry had no idea what to do with itself. The dumb venturecapitalists who had been taken during the bubble didn’t want to look anydumber, so they stopped funding new ventures altogether. Entrepreneurs’ bigideas were replaced by the smallest of notions. It was as if Silicon Valley hadentered rehab en masse. It sounds melodramatic, but it’s true. A populace ofmillions of clever people came to believe that they were inventing the future.Then . . . poof! Playing it safe suddenly became the fashionable thing to do.The evidence of this malaise is in the companies and ideas formed during thisperiod. Google had appeared and really started to thrive around 2002, but it wasan outlier. Between Google and Apple’s introduction of the iPhone in 2007,there’s a wasteland of ho-hum companies. And the hot new things that were juststarting out—Facebook and Twitter—certainly did not look like theirpredecessors—Hewlett-Packard, Intel, Sun Microsystems—that made physicalproducts and employed tens of thousands of people in the process. In the yearsthat followed, the goal went from taking huge risks to create new industries andgrand new ideas, to chasing easier money by entertaining consumers andpumping out simple apps and advertisements. “The best minds of my generationare thinking about how to make people click ads,” Jeff Hammerbacher, an earlyFacebook engineer, told me. “That sucks.” Silicon Valley began to look an awfullot like Hollywood. Meanwhile, the consumers it served had turned inward,obsessed with their virtual lives.One of the first people to suggest that this lull in innovation could signal amuch larger problem was Jonathan Huebner, a physicist who works at thePentagon’s Naval Air Warfare Center in China Lake, California. Huebner is theLeave It to Beaver version of a merchant of death. Middle-aged, thin, andbalding, he likes to wear a dirt-inspired ensemble of khaki pants, a brown-stripedshirt, and a canvas khaki jacket. He has designed weapons systems since 1985,gaining direct insight into the latest and greatest technology around materials,energy, and software. Following the dot-com bust, he became miffed at the ho-hum nature of the supposed innovations crossing his desk. In 2005, Huebnerdelivered a paper, “A Possible Declining Trend in Worldwide Innovation,” whichwas either an indictment of Silicon Valley or at least an ominous warning.Huebner opted to use a tree metaphor to describe what he saw as the state ofinnovation. Man has already climbed past the trunk of the tree and gone out onits major limbs, mining most of the really big, game-changing ideas—the wheel,electricity, the airplane, the telephone, the transistor. Now we’re left danglingnear the end of the branches at the top of the tree and mostly just refining pastinventions. To back up his point in the paper, Huebner showed that the frequencyof life-changing inventions had started to slow. He also used data to prove thatthe number of patents filed per person had declined over time. “I think theprobability of us discovering another top-one-hundred-type invention getssmaller and smaller,” Huebner told me in an interview. “Innovation is a finiteresource.”Huebner predicted that it would take people about five years to catch on to histhinking, and this forecast proved almost exactly right. Around 2010, PeterThiel, the PayPal cofounder and early Facebook investor, began promoting theidea that the technology industry had let people down. “We wanted flying cars,instead we got 140 characters” became the tagline of his venture capital firmFounders Fund. In an essay called “What Happened to the Future,” Thiel and hiscohorts described how Twitter, its 140-character messages, and similarinventions have let the public down. He argued that science fiction, which oncecelebrated the future, has turned dystopian because people no longer have anoptimistic view of technology’s ability to change the world.I’d subscribed to a lot of this type of thinking until that first visit to MuskLand. While Musk had been anything but shy about what he was up to, fewpeople outside of his companies got to see the factories, the R&D centers, themachine shops, and to witness the scope of what he was doing firsthand. Herewas a guy who had taken much of the Silicon Valley ethic behind movingquickly and running organizations free of bureaucratic hierarchies and applied itto improving big, fantastic machines and chasing things that had the potential tobe the real breakthroughs we’d been missing.By rights, Musk should have been part of the malaise. He jumped right intodot-com mania in 1995, when, fresh out of college, he founded a company calledZip2—a primitive Google Maps meets Yelp. That first venture ended up a big,quick hit. Compaq bought Zip2 in 1999 for $307 million. Musk made $22million from the deal and poured almost all of it into his next venture, a startupthat would morph into PayPal. As the largest shareholder in PayPal, Muskbecame fantastically well-to-do when eBay acquired the company for $1.5billion in 2002.Instead of hanging around Silicon Valley and falling into the same funk as hispeers, however, Musk decamped to Los Angeles. The conventional wisdom ofthe time said to take a deep breath and wait for the next big thing to arrive in duecourse. Musk rejected that logic by throwing $100 million into SpaceX, $70million into Tesla, and $10 million into SolarCity. Short of building an actualmoney-crushing machine, Musk could not have picked a faster way to destroyhis fortune. He became a one-man, ultra-risk-taking venture capital shop anddoubled down on making super-complex physical goods in two of the mostexpensive places in the world, Los Angeles and Silicon Valley. Wheneverpossible, Musk’s companies would make things from scratch and try to rethinkmuch that the aerospace, automotive, and solar industries had accepted asconvention.With SpaceX, Musk is battling the giants of the U.S. military-industrialcomplex, including Lockheed Martin and Boeing. He’s also battling nations—most notably Russia and China. SpaceX has made a name for itself as the low-cost supplier in the industry. But that, in and of itself, is not really good enoughto win. The space business requires dealing with a mess of politics, back-scratching, and protectionism that undermines the fundamentals of capitalism.Steve Jobs faced similar forces when he went up against the recording industryto bring the iPod and iTunes to market. The crotchety Luddites in the musicindustry were a pleasure to deal with compared to Musk’s foes who buildweapons and countries for a living. SpaceX has been testing reusable rocketsthat can carry payloads to space and land back on Earth, on their launchpads,with precision. If the company can perfect this technology, it will deal adevastating blow to all of its competitors and almost assuredly push somemainstays of the rocket industry out of business while establishing the UnitedStates as the world leader for taking cargo and humans to space. It’s a threat thatMusk figures has earned him plenty of fierce enemies. “The list of people thatwould not mind if I was gone is growing,” Musk said. “My family fears that theRussians will assassinate me.”With Tesla Motors, Musk has tried to revamp the way cars are manufacturedand sold, while building out a worldwide fuel distribution network at the sametime. Instead of hybrids, which in Musk lingo are suboptimal compromises,Tesla strives to make all-electric cars that people lust after and that push thelimits of technology. Tesla does not sell these cars through dealers; it sells themon the Web and in Apple-like galleries located in high-end shopping centers.Tesla also does not anticipate making lots of money from servicing its vehicles,since electric cars do not require the oil changes and other maintenanceprocedures of traditional cars. The direct sales model embraced by Tesla standsas a major affront to car dealers used to haggling with their customers andmaking their profits from exorbitant maintenance fees. Tesla’s rechargingstations now run alongside many of the major highways in the United States,Europe, and Asia and can add hundreds of miles of oomph back to a car in abouttwenty minutes. These so-called supercharging stations are solar-powered, andTesla owners pay nothing to refuel. While much of America’s infrastructuredecays, Musk is building a futuristic end-to-end transportation system that wouldallow the United States to leapfrog the rest of the world. Musk’s vision, and, oflate, execution seem to combine the best of Henry Ford and John D. Rockefeller.With SolarCity, Musk has funded the largest installer and financer of solarpanels for consumers and businesses. Musk helped come up with the idea forSolarCity and serves as its chairman, while his cousins Lyndon and Peter Riverun the company. SolarCity has managed to undercut dozens of utilities andbecome a large utility in its own right. During a time in which clean-techbusinesses have gone bankrupt with alarming regularity, Musk has built two ofthe most successful clean-tech companies in the world. The Musk Co. empire offactories, tens of thousands of workers, and industrial might has incumbents onthe run and has turned Musk into one of the richest men in the world, with a networth around $10 billion.The visit to Musk Land started to make a few things clear about how Muskhad pulled all this off. While the “putting man on Mars” talk can strike somepeople as loopy, it gave Musk a unique rallying cry for his companies. It’s thesweeping goal that forms a unifying principle over everything he does.Employees at all three companies are well aware of this and well aware thatthey’re trying to achieve the impossible day in and day out. When Musk setsunrealistic goals, verbally abuses employees, and works them to the bone, it’sunderstood to be—on some level—part of the Mars agenda. Some employeeslove him for this. Others loathe him but remain oddly loyal out of respect for hisdrive and mission. What Musk has developed that so many of the entrepreneursin Silicon Valley lack is a meaningful worldview. He’s the possessed genius onthe grandest quest anyone has ever concocted. He’s less a CEO chasing richesthan a general marshaling troops to secure victory. Where Mark Zuckerbergwants to help you share baby photos, Musk wants to . . . well . . . save the humanrace from self-imposed or accidental annihilation.The life that Musk has created to manage all of these endeavors ispreposterous. A typical week starts at his mansion in Bel Air. On Monday, heworks the entire day at SpaceX. On Tuesday, he begins at SpaceX, then hopsonto his jet and flies to Silicon Valley. He spends a couple of days working atTesla, which has its offices in Palo Alto and factory in Fremont. Musk does notown a home in Northern California and ends up staying at the luxe Rosewoodhotel or at friends’ houses. To arrange the stays with friends, Musk’s assistantwill send an e-mail asking, “Room for one?” and if the friend says, “Yes,” Muskturns up at the door late at night. Most often he stays in a guest room, but he’salso been known to crash on the couch after winding down with some videogames. Then it’s back to Los Angeles and SpaceX on Thursday. He sharescustody of his five young boys—twins and triplets—with his ex-wife, Justine,and has them four days a week. Each year, Musk tabulates the amount of flighttime he endures per week to help him get a sense of just how out of hand thingsare getting. Asked how he survives this schedule, Musk said, “I had a toughchildhood, so maybe that was helpful.”During one visit to Musk Land, he had to squeeze our interview in beforeheading off for a camping trip at Crater Lake National Park in Oregon. It wasalmost 8 P.M. on a Friday, so Musk would soon be piling his boys and nanniesinto his private jet and then meeting drivers who would take him to his friends atthe campsite; the friends would then help the Musk clan unpack and completetheir pitch-black arrival. There would be a bit of hiking over the weekend. Thenthe relaxation would end. Musk would fly with the boys back to Los Angeles onSunday afternoon. Then, he would take off on his own that evening for NewYork. Sleep. Hit the morning talk shows on Monday. Meetings. E-mail. Sleep.Fly back to Los Angeles Tuesday morning. Work at SpaceX. Fly to San JoseTuesday afternoon to visit the Tesla Motors factory. Fly to Washington, D.C.,that night and see President Obama. Fly back to Los Angeles Wednesday night.Spend a couple of days working at SpaceX. Then go to a weekend conferenceheld by Google’s chairman, Eric Schmidt, in Yellowstone. At this time, Muskhad just split from his second wife, the actress Talulah Riley, and was trying tocalculate if he could mix a personal life into all of this. “I think the timeallocated to the businesses and the kids is going fine,” Musk said. “I would liketo allocate more time to dating, though. I need to find a girlfriend. That’s why Ineed to carve out just a little more time. I think maybe even another five to ten—how much time does a woman want a week? Maybe ten hours? That’s kind ofthe minimum? I don’t know.”Musk rarely finds time to decompress, but when he does, the festivities arejust as dramatic as the rest of his life. On his thirtieth birthday, Musk rented out acastle in England for about twenty people. From 2 A.M. until 6 A.M., they playeda variation of hide-and-seek called sardines in which one person runs off andhides and everyone else looks for him. Another party occurred in Paris. Musk,his brother, and cousins found themselves awake at midnight and decided tobicycle through the city until 6 A.M. They slept all day and then boarded theOrient Express in the evening. Once again, they stayed up all night. The LucentDossier Experience—an avant-garde group of performers—were on theluxurious train, performing palm readings and acrobatics. When the train arrivedin Venice the next day, Musk’s family had dinner and then hung out on the patioof their hotel overlooking the Grand Canal until 9 A.M. Musk loves costumeparties as well, and turned up at one dressed like a knight and using a parasol toduel a midget wearing a Darth Vader costume.For one of his most recent birthdays, Musk invited fifty people to a castle—orat least the United States’ best approximation of a castle—in Tarrytown, NewYork. This party had a Japanese steampunk theme, which is sort of like a sci-filover’s wet dream—a mix of corsets, leather, and machine worship. Muskdressed as a samurai.The festivities included a performance of The Mikado, a Victorian comicopera by Gilbert and Sullivan set in Japan, at a small theater in the heart of town.“I am not sure the Americans got it,” said Riley, whom Musk remarried after histen-hour-a-week dating plan failed. The Americans and everyone else did enjoywhat followed. Back at the castle, Musk donned a blindfold, got pushed upagainst a wall, and held balloons in each hand and another between his legs. Theknife thrower then went to work. “I’d seen him before, but did worry that maybehe could have an off day,” Musk said. “Still, I thought, he would maybe hit onegonad but not both.” The onlookers were stunned and frightened for Musk’ssafety. “That was bizarre,” said Bill Lee, a technology investor and one ofMusk’s good friends. “But Elon believes in the science of things.” One of theworld’s top sumo wrestlers showed up at the party along with some of hiscompatriots. A ring had been set up at the castle, and Musk faced off against thechampion. “He was three hundred and fifty pounds, and they were not jigglypounds,” Musk said. “I went full adrenaline rush and managed to lift the guy offthe ground. He let me win that first round and then beat me. I think my back isstill screwed up.”Riley turned planning these types of parties for Musk into an art. She metMusk back in 2008, when his companies were collapsing. She watched him losehis entire fortune and get ridiculed by the press. She knows that the sting of theseyears remains and has combined with the other traumas in Musk’s life—thetragic loss of an infant son and a brutal upbringing in South Africa—to create atortured soul. Riley has gone to great lengths to make sure Musk’s escapes fromwork and this past leave him feeling refreshed if not healed. “I try to think of funthings he has not done before where he can relax,” Riley said. “We’re trying tomake up for his miserable childhood now.”Genuine as Riley’s efforts might have been, they were not entirely effective.Not long after the Sumo party, I found Musk back at work at the Teslaheadquarters in Palo Alto. It was a Saturday, and the parking lot was full of cars.Inside of the Tesla offices, hundreds of young men were at work—some of themdesigning car parts on computers and others conducting experiments withelectronics equipment on their desks. Musk’s uproarious laugh would eruptevery few minutes and carry through the entire floor. When Musk came into themeeting room where I’d been waiting, I noted how impressive it was for somany people to turn up on a Saturday. Musk saw the situation in a different light,complaining that fewer and fewer people had been working weekends of late.“We’ve grown fucking soft,” Musk replied. “I was just going to send out an e-mail. We’re fucking soft.” (A word of warning: There’s going to be a lot of“fuck” in this book. Musk adores the word, and so do most of the people in hisinner circle.)This kind of declaration seems to fit with our impressions of other visionaries.It’s not hard to imagine Howard Hughes or Steve Jobs chastising their workforcein a similar way. Building things—especially big things—is a messy business. Inthe two decades Musk has spent creating companies, he’s left behind a trail ofpeople who either adore or despise him. During the course of my reporting, thesepeople lined up to give me their take on Musk and the gory details of how he andhis businesses operate.My dinners with Musk and periodic trips to Musk Land revealed a differentset of possible truths about the man. He’s set about building something that hasthe potential to be much grander than anything Hughes or Jobs produced. Muskhas taken industries like aerospace and automotive that America seemed to havegiven up on and recast them as something new and fantastic. At the heart of thistransformation are Musk’s skills as a software maker and his ability to applythem to machines. He’s merged atoms and bits in ways that few people thoughtpossible, and the results have been spectacular. It’s true enough that Musk hasyet to have a consumer hit on the order of the iPhone or to touch more than onebillion people like Facebook. For the moment, he’s still making rich people’stoys, and his budding empire could be an exploded rocket or massive Tesla recallaway from collapse. On the other hand, Musk’s companies have alreadyaccomplished far more than his loudest detractors thought possible, and thepromise of what’s to come has to leave hardened types feeling optimistic duringtheir weaker moments. “To me, Elon is the shining example of how SiliconValley might be able to reinvent itself and be more relevant than chasing thesequick IPOs and focusing on getting incremental products out,” said EdwardJung, a famed software engineer and inventor. “Those things are important, butthey are not enough. We need to look at different models of how to do things thatare longer term in nature and where the technology is more integrated.” Theintegration mentioned by Jung—the harmonious melding of software,electronics, advanced materials, and computing horsepower—appears to beMusk’s gift. Squint ever so slightly, and it looks like Musk could be using hisskills to pave the way toward an age of astonishing machines and science fictiondreams made manifest.In that sense, Musk comes off much more like Thomas Edison than HowardHughes. He’s an inventor, celebrity businessman, and industrialist able to takebig ideas and turn them into big products. He’s employing thousands of peopleto forge metal in American factories at a time when this was thought to beimpossible. Born in South Africa, Musk now looks like America’s mostinnovative industrialist and outlandish thinker and the person most likely to setSilicon Valley on a more ambitious course. Because of Musk, Americans couldwake up in ten years with the most modern highway in the world: a transitsystem run by thousands of solar-powered charging stations and traversed byelectric cars. By that time, SpaceX may well be sending up rockets every day,taking people and things to dozens of habitats and making preparations forlonger treks to Mars. These advances are simultaneously difficult to fathom andseemingly inevitable if Musk can simply buy enough time to make them work.As his ex-wife, Justine, put it, “He does what he wants, and he is relentless aboutit. It’s Elon’s world, and the rest of us live in it.”