4ELON’S FIRST STARTUPIN THE SUMMER OF 1994, Musk and his brother, Kimbal, took their firststeps toward becoming honest-to-God Americans. They set off on a road tripacross the country.Kimbal had been working as a franchisee for College Pro Painters and donewell for himself, running what amounted to a small business. He sold off his partof the franchise and pooled the money with what Musk had on hand to buy abeat-up 1970s BMW 320i. The brothers began their trip near San Francisco inAugust, as temperatures in California soared. The first part of the drive tookthem down to Needles, a city in the Mojave Desert. There they experienced thesweaty thrill of 120-degree weather in a car with no air-conditioning and learnedto love pit stops at Carl’s Jr. burger joints, where they spent hours recuperating inthe cold.The trip provided plenty of time for your typical twenty-something hijinks andraging capitalist daydreaming. The Web had just started to become accessible tothe public thanks to the rise of directory sites like Yahoo! and tools likeNetscape’s browser. The brothers were tuned in to the Internet and thought theymight like to start a company together doing something on the Web. FromCalifornia to Colorado, Wyoming, South Dakota, and Illinois, they took turnsdriving, brainstorming, and talking shit before heading back east to get Musk toschool that fall. The best idea to arise from the journey was an online networkfor doctors. This wasn’t meant to be something as ambitious as electronic healthrecords but more of a system for physicians to exchange information andcollaborate. “It seemed like the medical industry was one that could bedisrupted,” Kimbal said. “I went to work on a business plan and the sales andmarketing side of it later, but it didn’t fly. We didn’t love it.”Musk had spent the earlier part of that summer in Silicon Valley, holdingdown a pair of internships. By day, he worked at Pinnacle Research Institute.Based in Los Gatos, Pinnacle was a much-ballyhooed startup with a team ofscientists exploring ways in which ultracapacitors could be used as arevolutionary fuel source in electric and hybrid vehicles. The work also veered—at least conceptually—into more bizarre territory. Musk could talk at lengthabout how ultracapacitors might be used to build laser-based sidearms in thetradition of Star Wars and just about any other futuristic film. The laser gunswould release rounds of enormous energy, and then the shooter would replace anultracapacitor at the base of the gun, much like swapping out a clip of bullets,and start blasting away again. Ultracapacitors also looked promising as thepower supplies for missiles. They were more resilient than batteries under themechanical stresses of a launch and would hold a more consistent charge overlong periods of time. Musk fell in love with the work at Pinnacle and beganusing it as the basis for some of his business plan experiments at Penn and forhis industrialist fantasies.In the evenings, Musk headed to Rocket Science Games, a startup based inPalo Alto that wanted to create the most advanced video games ever made bymoving them off cartridges and onto CDs that could hold more information. TheCDs would in theory allow them to bring Hollywood-style storytelling andproduction quality to the games. A team of budding all-stars who were a mix ofengineers and film people was assembled to pull off the work. Tony Fadell, whowould later drive much of the development of both the iPod and iPhone atApple, worked at Rocket Science, as did the guys who developed the QuickTimemultimedia software for Apple. They also had people who worked on theoriginal Star Wars effects at Industrial Light & Magic and some who did gamesat LucasArts Entertainment. Rocket Science gave Musk a flavor for what SiliconValley had to offer both from a talent and culture perspective. There were peopleworking at the office twenty-four hours a day, and they didn’t think it at all oddthat Musk would turn up around 5 P.M. every evening to start his second job. “Webrought him in to write some very menial low-level code,” said Peter Barrett, anAustralian engineer who helped start the company. “He was completelyunflappable. After a short while, I don’t think anyone was giving him anydirection, and he ended up making what he wanted to make.”Specifically, Musk had been asked to write the drivers that would let joysticksand mice communicate with various computers and games. Drivers are the sametypes of annoying files that you have to install to get a printer or camera workingwith a home computer—true grunt work. A self-taught programmer, Muskfancied himself quite good at coding and assigned himself to more ambitiousjobs. “I was basically trying to figure out how you could multitask stuff, so youcould read video from a CD, while running a game at the same time,” Musk said.“At the time, you could do one or the other. It was this complicated bit ofassembly programming.” Complicated indeed. Musk had to issue commands thatspoke directly to a computer’s main microprocessor and fiddled with the mostbasic functions that made the machine work. Bruce Leak, the former leadengineer behind Apple’s QuickTime, had overseen the hiring of Musk andmarveled at his ability to pull all-nighters. “He had boundless energy,” Leaksaid. “Kids these days have no idea about hardware or how stuff works, but hehad a PC hacker background and was not afraid to just go figure things out.”Musk found in Silicon Valley a wealth of the opportunity he’d been seekingand a place equal to his ambitions. He would return two summers in a row andthen bolt west permanently after graduating with dual degrees from Penn. Heinitially intended to pursue a doctorate in materials science and physics atStanford and to advance the work he’d done at Pinnacle on ultracapacitors. Asthe story goes, Musk dropped out of Stanford after two days, finding theInternet’s call irresistible. He talked Kimbal into moving to Silicon Valley aswell, so they could conquer the Web together.The first inklings of a viable Internet business had come to Musk during hisinternships. A salesperson from the Yellow Pages had come into one of thestartup offices. He tried to sell the idea of an online listing to complement theregular listing a company would have in the big, fat Yellow Pages book. Thesalesman struggled with his pitch and clearly had little grasp of what the Internetactually was or how someone would find a business on it. The flimsy pitch gotMusk thinking, and he reached out to Kimbal, talking up the idea of helpingbusinesses get online for the first time.“Elon said, ‘These guys don’t know what they are talking about. Maybe this issomething we can do,’” Kimbal said. This was 1995, and the brothers wereabout to form Global Link Information Network, a startup that would eventuallybe renamed Zip2. (For details on the controversy surrounding Zip2’s foundingand Musk’s academic record, see Appendix 1.)The Zip2 idea was ingenious. Few small businesses in 1995 understood theramifications of the Internet. They had little idea how to get on it and didn’treally see the value in creating a website for their business or even in having aYellow Pages–like listing online. Musk and his brother hoped to convincerestaurants, clothing shops, hairdressers, and the like that the time had come forthem to make their presence known to the Web-surfing public. Zip2 would createa searchable directory of businesses and tie this into maps. Musk often explainedthe concept through pizza, saying that everyone deserved the right to know thelocation of their closest pizza parlor and the turn-by-turn directions to get there.This may seem obvious today—think Yelp meets Google Maps—but back then,not even stoners had dreamed up such a service.The Musk brothers brought Zip2 to life at 430 Sherman Avenue in Palo Alto.They rented a studio-apartment-sized office—twenty feet by thirty feet—andacquired some basic furniture. The three-story building had its quirks. Therewere no elevators, and the toilets often backed up. “It was literally a shitty placeto work,” said an early employee. To get a fast Internet connection, Musk strucka deal with Ray Girouard, an entrepreneur who ran an Internet service provideroperation from the floor below the Zip2 offices. According to Girouard, Muskdrilled a hole in the drywall near the Zip2 door and then strung an Ethernet cabledown the stairwell to the ISP. “They were slow to pay a couple of times butnever stiffed me on the bill,” Girouard said.Musk did all of the original coding behind the service himself, while the moreamiable Kimbal looked to ramp up the door-to-door sales operation. Musk hadacquired a cheap license to a database of business listings in the Bay Area thatwould give a business’s name and its address. He then contacted Navteq, acompany that had spent hundreds of millions of dollars to create digital mapsand directions that could be used in early GPS navigation-style devices, andstruck a masterful bargain. “We called them up, and they gave us the technologyfor free,” said Kimbal. Musk merged the two databases together to get arudimentary system up and running. Over time, Zip2’s engineers had to augmentthis initial data haul with more maps to cover areas outside of majormetropolitan areas and to build custom turn-by-turn directions that would lookgood and work well on a home computer.Errol Musk gave his sons $28,000 to help them through this period, but theywere more or less broke after getting the office space, licensing software, andbuying some equipment. For the first three months of Zip2’s life, Musk and hisbrother lived at the office. They had a small closet where they kept their clothesand would shower at the YMCA. “Sometimes we ate four meals a day at Jack inthe Box,” Kimbal said. “It was open twenty-four hours, which suited our workschedule. I got a smoothie one time, and there was something in it. I just pulledit out and kept drinking. I haven’t been able to eat there since, but I can stillrecite their menu.”Next, the brothers rented a two-bedroom apartment. They didn’t have themoney or the inclination to get furniture. So there were just a couple ofmattresses on the floor. Musk somehow managed to convince a young SouthKorean engineer to come work at Zip2 as an intern in exchange for room andboard. “This poor kid thought he was coming over for a job at a big company,”Kimbal said. “He ended up living with us and had no idea what he was gettinginto.” One day, the intern drove the Musks’ battered BMW 320i to work, and awheel came off en route. The axle dug into the street at the intersection of PageMill Road and El Camino Real, and the groove it carved out remained visible foryears.Zip2 may have been a go-go Internet enterprise aimed at the Information Age,but getting it off the ground required old-fashioned door-to-door salesmanship.Businesses needed to be persuaded of the Web’s benefits and charmed intopaying for the unknown. In late 1995, the Musk brothers began making their firsthires and assembling a motley sales team. Jeff Heilman, a free-spirited twenty-year-old trying to figure out what to do with his life, arrived as one of Zip2’s firstrecruits. He’d been watching TV late one night with his dad and seen a Webaddress printed at the bottom of the screen during a commercial. “It was forsomething dot-com,” Heilman said. “I remember sitting there and asking my dadwhat we were looking at. He said he didn’t know, either. That’s when I realized Ihad to go find me some Internet.” Heilman spent a couple of weeks trying tochat up people who could explain the Internet to him and then stumbled on atwo-by-two-inch Zip2 job listing in the San Jose Mercury News. “Internet SalesApply Here!” it read, and Heilman got the gig. A handful of other salespeoplejoined him and worked for commissions.Musk never seemed to leave the office. He slept, not unlike a dog, on abeanbag next to his desk. “Almost every day, I’d come in at seven thirty or eightA.M., and he’d be asleep right there on that bag,” Heilman said. “Maybe heshowered on the weekends. I don’t know.” Musk asked those first employees ofZip2 to give him a kick when they arrived, and he’d wake up and get back towork. While Musk did his possessed coder thing, Kimbal became the rah-rahsales leader. “Kimbal was the eternal optimist, and he was very, very uplifting,”Heilman said. “I had never met anyone quite like him.” Kimbal sent Heilman tothe high-end Stanford shopping mall and to University Avenue, the main drag inPalo Alto, to coax retailers into signing up with Zip2, explaining that asponsored listing would send a company to the top of search results. The bigproblem, of course, was that no one was buying. Week after week, Heilmanknocked on doors and returned to the office with very little to report in the wayof good news. The nicest responses came from the people who told Heilman thatadvertising on the Internet sounded like the dumbest thing they had ever heardof. Most often, the shop owners just told Heilman to leave and stop botheringthem. When lunchtime came around, the Musks would reach into a cigar boxwhere they kept some cash, take Heilman out, and get the depressing statusreports on the sales.Craig Mohr, another early employee, gave up his job selling real estate tohawk Zip2’s service. He decided to court auto dealerships because they usuallyspent lots of money on advertising. He told them about Zip2’s main website—www.totalinfo.com—and tried to convince them that demand was high to get alisting like www.totalinfo.com/toyotaofsiliconvalley. The service did not alwayswork when Mohr demonstrated it or it would load very slowly, as was commonback then. This forced him to talk the customers into imagining Zip2’s potential.“One day I came back with about nine hundred dollars in checks,” Mohr said. “Iwalked into the office and asked the guys what they wanted me to do with themoney. Elon stopped pounding his keyboard, leaned out from behind hismonitor, and said, ‘No way, you’ve got money.’”What kept the employees’ spirits up were the continuous improvements Muskmade with the Zip2 software. The service had morphed from a proof-of-conceptto an actual product that could be used and demoed. Ever marketing savvy, theMusk brothers tried to make their Web service seem more important by giving itan imposing physical body. Musk built a huge case around a standard PC andlugged the unit onto a base with wheels. When prospective investors wouldcome by, Musk would put on a show and roll this massive machine out so that itappeared like Zip2 ran inside of a mini-supercomputer. “The investors thoughtthat was impressive,” Kimbal said. Heilman also noticed that the investorsbought into Musk’s slavish devotion to the company. “Even then, as essentially acollege kid with zits, Elon had this drive that this thing—whatever it was—hadto get done and that if he didn’t do it, he’d miss his shot,” Heilman said. “I thinkthat’s what the VCs saw—that he was willing to stake his existence on buildingout this platform.” Musk actually said as much to one venture capitalist,informing him, “My mentality is that of a samurai. I would rather commitseppuku than fail.”Early on in the Zip2 venture, Musk acquired an important confidant, whotempered some of these more dramatic impulses. Greg Kouri, a Canadianbusinessman in his mid-thirties, had met the Musks in Toronto and bought intothe early Zip2 brainstorming. The boys had showed up at his door one morningto inform Kouri that they intended to head to California to give the business ashot. Still in his red bathrobe, Kouri went back into the house, dug around for acouple of minutes, and came back with a wad of $6,000. In early 1996, hemoved to California and joined Zip2 as a cofounder.Kouri, who had done a number of real estate deals in the past and had actualbusiness experience and skills at reading people, served as the adult supervisionat Zip2. The Canadian had a knack for calming Musk and ended up becomingsomething of a mentor. “Really smart people sometimes don’t understand thatnot everyone can keep up with them or go as fast,” said Derek Proudian, aventure capitalist who would become Zip2’s chief executive officer. “Greg is oneof the few people that Elon would listen to and had a way of putting things incontext for him.” Kouri also used to referee fistfights between Elon and Kimbal,in the middle of the office.“I don’t get in fights with anyone else, but Elon and I don’t have the ability toreconcile a vision other than our own,” Kimbal said. During a particularly nastyscrap over a business decision, Elon ripped some skin off his fist and had to goget a tetanus shot. Kouri put an end to the fights after that. (Kouri died of a heartattack in 2012 at the age of fifty-one, having made a fortune investing in Musk’scompanies. Musk attended his funeral. “We owe him a lot,” said Kimbal.)In early 1996, Zip2 underwent a massive change. The venture capital firmMohr Davidow Ventures had caught wind of a couple of South African boystrying to make a Yellow Pages for the Internet and met with the brothers. Musk,while raw in his presentation skills, pitched the company well enough, and theinvestors came away impressed with his energy. Mohr Davidow invested $3million into the company.* With these funds in hand, the company officiallychanged its name from Global Link to Zip2—the idea being zip to here, zip tothere—moved to a larger office at 390 Cambridge Avenue in Palo Alto, andbegan hiring talented engineers. Zip2 also shifted its business strategy. At thetime, the company had built one of the best direction systems on the Web. Zip2would advance this technology and take it from focusing just on the Bay Area tohaving a national scope. The company’s main focus, however, would be analtogether new play. Instead of selling its service door-to-door, Zip2 wouldcreate a software package that could be sold to newspapers, which would in turnbuild their own directories for real estate, auto dealers, and classifieds. Thenewspapers were late understanding how the Internet would impact theirbusinesses, and Zip2’s software would give them a quick way of getting onlinewithout needing to develop all their own technology from scratch. For its part,Zip2 could chase bigger prey and get a cut of a nationwide network of listings.This transition of the business model and the company’s makeup would be aseminal moment in Musk’s life. The venture capitalists pushed Musk into therole of chief technology officer and hired Rich Sorkin as the company’s CEO.Sorkin had worked at Creative Labs, a maker of audio equipment, and run thebusiness development group at the company, where he steered a number ofinvestments in Internet startups. Zip2’s investors saw him as experienced andclued in to the Web. While Musk agreed to the arrangement, he came to resentgiving up control of Zip2. “Probably the biggest regret the whole time I workedwith him was that he had made a deal with the devil with Mohr Davidow,” saidJim Ambras, the vice president of engineering at Zip2. “Elon didn’t have anyoperational responsibilities, and he wanted to be CEO.”Ambras had worked at Hewlett-Packard Labs and Silicon Graphics Inc. andexemplified the high-caliber talent Zip2 brought on after the first wave of moneyarrived. Silicon Graphics, a maker of high-end computers beloved byHollywood, was the flashiest company of its day and had hoarded the elite geeksof Silicon Valley. And yet Ambras used the promise of Internet riches to poach ateam of SGI’s smartest engineers over to Zip2. “Our attorneys got a letter fromSGI saying that we were cherry-picking the very best guys,” Ambras said. “Elonthought that was fantastic.”While Musk had exceled as a self-taught coder, his skills weren’t nearly aspolished as those of the new hires. They took one look at Zip2’s code and beganrewriting the vast majority of the software. Musk bristled at some of theirchanges, but the computer scientists needed just a fraction of the lines of codethat Musk used to get their jobs done. They had a knack for dividing softwareprojects into chunks that could be altered and refined whereas Musk fell into theclassic self-taught coder trap of writing what developers call hairballs—big,monolithic hunks of code that could go berserk for mysterious reasons. Theengineers also brought a more refined working structure and realistic deadlinesto the engineering group. This was a welcome change from Musk’s approach,which had been to set overly optimistic deadlines and then try to get engineers towork nonstop for days on end to meet the goals. “If you asked Elon how long itwould take to do something, there was never anything in his mind that wouldtake more than an hour,” Ambras said. “We came to interpret an hour as reallytaking a day or two and if Elon ever did say something would take a day, weallowed for a week or two weeks.”Starting Zip2 and watching it grow imbued Musk with self-confidence.Terence Beney, one of Musk’s high school friends, came to California for a visitand noticed the change in Musk’s character right away. He watched Muskconfront a nasty landlord who had been giving his mother, who was renting anapartment in town, a hard time. “He said, ‘If you’re going to bully someone,bully me.’ It was startling to see him take over the situation. The last time I hadseen him he was this geeky, awkward kid who would sometimes lose his temper.He was the kid you would pick on to get a response. Now he was confident andin control.” Musk also began consciously trying to manage his criticism ofothers. “Elon is not someone who would say, ‘I feel you. I see your point ofview,’” said Justine. “Because he doesn’t have that ‘I feel you’ dimension therewere things that seemed obvious to other people that weren’t that obvious tohim. He had to learn that a twenty-something-year-old shouldn’t really shootdown the plans of older, senior people and point out everything wrong withthem. He learned to modify his behavior in certain ways. I just think he comes atthe world through strategy and intellect.” The personality tweaks worked withvarying degrees of success. Musk still tended to drive the young engineers madwith his work demands and blunt criticism. “I remember being in a meeting oncebrainstorming about a new product—a new-car site,” said Doris Downes, thecreative director at Zip2. “Someone complained about a technical change that wewanted being impossible. Elon turned and said, ‘I don’t really give a damn whatyou think,’ and walked out of the meeting. For Elon, the word no does not exist,and he expects that attitude from everyone around him.” Periodically, Musk letloose on the more senior executives as well. “You would see people come out ofthe meetings with this disgusted look on their face,” Mohr, the salesman, said.“You don’t get to where Elon is now by always being a nice guy, and he was justso driven and sure of himself.”As Musk tried to come to terms with the changes the investors had inflicted onZip2, he did enjoy some of the perks of having big-money backing. Thefinanciers helped the Musk brothers with their visas. They also gave them$30,000 each to buy cars. Musk and Kimbal had traded in their dilapidatedBMW for a dilapidated sedan that they spray-painted with polka dots. Kimbalupgraded from that to a BMW 3 Series, and Musk bought a Jaguar E-Type. “Itkept breaking down, and would arrive at the office on a flatbed,” Kimbal said.“But Elon always thought big.”*As a bonding exercise one weekend, Musk, Ambras, a few other employeesand friends took off for a bike ride through the Saratoga Gap trail in the SantaCruz Mountains. Most of the riders had been training and were accustomed tostrenuous sessions and the summer’s heat. They set up the mountains at a furiouspace. After an hour, Russ Rive, Musk’s cousin, reached the top and proceeded tovomit. Right behind him were the rest of the cyclists. Then, fifteen minutes later,Musk became visible to the group. His face had turned purple, and sweat pouredout of him, and he made it to the top. “I always think back to that ride. He wasn’tclose to being in the condition needed for it,” Ambras said. “Anyone else wouldhave quit or walked up their bike. As I watched him climb that final hundred feetwith suffering all over his face, I thought, That’s Elon. Do or die but don’t giveup.”Musk continued to be a ball of energy around the office as well. Ahead ofvisits by venture capitalists and other investors, Musk would rally the troops andinstruct them all to get on the phone to create a buzzy atmosphere. He alsoformed a videogame team to participate in competitions around Quake, a first-person-shooter game. “We competed in one of the first nationwide tournaments,”Musk said. “We came in second, and we would have come in first, but one of ourtop players’ machine crashed because he had pushed his graphics card too hard.We won a few thousand dollars.”Zip2 had remarkable success courting newspapers. The New York Times,Knight Ridder, Hearst Corporation, and other media properties signed up to itsservice. Some of these companies contributed $50 million in additional fundingfor Zip2. Services like Craigslist with its free online classifieds had just startedto appear, and the newspapers needed some course of action. “The newspapersknew they were in trouble with the Internet, and the idea was to sign up as manyof them as possible,” Ambras said. “They wanted classifieds and listings for realestate, automotive, and entertainment and could use us as a platform for all theseonline services.” Zip2 acquired a trademark for its “We Power the Press” sloganand the influx of cash kept Zip2 growing fast. Company headquarters were soonso crowded that one desk ended up directly in front of the women’s bathroom. In1997, Zip2 moved into flashier, more spacious digs at 444 Castro Street inMountain View.It irritated Musk that Zip2 had become a behind-the-scenes player to thenewspapers. He believed the company could offer interesting services directly toconsumers and encouraged the purchase of the domain name city.com with thehopes of turning it into a consumer destination. But the lure of the mediacompanies’ money kept Sorkin and the board on a conservative path, and theydecided to worry about a consumer push down the road.In April 1998, Zip2 announced a blockbuster move to double down on itsstrategy. It would merge with its main competitor CitySearch in a deal valued ataround $300 million. The new company would retain the CitySearch name,while Sorkin would head up the venture. On paper, the union looked very muchlike a merger of equals. CitySearch had built up an extensive set of directoriesfor cities around the country. It also appeared to have strong sales and marketingteams that would complement the talented engineers at Zip2. The merger hadbeen announced in the press and seemed inevitable.The opinions on what happened next vary greatly. The logistics of thesituation required the two companies to go over each other’s books and to figureout which employees would be fired to avoid a duplication of roles. This processraised some questions about how frank CitySearch had been with its financialsand rankled some executives at Zip2 who could see their positions beingdiminished or erased altogether at the new company. One faction inside Zip2argued that the deal should be abandoned, while Sorkin demanded that it gothrough. Musk, who had been an early advocate of the deal, turned against it. InMay 1998, the two companies canceled the merger, and the press pounced,making a big deal of the chaotic bust-up. Musk urged Zip2’s board to oustSorkin and reinstate him as CEO of Zip2. The board declined. Instead, Musk losthis chairman title, and Sorkin was replaced by Derek Proudian, a venturecapitalist with Mohr Davidow. Sorkin considered Musk’s behavior through thewhole affair atrocious and later pointed to the board’s reaction and Musk’sdemotion as evidence that they felt the same way. “There was a lot of backlashand finger-pointing,” Proudian said. “Elon wanted to be CEO, but I said, ‘This isyour first company. Let’s find an acquirer and make some money, so you can doyour second, third, and fourth company.’”With the deal busted, Zip2 found itself in a predicament. It was losing money.Musk still wanted to go the consumer route, but Proudian feared that would taketoo much capital. Microsoft had mounted a charge into the same market, andstartups with mapping, real estate, and automotive ideas multiplied. The Zip2engineers were deflated and worried that they might not be able to outrun thecompetition. Then, in February 1999, the PC maker Compaq Computer suddenlyoffered to pay $307 million in cash for Zip2. “It was like pennies from heaven,”said Ed Ho, a former Zip2 executive. Zip2’s board accepted the offer, and thecompany rented out a restaurant in Palo Alto and threw a huge party. MohrDavidow had made back twenty times its original investment, and Musk andKimbal had come away with $22 million and $15 million, respectively. Musknever entertained the idea of sticking around at Compaq. “As soon as it wasclear the company would be sold, Elon was on to his next project,” Proudiansaid. From that point on, Musk would fight to maintain control of his companiesand stay CEO. “We were overwhelmed and just thought these guys must knowwhat they’re doing,” Kimbal said. “But they’ didn’t. There was no vision oncethey took over. They were investors, and we got on well with them, but thevision had just disappeared from the company.”Years later, after he had time to reflect on the Zip2 situation, Musk realizedthat he could have handled some of the situations with employees better. “I hadnever really run a team of any sort before,” Musk said. “I’d never been a sportscaptain or a captain of anything or managed a single person. I had to think,Okay, what are the things that affect how a team functions. The first obviousassumption would be that other people will behave like you. But that’s not true.Even if they would like to behave like you, they don’t necessarily have all theassumptions or information that you have in your mind. So, if I know a certainset of things, and I talk to a replica of myself but only communicate half theinformation, you can’t expect that the replica would come to the sameconclusion. You have to put yourself in a position where you say, ‘Well, howwould this sound to them, knowing what they know?’”Employees at Zip2 would go home at night, come back, and find that Muskhad changed their work without talking to them, and Musk’s confrontationalstyle did more harm than good. “Yeah, we had some very good softwareengineers at Zip2, but I mean, I could code way better than them. And I’d just goin and fix their fucking code,” Musk said. “I would be frustrated waiting for theirstuff, so I’m going to go and fix your code and now it runs five times faster, youidiot. There was one guy who wrote a quantum mechanics equation, a quantumprobability on the board, and he got it wrong. I’m like, ‘How can you writethat?’ Then I corrected it for him. He hated me after that. Eventually, I realized,Okay, I might have fixed that thing but now I’ve made the person unproductive.It just wasn’t a good way to go about things.”Musk, the dot-com striver, had been both lucky and good. He had a decentidea, turned it into a real service, and came out of the dot-com tumult with cashin his pockets, which was better than what many of his compatriots could say.The process had been painful. Musk had yearned to be a leader, but the peoplearound him struggled to see how Musk as the CEO could work. As far as Muskwas concerned, they were all wrong, and he set out to prove his point with whatwould end up being even more dramatic results.