7ALL ELECTRICJ. B. STRAUBEL HAS A TWO-INCH-LONG SCAR that cuts across themiddle of his left cheek. He earned it in high school, during a chemistry classexperiment. Straubel whipped up the wrong concoction of chemicals, and thebeaker he was holding exploded, throwing off shards of glass, one of whichsliced through his face.The wound lingers as a tinkerer’s badge of honor. It arrived near the end of achildhood full of experimentation with chemicals and machines. Born inWisconsin, Straubel constructed a large chemistry lab in the basement of hisfamily’s home that included fume hoods and chemicals ordered, borrowed, orpilfered. At thirteen, Straubel found an old golf cart at the dump. He brought itback home and restored it to working condition, which required him to rebuildthe electric motor. It seemed that Straubel was always taking something apart,sprucing it up, and putting it back together. All of this fit into the Straubelfamily’s do-it-yourself traditions. In the late 1890s Straubel’s great-grandfatherstarted the Straubel Machine Company, which built one of the first internalcombustion engines in the United States and used it to power boats.Straubel’s inquisitive spirit carried him west to Stanford University, where heenrolled in 1994 intending to become a physicist. After flying through thehardest courses he could take, Straubel concluded that majoring in physicswould not be for him. The advanced courses were too theoretical, and Straubelliked to get his hands dirty. He developed his own major called energy systemsand engineering. “I wanted to take software and electricity and use it to controlenergy,” Straubel said. “It was computing combined with power electronics. Icollected all the things I love doing in one place.”There was no clean-technology movement at this time, but there werecompanies dabbling with new uses for solar power and electric vehicles.Straubel ended up hunting down these startups, hanging out in their garages andpestering the engineers. He began tinkering once again on his own as well in thegarage of a house he shared with a half dozen friends. Straubel bought a “pieceof shit Porsche” for $1,600 and turned it into an electric car. This meant thatStraubel had to create a controller to manage the electric motor, build a chargerfrom scratch, and write the software that made the entire machine work. The carset the world record for electric vehicle (EV) acceleration, traveling a quartermile in 17.28 seconds. “The thing I took away was that the electronics weregreat, and you could get acceleration on a shoestring budget, but the batteriessucked,” Straubel said. “It had a thirty-mile range, so I learned firsthand aboutsome of the limitations of electric vehicles.” Straubel gave his car a hybridboost, building a gasoline-powered contraption that could be towed behind thePorsche and used to recharge the batteries. It was good enough for Straubel todrive the four hundred miles down to Los Angeles and back.By 2002, Straubel was living in Los Angeles. He’d gotten a master’s degreefrom Stanford and bounced around a couple of companies looking for somethingthat called out to him. He decided on Rosen Motors, which had built one of theworld’s first hybrid vehicles—a car that ran off a flywheel and a gas turbine andhad electric motors to drive the wheel. After it folded, Straubel followed HaroldRosen, an engineer famed for inventing the geostationary satellite, to create anelectric plane. “I’m a pilot and love to fly, so this was perfect for me,” Straubelsaid. “The idea was that it would stay aloft for two weeks at a time and hoverover a specific spot. This was way before drones and all that.” To help makeends meet, Straubel also worked nights and on the weekend doing electronicsconsulting for a startup.It was in the midst of toiling away on all these projects that Straubel’s oldbuddies from the Stanford solar car team came to pay him a visit. A group ofrogue engineers at Stanford had been working on solar cars for years, buildingthem in a World War II–era Quonset hut full of toxic chemicals and blackwidows. Unlike today, when the university would jump at the chance to supportsuch a project, Stanford tried to shut down this group of fringe freaks and geeks.The students proved very capable of doing the work on their own and competedin cross-country solar-powered car races. Straubel helped build the vehiclesduring his time at university and even after, forming relationships with theincoming crop of engineers. The team had just raced 2,300 miles from Chicagoto Los Angeles, and Straubel offered the strapped, exhausted kids a place to stay.About a half dozen students showed up at Straubel’s place, took their firstshowers in many days, and then spread across his floor. As they chatted late intothe night, Straubel and the solar team kept fixating on one topic. They realizedthat lithium ion batteries—such as the ones in their car being fed by the sun—had gotten much better than most people realized. Many consumer electronicsdevices like laptops were running on so-called 18650 lithium ion batteries,which looked a lot like AA batteries and could be strung together. “We wonderedwhat would happen if you put ten thousand of the battery cells together,”Straubel said. “We did the math and figured you could go almost one thousandmiles. It was totally nerdy shit, and eventually everyone fell asleep, but the ideareally stuck with me.”Soon enough, Straubel was stalking the solar car crew, trying to talk them intobuilding an electric car based on the lithium ion batteries. He would fly up toPalo Alto, spend the night sleeping in his plane, and then ride a bicycle to theStanford campus to make his sales pitch while helping with their currentprojects. The design Straubel had come up with was a super-aerodynamicvehicle with 80 percent of its mass made up of the batteries. It looked quite a bitlike a torpedo on wheels. No one knew the exact details of Straubel’s long-termvision for this thing, including Straubel. The plan seemed to be less aboutforming a car company than about building a proof-of-concept vehicle just to getpeople thinking about the power of the lithium ion batteries. With any luck, theywould find a race to compete in.The Stanford students agreed to join Straubel, if he could raise some money.He began going to trade shows handing out brochures about his idea andemailing just about anyone he could think of. “I was shameless,” he said. Theonly problem was that no one had any interest in what Straubel was selling.Investors dealt him one rejection after another for months on end. Then, in thefall of 2003, Straubel met Elon Musk.Harold Rosen had set up a lunch with Musk at a seafood restaurant near theSpaceX headquarters in Los Angeles and brought Straubel along to help talk upthe electric plane idea. When Musk didn’t bite on that, Straubel announced hiselectric car side project. The crazy idea struck an immediate chord with Musk,who had been thinking about electric vehicles for years. While Musk had mostlyfocused on using ultracapacitors for the vehicles, he was thrilled and surprised tohear how far the lithium ion battery technology had progressed. “Everyone elsehad told me I was nuts, but Elon loved the idea,” Straubel said. “He said, ‘Sure, Iwill give you some money.’” Musk promised Straubel $10,000 of the $100,000he was seeking. On the spot, Musk and Straubel formed a kinship that wouldsurvive more than a decade of extreme highs and lows as they set out to donothing less than change the world.After the meeting with Musk, Straubel reached out to his friends at ACPropulsion. The Los Angeles–based company started in 1992 and was thebleeding edge of electric vehicles, building everything from zippy midsizepassenger jobs right on up to sports cars. Straubel really wanted to show Muskthe tzero (from “t-zero”)—the highest-end vehicle in AC Propulsion’s stable. Itwas a type of kit car that had a fiberglass body sitting on top of a steel frame andwent from zero to 60 miles per hour in 4.9 seconds when first unveiled in 1997.Straubel had spent years hanging out with the AC Propulsion crew and askedTom Gage, the company’s president, to bring a tzero over for Musk to drive.Musk fell for the car. He saw its potential as a screaming-fast machine that couldshift the perception of electric cars from boring and plodding to somethingaspirational. For months Musk offered to fund an effort to transform the kit carinto a commercial vehicle but got rebuffed time and again. “It was a proof ofconcept and needed to be made real,” Straubel said. “I love the hell out of theAC Propulsion guys, but they were sort of hopeless at business and refused to doit. They kept trying to sell Elon on this car called the eBox that looked like shit,didn’t have good performance, and was just uninspiring.” While the meetingswith AC Propulsion didn’t result in a deal, they had solidified Musk’s interest inbacking something well beyond Straubel’s science project. In a late February2004 e-mail to Gage, Musk wrote, “What I’m going to do is figure out the bestchoice of a high performance base car and electric powertrain and go in thatdirection.”Unbeknownst to Straubel, at about the same time, a couple of businesspartners in Northern California had also fallen in love with the idea of making alithium ion battery powered car. Martin Eberhard and Marc Tarpenning hadfounded NuvoMedia in 1997 to create one of the earliest electronic book readers,called the Rocket eBook. The work at NuvoMedia had given the men insightinto cutting-edge consumer electronics and the hugely improved lithium ionbatteries used to power laptops and other portable devices. While the RocketeBook was too far ahead of its time and not a major commercial success, it wasinnovative enough to attract the attention of Gemstar International Group, whichowned TV Guide and some electronic programming guide technology. Gemstarpaid $187 million to acquire NuvoMedia in March 2000. Spoils in hand, thecofounders stayed in touch after the deal. They both lived in Woodside, one ofthe wealthiest towns in Silicon Valley, and chatted from time to time about whatthey should tackle next. “We thought up some goofball things,” said Tarpenning.“There was one plan for these fancy irrigation systems for farms and the homebased on smart water-sensing networks. But nothing really resonated, and wewanted something more important.”Eberhard was a supremely talented engineer with a do-gooder’s socialconscience. The United States’ repeated conflicts in the Middle East botheredhim, and like many other science-minded folks around 2000 he had started toaccept global warming as a reality. Eberhard began looking for alternatives togas-guzzling cars. He investigated the potential of hydrogen fuel cells but foundthem lacking. He also didn’t see much point in leasing something like the EV1electric car from General Motors. What did catch Eberhard’s interest, however,were the all-electric cars from AC Propulsion that he spied on the Internet.Eberhard went down to Los Angeles around 2001 to visit the AC Propulsionshop. “The place looked like a ghost town and like they were going out ofbusiness,” Eberhard said. “I bailed them out with five hundred thousand dollarsso that they could build one of their cars for me with lithium ion instead of leadacid batteries.” Eberhard too tried to goad AC Propulsion into being acommercial enterprise rather than a hobby shop. When they rejected hisovertures, Eberhard decided to form his own company and see what the lithiumion batteries could really do.Eberhard’s journey began with him building a technical model of the electriccar on a spreadsheet. This let him tweak various components and see how theymight affect the vehicle’s shape and performance. He could adjust the weight,number of batteries, resistance of the tires and body, and then get back answerson how many batteries it would take to power the various designs. The modelsmade it clear that SUVs, which were very popular at the time, and things likedelivery trucks were unlikely candidates. The technology seemed instead tofavor a lighter-weight, high-end sports car, which would be fast, fun to drive,and have far better range than most people would expect. These technicalspecifications complemented the findings of Tarpenning, who had been doingresearch into a financial model for the car. The Toyota Prius had started to takeoff in California, and it was being purchased by wealthy eco-crusaders. “We alsolearned that the average income for EV1 owners was around two hundredthousand dollars per year,” Tarpenning said. People who used to go after theLexus, BMW, and Cadillac brands saw electric and hybrid cars as a differentkind of status symbol. The men figured they could build something for the $3billion per year luxury auto market in the United States that would let richpeople have fun and feel good about themselves too. “People pay for cool andsexy and an amazing zero-to-sixty time,” Tarpenning said.On July 1, 2003, Eberhard and Tarpenning incorporated their new company.While at Disneyland a few months earlier on a date with his wife, Eberhard hadcome up with the name Tesla Motors, both to pay homage to the inventor andelectric motor pioneer Nikola Tesla and because it sounded cool. The cofoundersrented an office that had three desks and two small rooms in a decrepit 1960sbuilding located at 845 Oak Grove Avenue in Menlo Park. The third desk wasoccupied a few months later by Ian Wright, an engineer who grew up on a farmin New Zealand. He was a neighbor of the Tesla cofounders in Woodside, andhad been working with them to hone his pitch for a networking startup. Whenthe startup failed to raise any money from venture capitalists, Wright joinedTesla. As the three men began to tell some of their confidants of their plans, theywere confronted with universal derision. “We met a friend at this Woodside pubto tell her what we had finally decided to do and that it was going to be anelectric car,” Tarpenning said. “She said, ‘You have to be kidding me.’”Anyone who tries to build a car company in the United States is quicklyreminded that the last successful startup in the industry was Chrysler, founded in1925. Designing and building a car from the ground up comes with plenty ofchallenges, but it’s really getting the money and know-how to build lots of carsthat has thwarted past efforts to get a new company going. The Tesla founderswere aware of these realities. They figured that Nikola Tesla had built an electricmotor a century earlier and that creating a drivetrain to take the power from themotor and send it to the wheels was doable. The really frightening part of theirenterprise would be building the factory to make the car and its associated parts.But the more the Tesla guys researched the industry, the more they realized thatthe big automakers don’t even really build their cars anymore. The days ofHenry Ford having raw materials delivered to one end of his Michigan factoryand then sending cars out the other end had long passed. “BMW didn’t make itswindshields or upholstery or rearview mirrors,” Tarpenning said. “The onlything the big car companies had kept was internal combustion research, sales andmarketing, and the final assembly. We thought naïvely that we could access allthe same suppliers for our parts.”The plan the Tesla cofounders came up with was to license some technologyfrom AC Propulsion around the tzero vehicle and to use the Lotus Elise chassisfor the body of their car. Lotus, the English carmaker, had released the two-doorElise in 1996, and it certainly had the sleek, ground-hugging appeal to make astatement to high-end car buyers. After talking to a number of people in the cardealership business, the Tesla team decided to avoid selling their cars throughpartners and sell direct. With these basics of a plan in place, the three men wenthunting for some venture capital funding in January 2004.To make things feel more real for the investors, the Tesla founders borrowed atzero from AC Propulsion and drove it to the venture capital corridor of SandHill Road. The car accelerated faster than a Ferrari, and this translated intovisceral excitement for the investors. The downside, though, was that venturecapitalists are not a terribly imaginative bunch, and they struggled to see past thecrappy plastic finish of this glorified kit car. The only venture capitalists that bitwere Compass Technology Partners and SDL Ventures, and they didn’t soundaltogether thrilled. The lead partner at Compass had made out well onNuvoMedia and felt some loyalty to Eberhard and Tarpenning. “He said, ‘This isstupid, but I have invested in every automotive startup for the last forty years, sowhy not,’” Tarpenning recalled. Tesla still needed a lead investor who wouldpony up the bulk of the $7 million needed to make what’s known as a mule or aprototype vehicle. That would be their first milestone and give them somethingphysical to show off, which could aid a second round of funding.Eberhard and Tarpenning had Elon Musk’s name in the back of their heads asa possible lead investor from the outset. They had both seen him speak a coupleof years earlier at a Mars Society conference held at Stanford where Musk hadlaid out his vision of sending mice into space, and they got the impression thathe thought a bit differently and would be open to the idea of an electric car. Theidea to pitch Musk on Tesla Motors solidified when Tom Gage from ACPropulsion called Eberhard and told him that Musk was looking to fundsomething in the electric car arena. Eberhard and Wright flew down to LosAngeles and met with Musk on a Friday. That weekend, Musk pepperedTarpenning, who had been away on a trip, with questions about the financialmodel. “I just remember responding, responding, and responding,” Tarpenningsaid. “The following Monday, Martin and I flew down to meet him again, and hesaid, ‘Okay, I’m in.’”The Tesla founders felt like they had lucked into the perfect investor. Muskhad the engineering smarts to know what they were building. He also sharedtheir larger goal of trying to end the United States’ addiction to oil. “You needangel investors to have some belief, and it wasn’t a purely financial transactionfor him,” Tarpenning said. “He wanted to change the energy equation of thecountry.” With an investment of $6.5 million, Musk had become the largestshareholder of Tesla and the chairman of the company. Musk would later wieldhis position of strength well while battling Eberhard for control of Tesla. “It wasa mistake,” Eberhard said. “I wanted more investors. But, if I had to do it again,I would take his money. A bird in the hand, you know. We needed it.”Not long after this meeting took place, Musk called Straubel and urged him tomeet with the Tesla team. Straubel heard that their offices in Menlo Park wereabout a half a mile from his house, and he was intrigued but very skeptical oftheir story. No one on the planet was more dialed into the electric vehicle scenethan Straubel, and he found it hard to believe that a couple of guys had gottenthis far along without word of their project reaching him. Nonetheless, Straubelstopped by the office for a meeting, and was hired right away in May 2004 at asalary of $95,000 per year. “I told them that I had been building the battery packthey need down the street with funding from Elon,” Straubel said. “We agreed tojoin forces and formed this ragtag group.”Had anyone from Detroit stopped by Tesla Motors at this point, they wouldhave ended up in hysterics. The sum total of the company’s automotive expertisewas that a couple of the guys at Tesla really liked cars and another one hadcreated a series of science fair projects based on technology that the automotiveindustry considered ridiculous. What’s more, the founding team had no intentionof turning to Detroit for advice on how to build a car company. No, Tesla woulddo what every other Silicon Valley startup had done before it, which was hire abunch of young, hungry engineers and figure things out as they went along.Never mind that the Bay Area had no real history of this model ever havingworked for something like a car and that building a complex, physical object hadlittle in common with writing a software application. What Tesla did have, aheadof anyone else, was the realization that 18650 lithium ion batteries had gottenreally good and were going to keep getting better. Hopefully that coupled withsome effort and smarts would be enough.Straubel had a direct pipeline into the smart, energetic engineers at Stanfordand told them about Tesla. Gene Berdichevsky, one of the members of the solar-powered-car team, lit up the second he heard from Straubel. An undergraduate,Berdichevsky volunteered to quit school, work for free, and sweep the floors atTesla if that’s what it took to get a job. The founders were impressed with hisspirit and hired Berdichevsky after one meeting. This left Berdichevsky in theuncomfortable position of calling his Russian immigrant parents, a pair ofnuclear submarine engineers, to tell them that he was giving up on Stanford tojoin an electric car startup. As employee No. 7, he spent part of the workday inthe Menlo Park office and the rest in Straubel’s living room designing three-dimensional models of the car’s powertrain on a computer and building batterypack prototypes in the garage. “Only now do I realize how insane it was,”Berdichevsky said.Tesla soon needed to expand to accommodate its budding engineer army andto create a workshop that would help bring the Roadster, as they were nowcalling the car, to life. They found a two-story industrial building in San Carlosat 1050 Commercial Street. The 10,000-square-foot facility wasn’t much, but ithad room to build a research and development shop capable of knocking outsome prototype cars. There were a couple of large assembly bays on the ride sideof the building and two large rollup doors big enough for cars to drive in and out.Wright divided the open floor space into segments—motors, batteries, powerelectronics, and final assembly. The left half of the building was an office spacethat had been modified in weird ways by the previous tenant, a plumbing supplycompany. The main conference room had a wet bar and a sink where the faucetwas a swan’s mouth, and the hot and cold knobs were wings. Berdichevskypainted the office white on a Sunday night, and the next week the employeesmade a field trip to IKEA to buy desks and hopped online to order theircomputers from Dell. As for tools, Tesla had a single Craftsman toolbox loadedwith hammers, nails, and other carpentry basics. Musk would visit now andagain from Los Angeles and was unfazed by the conditions, having seen SpaceXgrow up in similar surroundings.The original plan for producing a prototype vehicle sounded simple. Teslawould take the AC Propulsion tzero powertrain and fit it into the Lotus Elisebody. The company had acquired a schematic for an electric motor design andfigured it could buy a transmission from a company in the United States orEurope and outsource any other parts from Asia. Tesla’s engineers mostlyneeded to focus on developing the battery pack systems, wiring the car, andcutting and welding metal as needed to bring everything together. Engineers loveto muck around with hardware, and the Tesla team thought of the Roadster assomething akin to a car conversion project that could be done with two or threemechanical engineers, and a few assembly people.The main team of prototype builders consisted of Straubel, Berdichevsky, andDavid Lyons, a very clever mechanical engineer and employee No. 12. Lyonshad about a decade of experience working for Silicon Valley companies and hadmet Straubel a few years before when the two men struck up a conversation at a7-Eleven about an electric bike Straubel was riding. Lyons had helped Straubelpay bills by hiring him as a consultant for a company building a device tomeasure people’s core body temperature. Straubel thought he could return thefavor by bringing Lyons on early to such an exciting project. Tesla would benefitin a big way as well. As Berdichevsky put it, “Dave Lyons knew how to get shitdone.”The engineers bought a blue lift for the car and set it up inside the building.They also purchased some machine tools, hand tools, and floodlights to work atnight and started to turn the facility into a hotbed of R&D activity. Electricalengineers studied the Lotus’s base-level software to figure out how it tiedtogether the pedals, mechanical apparatus, and the dashboard gauges. The reallyadvanced work took place with the battery pack design. No one had ever tried tocombine hundreds of lithium ion batteries in parallel, so Tesla ended up at thecutting edge of the technology.The engineers started trying to understand how heat would dissipate andcurrent flow would behave across seventy batteries by supergluing them togetherinto groups called bricks. Then ten bricks would be placed together, and theengineers would test various types of air and liquid cooling mechanisms. Whenthe Tesla team had developed a workable battery pack, they stretched the yellowLotus Elise chassis five inches and lowered the pack with a crane into the backof the car, where its engine would normally be. These efforts began in earnest onOctober 18, 2004, and, rather remarkably, four months later, on January 27,2005, an entirely new kind of car had been built by eighteen people. It couldeven be driven around. Tesla had a board meeting that day, and Musk zippedabout in the car. He came away happy enough to keep investing. Musk put in $9million more as Tesla raised a $13 million funding round. The company nowplanned to deliver the Roadster to consumers in early 2006.Once they’d finished building a second car a few months later, the engineersat Tesla decided they needed to face up to a massive potential flaw in theirelectric vehicle. On July 4, 2005, they were at Eberhard’s house in Woodsidecelebrating Independence Day and figured it was as good a moment as any to seewhat happened when the Roadster’s batteries caught on fire. Someone tapedtwenty of the batteries together, put a heating strip wire into the bundle, and set itoff. “It went up like a cluster of bottle rockets,” Lyons said. Instead of twentybatteries, the Roadster would have close to 7,000, and the thought of what anexplosion at that scale would be like horrified the engineers. One of the perks ofan electric car was meant to be that it moved people away from a flammableliquid like gasoline and the endless explosions that take place in an engine. Richpeople were unlikely to pay a high price for something even more dangerous,and the early nightmare scenario for the employees at Tesla was that a rich,famous person would get caught in a fire caused by the car. “It was one of those‘oh shit’ moments,” Lyons said. “That is when we really sobered up.”Tesla formed a six-person task force to deal with the battery issue. They werepulled off all other work and given money to begin running experiments. Thefirst explosions started taking place at the Tesla headquarters, where theengineers filmed them in slow motion. Once saner minds prevailed, Tesla movedits explosion research to a blast area behind an electrical substation maintainedby the fire department. Blast by blast, the engineers learned a great deal aboutthe inner workings of the batteries. They developed methods for arranging themin ways that would prevent fires spreading from one battery to the next and othertechniques for stopping explosions altogether. Thousands of batteries explodedalong the way, and the effort was worth it. It was still early days, for sure, butTesla was on the verge of inventing battery technology that would set it apartfrom rivals for years to come and would become one of the company’s greatadvantages.The early success at building two prototype cars, coupled with Tesla’sengineering breakthroughs around the batteries and other technological pieces,boosted the company’s confidence. It was time to put Tesla’s stamp on thevehicle. “The original plan had been to do the bare minimum we could get awaywith as far as making the car stylistically different from a Lotus but electric,”said Tarpenning. “Along the way, Elon and the rest of the board said, ‘You onlyget to do this once. It has to delight the customer, and the Lotus just isn’t goodenough to do that.’”The Elise’s chassis, or base frame, worked fine for Tesla’s engineeringpurposes. But the body of the car had serious issues in both form and function.The door on the Elise was all of a foot tall, and you were meant to either jumpinto the car or fall into it, depending on your flexibility and/or dignity. The bodyalso needed to be longer to accommodate Tesla’s battery pack and a trunk. AndTesla preferred to make the Roadster out of carbon fiber instead of fiberglass. Onthese design points, Musk had a lot of opinion and influence. He wanted a carthat Justine could feel comfortable getting into and that had some measure ofpracticality. Musk made these opinions clear when he visited Tesla for boardmeetings and design reviews.Tesla hired a handful of designers to mock up new looks for the Roadster.After settling on a favorite, the company paid to build a quarter-scale model ofthe vehicle in January 2005 and then a full-scale model in April. This processprovided the Tesla executives with yet another revelation of everything that wentinto making a car. “They wrap this shiny Mylar material around the model andvacuum it, so that you can really see the contours and shine and shadows,”Tarpenning said. The silver model was then turned into a digital rendering thatthe engineers could manipulate on their computers. A British company took thedigital file and used it to create a plastic version of the car called an “aero buck”for aerodynamics testing. “They put it on a boat and shipped it to us, and then wetook it to Burning Man,” Tarpenning said, referring to the annual drug-infusedart festival held in the Nevada desert.About a year later, after many tweaks and much work, Tesla had a pencils-down moment. It was May 2006, and the company had grown to a hundredemployees. This team built a black version of the Roadster known as EP1, orengineering prototype one. “It was saying, ‘We now think we know what we willbuild,’” Tarpenning said. “You can feel it. It’s a real car, and it’s very exciting.”The arrival of the EP1 provided a great excuse to show existing investors whattheir money had bought and to ask for more funds from a wider audience. Theventure capitalists were impressed enough to overlook the fact that engineerssometimes had to manually fan the car to cool it down in between test drives andwere now starting to grasp Tesla’s long-term potential. Musk once again putmoney into Tesla—$12 million—and a handful of other investors, including theventure capital firm Draper Fisher Jurvetson, VantagePoint Capital Partners, J.P.Morgan, Compass Technology Partners, Nick Pritzker, Larry Page, and SergeyBrin, joined the $40 million round.*In July 2006, Tesla decided to tell the world what it had been up to. Thecompany’s engineers had built a red prototype—EP2—to complement the blackone, and they both went on display at an event in Santa Clara. The press flockedto the announcement and were quite taken with what they saw. The Roadsterswere gorgeous, two-seater convertibles that could go from zero to 60 in aboutfour seconds. “Until today,” Musk said at the event, “all electric cars havesucked.”6Celebrities like then-governor Arnold Schwarzenegger and former DisneyCEO Michael Eisner showed up at the event, and many of them took test rides inthe Roadsters. The vehicles were so fragile that only Straubel and a couple ofother trusted hands knew how to run them, and they were swapped out everyfive minutes to avoid overheating. Tesla revealed that each car would cost about$90,000 and had a range of 250 miles per charge. Thirty people, the companysaid, had committed to buying a Roadster, including the Google cofounders Brinand Page and a handful of other technology billionaires. Musk promised that acheaper car—a four-seat, four-door model under $50,000, would arrive in aboutthree years.Around the time of this event, Tesla made its debut in the New York Times viaa mini-profile on the company. Eberhard vowed—optimistically—to beginshipments of the Roadster in the middle of 2007, instead of early 2006 as onceplanned, and laid out Tesla’s strategy of starting with a high-priced, low-volumeproduct and moving down to more affordable products over time, as underlyingtechnology and manufacturing capabilities advanced. Musk and Eberhard werebig believers in this strategy, having seen it play out with a number of electronicdevices. “Cellphones, refrigerators, color TV’s, they didn’t start off by making alow-end product for masses,” Eberhard told the paper.7 “They were relativelyexpensive, for people who could afford it.” While the story was a coup for Tesla,Musk didn’t appreciate being left out of the article entirely. “We tried toemphasize him, and told the reporter about him over and over again, but theyweren’t interested in the board of the company,” Tarpenning said. “Elon wasfurious. He was livid.”You could understand why Musk might want some of the shine of Tesla to ruboff on him. The car had turned into a cause célèbre of the automotive world.Electric vehicles tended to invoke religious overreactions from both the pro andcon camps, and the appearance of a good-looking, fast electric car stokedeveryone’s passions. Tesla had also turned Silicon Valley into a real threat, atleast conceptually, to Detroit for the first time. The month after the Santa Monicaevent was the Pebble Beach Concours d’Elegance, a famous showcase for exoticcars. Tesla had become such a topic of conversation that the organizers of theevent begged to have a Roadster and waived the usual display fees. Tesla set upa booth, and people showed up by the dozens writing $100,000 checks on thespot to pre-order their cars. “This was long before Kickstarter, and we just hadnot thought of trying to do that,” Tarpenning said. “But then we started gettingmillions of dollars at these types of events.” Venture capitalists, celebrities, andfriends of Tesla employees began trying to buy their way onto the waiting list.Some of Silicon Valley’s wealthy elite went so far as to show up at the Teslaoffice and knock on the door, looking to buy a car. The entrepreneurs KonstantinOthmer and Bruce Leak, who had known Musk from his internship days atRocket Science Games, did just that one weekday and ended up getting apersonal tour of the car from Musk and Eberhard that stretched over a couple ofhours. “At the end we said, ‘We’ll take one,’” Othmer said. “They weren’tactually allowed to sell cars yet, though, so we joined their club. It cost onehundred thousand dollars, but one of the benefits of membership was that you’dget a free car.”As Tesla switched from marketing back into R&D mode, it had some trendsworking in its favor. Advances in computing had made it so that small carcompanies could sometimes punch at the same weight as the giants of theindustry. Years ago, automakers would have needed to make a fleet of cars forcrash testing. Tesla could not afford to do that, and it didn’t have to. The thirdRoadster engineering prototype went to the same collision testing facility usedby large automakers, giving Tesla access to top-of-the-line high-speed camerasand other imaging technology. Thousands of other tests, though, were done by athird party that specialized in computer simulations and saved Tesla frombuilding a fleet of crash vehicles. Tesla also had equal access to the big guys’durability tracks made out of cobblestones and concrete embedded with metalobjects. It could replicate 100,000 miles and ten years of wear at these facilities.Quite often, the Tesla engineers brought their Silicon Valley attitude to theautomakers’ traditional stomping grounds. There’s a break and traction testingtrack in northern Sweden near the Arctic Circle where cars get tuned on largeplains of ice. It would be standard to run the car for three days or so, get the data,and return to company headquarters for many weeks of meetings about how toadjust the car. The whole process of tuning a car can take the entire winter. Tesla,by contrast, sent its engineers along with the Roadsters being tested and hadthem analyze the data on the spot. When something needed to be tweaked, theengineers would rewrite some code and send the car back on the ice. “BMWwould need to have a confab between three or four companies that would allblame each other for the problem,” Tarpenning said. “We just fixed it ourselves.”Another testing procedure required that the Roadsters go into a special coolingchamber to check how they would respond to frigid temperatures. Not wantingto pay the exorbitant costs to use one of these chambers, the Tesla engineersopted to rent an ice cream delivery truck with a large refrigerated trailer.Someone would drive a Roadster into the truck, and the engineers would donparkas and work on the car.Every time Tesla interacted with Detroit it received a reminder of how theonce-great city had been separated from its own can-do culture. Tesla tried tolease a small office in Detroit. The costs were incredibly low compared withspace in Silicon Valley, but the city’s bureaucracy made getting just a basicoffice an ordeal. The building’s owner wanted to see seven years of auditedfinancials from Tesla, which was still a private company. Then the buildingowner wanted two years’ worth of advanced rent. Tesla had about $50 million inthe bank and could have bought the building outright. “In Silicon Valley, you sayyou’re backed by a venture capitalist, and that’s the end of the negotiation,”Tarpenning said. “But everything was like that in Detroit. We’d get FedExboxes, and they couldn’t even decide who should sign for the package.”Throughout these early years, the engineers credited Eberhard with makingquick, crisp decisions. Rarely did Tesla get hung up overanalyzing a situation.The company would pick a plan of attack, and when it failed at something, itfailed fast and then tried a new approach. It was many of the changes that Muskwanted that started to delay the Roadster. Musk kept pushing for the car to bemore comfortable, asking for alterations to the seats and the doors. He made thecarbon-fiber body a priority, and he pushed for electronic sensors on the doors sothat the Roadster could be unlocked with the touch of a finger instead of a tug ona handle. Eberhard groused that these features were slowing the company down,and many of the engineers agreed. “It felt at times like Elon was thisunreasonably demanding overarching force,” said Berdichevsky. “The companyas a whole was sympathetic to Martin because he was there all the time, and weall felt the car should ship sooner.”By the middle of 2007, Tesla had grown to 260 employees and seemed to bepulling off the impossible. It had produced the fastest, most beautiful electric carthe world had ever seen almost from thin air. All it had to do next was build a lotof the cars—a process that would end up almost bankrupting the company.The greatest mistake Tesla’s executives made in the early days wereassumptions around the transmission system for the Roadster. The goal hadalways been to get from zero to 60 mph as quickly as possible in the hopes thatthe raw speed of the Roadster would attract a lot of attention and make it fun todrive. To do this, Tesla’s engineers had decided on a two-speed transmission,which is the underlying mechanism in the car for transferring power from themotor to the wheels. The first gear would take the car from zero to 60 mph inless than four seconds, and then the second gear would take the car up to 130mph. Tesla had hired Xtrac, a British company specializing in transmissiondesigns, to build this part and had every reason to believe that this would be oneof the smoother bits of the Roadster’s journey. “People had been makingtransmissions since Robert Fulton built the steam engine,” said Bill Currie,8 aveteran Silicon Valley engineer and employee No. 86 at Tesla. “We thought youwould just order one. But the first one we had lasted forty seconds.” The initialtransmission could not handle the big jump from the first to the second gear, andthe fear was that the second gear would engage at high speed and not besynchronized with the motor properly, which would result in catastrophicdamage to the car.Lyons and the other engineers quickly set out to try to fix the issue. Theyfound a couple of other contractors to design replacements and again hoped thatthese longtime transmission experts would deliver something usable withrelative ease. It soon became apparent, however, that the contractors were notalways putting their A team to work on this project for a tiny startup in SiliconValley and that the new transmissions were no better than the first. During tests,Tesla found that the transmissions would sometimes break after 150 miles andthat the mean time between failures was about 2,000 miles. When a team fromDetroit ran a root cause analysis of the transmission to find failures, theydiscovered fourteen separate issues that could cause the system to break. Teslahad wanted to deliver the Roadster in November 2007, but the transmissionissues lingered, and by the time January 1, 2008, rolled around, the company hadto once again start from scratch, on a third transmission push.Tesla also faced issues abroad. The company had decided to send a team of itsyoungest, most energetic engineers to Thailand to set up a battery factory. Teslapartnered with an enthusiastic although not totally capable manufacturingpartner. The Tesla engineers had been told that they could fly over and managethe construction of a state-of-the-art battery factory. Instead of a factory, theyfound a concrete slab with posts holding up a roof. The building was about athree-hour drive south from Bangkok, and had been left mostly open like manyof the other factories because of the incredible heat. The other manufacturingoperations dealt with making stoves, tires, and commodities that could withstandthe elements. Tesla had sensitive batteries and electronics, and like parts of theFalcon 1, they’d be chewed up by the salty, humid conditions. Eventually,Tesla’s partner paid about $75,000 to put in drywall, coat the floor, and createstorage rooms with temperature controls. Tesla’s engineers ended up workingmaddening hours trying to train the Thai workers on how to handle theelectronics properly. The development of the battery technology, which had oncemoved along at a rapid pace, slowed to a crawl.The battery factory was one part of a supply chain that stretched across theglobe, adding cost and delays to the Roadster production. Body panels for thecar were to be made in France, while the motors were to come from Taiwan.Tesla planned on buying battery cells in China and shipping them to Thailand toturn the piece parts into battery packs. The battery packs, which had to be storedfor a minimal amount of time to avoid degradation, would then be taken to portand shipped to England, where they needed to clear customs. Tesla then plannedfor Lotus to build the body of the car, attach the battery packs, and ship theRoadsters by boat around Cape Horn to Los Angeles. In that scenario, Teslawould have paid for the bulk of the car and had no chance to recognize revenueon the parts until six to nine months had passed. “The idea was to get to Asia,get things done fast and cheap, and make money on the car,” said Forrest North,one of the engineers sent to Thailand. “What we found out was that for reallycomplicated things, you can do the work cheaper here and have less delays andless problems.” When some new hires came on, they were horrified to discoverjust how haphazard Tesla’s plan appeared. Ryan Popple, who had spent fouryears in the army and then gotten an MBA from Harvard, arrived at Tesla as adirector of finance meant to prep the company to go public. After examining thecompany’s books early in his tenure, Popple asked the manufacturing andoperations head exactly how he would get the car made. “He said, ‘Well, we willdecide we’re going into production and then a miracle is going to happen,’”Popple said.As word of the manufacturing issues reached Musk, he became veryconcerned about the way Eberhard had run the company and called in a fixer toaddress the situation. One of Tesla’s investors was Valor Equity, a Chicago-basedinvestment firm that specialized in fine-tuning manufacturing operations. Thecompany had been drawn to Tesla’s battery and powertrain technology andcalculated that even if Tesla failed to sell many cars, the big automakers wouldend up wanting to buy its intellectual property. To protect its investment, Valorsent in Tim Watkins, its managing director of operations, and he soon reachedsome horrific conclusions.Watkins is a Brit with degrees in industrial robotics and electrical engineering.He’s built up a reputation as an ingenious solver of problems. While doing workin Switzerland, for example, Watkins found a way to get around the country’srigid labor laws that limit the hours employees can work, by automating a metalstamping factory so that it could run twenty-four hours per day instead of sixteenhours like the factories or rivals. Watkins is also known for keeping his ponytailin place with a black scrunchie, wearing a black leather jacket, and toting a blackfanny pack everywhere he goes. The fanny pack has his passport, checkbook,earplugs, sunscreen, food, and an assortment of other necessities. “It’s full of theeveryday things I need to survive,” said Watkins. “If I walk ten feet away fromthis thing, I sense it.” While a bit eccentric, Watkins was thorough and spentweeks talking to employees and analyzing every part of Tesla’s supply chain tofigure out how much it cost to make the Roadster.Tesla had done a decent job of keeping its employee costs down. It hired thekid fresh out of Stanford for $45,000 rather than the proven guy who probablydidn’t want to work that hard anyway for $120,000. But when it came toequipment and materials, Tesla was a spending horror show. No one liked usingthe company’s software that tracked the bill of materials. So some people used it,and some people didn’t. Those that did use it often made huge errors. Theywould take the cost of a part from the prototype cars and then estimate howmuch of a discount they expected when buying that part in bulk, rather thanactually negotiating to find a viable price. At one point, the software declaredthat each Roadster should cost about $68,000, which would leave Tesla makingabout $30,000 per vehicle. Everyone knew the figure was wrong, but it gotreported to the board anyway.Around the middle of 2007, Watkins came to Musk with his findings. Muskwas prepared for a high figure but felt confident that the price of the car wouldcome down significantly over time as Tesla ironed out its manufacturing processand increased its sales. “That’s when Tim told me it was really bad news,” Musksaid. It looked like each Roadster could cost up to $200,000 to make, and Teslaplanned to sell the car for only around $85,000. “Even in full production, theywould have been like $170,000 or something insane,” Musk said. “Of course, itdidn’t much matter because about a third of the cars didn’t flat-out fuckingwork.”Eberhard made attempts to pull his team out of this mess. He’d gone to see aspeech in which the famous venture capitalist John Doerr, who became a majorinvestor in green technology companies, declared that he would devote his timeand money to trying to save the Earth from global warming because he owedsuch an effort to his children. Eberhard promptly returned to the Tesla buildingand ginned up a similar speech. In front of about a hundred people, Eberhard hada picture of his young daughter projected onto the wall of the main workshop.He asked the Tesla engineers why he had put that picture up. One of themguessed that it was because people like his daughter would drive the car. Towhich Eberhard replied, “No. We are building this because by the time she is oldenough to drive she will know a car as something completely different to howwe know it today, just like you don’t think of a phone as a thing on the wall witha cord on it. It’s this future that depends on you.” Eberhard then thanked some ofthe key engineers and called out their efforts in public. Many of the engineershad been pulling all-nighters on a regular basis and Eberhard’s show boostedmorale. “We were all working ourselves to the point of exhaustion,” said DavidVespremi, a former Tesla spokesman. “Then came this profound moment wherewe were reminded that building the car was not about getting to an IPO orselling it to a bunch of rich dudes but because it might change what a car is.”These victories, though, were not enough to overcome the feeling shared bymany of the Tesla engineers that Eberhard had reached the end of his abilities asa CEO. The company veterans had always admired Eberhard’s engineeringsmarts and continued to do so. Eberhard, in fact, had turned Tesla into a cult ofengineering. Regrettably, other parts of the company had been neglected, andpeople doubted Eberhard’s ability to take the company from the R&D stage toproduction. The ridiculous cost of the car, the transmission, the ineffectivesuppliers were crippling Tesla. And, as the company started to miss its deliverydates, many of the once-fanatical consumers who had made their large up-frontpayments turned on Tesla and Eberhard. “We saw the writing on the wall,”Lyons said. “Everyone knew that the person who starts a company is notnecessarily the right person to lead it in the long term, but whenever that is thecase, it’s not easy.”Eberhard and Musk had battled for years over some of the design points onthe car. But for the most part, they had gotten along well enough. Neither mansuffered fools. And they certainly shared many of the same visions for thebattery technology and what it could mean to the world. What their relationshipcould not survive were the cost figures for the Roadster unearthed by Watkins. Itlooked to Musk as if Eberhard had grossly mismanaged the company byallowing the parts costs to soar so high. Then, as Musk saw it, Eberhard failed todisclose the severity of the situation to the board. While on his way to give a talkto the Motor Press Guild in Los Angeles, Eberhard received a call from Muskand in a brief, uncomfortable chat learned that he would be replaced as CEO.In August 2007, Tesla’s board demoted Eberhard and named him president oftechnology, which only exacerbated the company’s issues. “Martin was so bitterand disruptive,” Straubel said. “I remember him running around the office andsowing discontent, as we’re trying to finish the car and are running out of moneyand everything is at knife’s edge.” As Eberhard saw it, other people at Tesla hadfoisted a wonky finance software application on him that made it tricky toaccurately track costs. He contended that the delays and cost increases werepartly due to the requests of other members of the management team and thathe’d been up front with the board about the issues. Beyond that, he thoughtWatkins had made the situation out to be worse than it really was. Startups inSilicon Valley view mayhem as standard operating procedure. “Valor was usedto dealing with older companies,” Eberhard said. “They found chaos and weren’tused to it. This was the chaos of a startup.” Eberhard had also already beenasking Tesla’s board to replace him as CEO and find someone with moremanufacturing experience.A few months passed, and Eberhard remained pissed-off. Many of the Teslaemployees felt like they were caught in the middle of a divorce and had to picktheir parent—Eberhard or Musk. By the time December arrived, the situationwas untenable, and Eberhard left the company altogether. Tesla said in astatement that Eberhard had been offered a position on its advisory board,although he denied that. “I am no longer with Tesla Motors—neither on its boardof directors nor an employee of any sort,” Eberhard said in a statement at thetime. “I’m not happy with the way I was treated.” Musk sent a note to a SiliconValley newspaper saying, “I’m sorry that it came to this and wish it were not so.It was not a question of personality differences, as the decision to have Martintransition to an advisory role was unanimous among the board. Tesla hasoperational problems that need to be solved and if the board thought there wasany way that Martin could be part of the solution, then he would still be anemployee of the company.”9 These statements were the start of a war that woulddrag on between the two men in public for years and that in many wayscontinues to the present day.As 2007 played out, the problems mounted for Tesla. The carbon-fiber bodythat looked so good turned out to be a huge pain to paint, and Tesla had to cyclethrough a couple of companies to find one that could do the work well.Sometimes there were faults in the battery pack. The motor short-circuited nowand again. The body panels had visible gaps. The company also had to face up tothe reality that a two-speed transmission was not going to happen. In order forthe Roadster to achieve its flashy zero-to-60 times with a single-speedtransmission, Tesla’s engineers had to redesign the car’s motor and inverter andshave off some weight. “We essentially had to do a complete reboot,” Musk said.“That was terrible.”After Eberhard was removed as CEO, Tesla’s board tapped Michael Marks asits interim chief. Marks had run Flextronics, an enormous electronics supplier,and had deep experience with complex manufacturing operations and logisticsissues. Marks began interrogating various groups at the company to try to figureout their problems and to prioritize the issues plaguing the Roadster. He also putin some basic rules like making sure that people all showed up at work at thesame time to establish a baseline of productivity—a tricky ask in Silicon Valley’swork anywhere, anytime culture. All of these moves were part of the Marks List,a 10-point, 100-day plan that included eliminating all faults in the battery packs,getting gaps between body parts to less than 40 mm, and booking a specifiednumber of reservations. “Martin had been falling apart and lacked a lot of thediscipline key for a manager,” Straubel said. “Michael came in and evaluated themess and was a bullshit filter. He didn’t really have a dog in the fight and couldsay, ‘I don’t care what you think or what you think. This is what we should do.’”For a while, Marks’s strategy worked, and the engineers at Tesla could onceagain focus on building the Roadster rather than on internal politics. But thenMarks’s vision for the company began to diverge from Musk’s.By this time, Tesla had moved into a larger facility at 1050 Bing Street in SanCarlos. The bigger building allowed Tesla to bring the battery work back in-house from Asia and for it to do some of the Roadster manufacturing, alleviatingthe supply chain issues. Tesla was maturing as a car company, although its wild-child startup streak remained well intact. While strolling around the factory oneday, Marks saw a Smart car from Daimler on a lift. Musk and Straubel had asmall side project going on around the Smart car to see what it might be like asan electric vehicle. “Michael didn’t know about it, and he’s like, ‘Who is theCEO here?’” said Lyons. (The work on the Smart car eventually led to Daimlerbuying a 10 percent stake in Tesla.)Marks’s inclination was to try to package Tesla as an asset that could be soldto a larger car company. It was a perfectly reasonable plan. While runningFlextronics, Marks had overseen a vast, global supply chain and knew thedifficulties of manufacturing intimately. Tesla must have looked borderlinehopeless to him at this point. The company could not make its one product well,was poised to hemorrhage money, and had missed a string of delivery deadlinesand yet its engineers were still off doing side experiments. Making Tesla look aspretty as possible for a suitor was the rational thing to do.In just about every other case, Marks would be thanked for his decisive planof action and saving the company’s investors from a big loss. But Musk had littleinterest in polishing up Tesla’s assets for the highest bidder. He’d started thecompany to put a dent in the automotive industry and force people to rethinkelectric cars. Instead of doing the fashionable Silicon Valley thing of “pivoting”toward a new idea or plan, Musk would dig in deeper. “The product was late andover budget and everything was wrong, but Elon didn’t want anything to do withthose plans to either sell the whole company or lose control through apartnership,” Straubel said. “So, Elon decided to double down.”On December 3, 2007, Ze’ev Drori replaced Marks as CEO. Drori hadexperience in Silicon Valley starting a company that made computer memoryand selling it to the chipmaker Advanced Micro Devices. Drori was not Musk’sfirst pick—a top choice had turned down the job because he didn’t want to movefrom the East Coast—and did not inspire much enthusiasm from the Teslaemployees. Drori had about fifteen years on the youngest Tesla worker and noconnection to this group bonded by suffering and toil. He came to be seen moreas an executor of Musk’s wishes than as a commanding, independent CEO.Musk began making more public gestures to mitigate the bad press aroundTesla. He issued statements and did interviews, promising that the Roadsterwould ship to customers in early 2008. He began talking up a car code-namedWhiteStar—the Roadster had been code-named DarkStar—that would be asedan possibly priced around $50,000, and a new factory to build the machine.“Given the recent management changes, some reassurances are in orderregarding Tesla Motors’ future plans,” Musk wrote in a blog post. “The nearterm message is simple and unequivocal—we are going to deliver a great sportscar next year that customers will love driving. . . . My car, production VIN 1, isalready off the production line in the UK and final preparations are being madefor importation.” Tesla held a series of town hall meetings with customers whereit tried to fess up to its problems in the open, and it started building someshowrooms for its car. Vince Sollitto, the former PayPal executive, visited theMenlo Park showroom and found Musk complaining about the public relationsissues but clearly inspired by the product Tesla was building. “His demeanorchanged the moment we got to this display of the motor,” Sollitto said. Dressedin a leather jacket and slacks, Musk started talking about the motor’s propertiesand then put on a performance worthy of a carnival strongman by lifting thehundred-or-so-pound hunk of metal. “He picks this thing up and wedges itbetween his two palms,” Sollitto said. “He’s holding it, and he’s shaking andbeads of sweat are forming on his forehead. It wasn’t so much a display ofstrength as a physical demonstration of the beauty of the product.” While thecustomers complained a lot about the delays, they seemed to sense this passionfrom Musk and share his enthusiasm for the product. Only a handful ofcustomers asked for their prepayments back.Tesla employees soon got to witness the same Musk that SpaceX employeeshad seen for years. When an issue like the Roadster’s faulty carbon-fiber bodypanels cropped up, Musk dealt with it directly. He flew to England in his jet topick up some new manufacturing tools for the body panels and personallydelivered them to a factory in France to ensure that the Roadster stayed on itsproduction schedule. The days of people being ambiguous about the Roadster’smanufacturing costs were gone as well. “Elon got fired up and said we weregoing to do this intense cost-down program,” said Popple. “He gave a speech,saying we would work on Saturdays and Sundays and sleep under desks until itgot done. Someone pushed back from the table and argued that everyone hadbeen working so hard just to get the car done, and they were ready for a breakand to see their families. Elon said, ‘I would tell those people they will get to seetheir families a lot when we go bankrupt.’ I was like, ‘Wow,’ but I got it. I hadcome out of a military culture, and you just have to make your objectivehappen.” Employees were required to meet at 7 A.M. every Thursday morning forbill-of-materials updates. They had to know the price of every part and have acogent plan for getting parts cheaper. If the motor cost $6,500 a pop at the end ofDecember, Musk wanted it to cost $3,800 by April. The costs were plotted andanalyzed each month. “If you started falling behind, there was hell to pay,”Popple said. “Everyone could see it, and people lost their jobs when they didn’tdeliver. Elon has a mind that’s a bit like a calculator. If you put a number on theprojector that does not make sense, he will spot it. He doesn’t miss details.”Popple found Musk’s style aggressive, but he liked that Musk would listen to awell-argued, analytical point and often change his mind if given a good enoughreason. “Some people thought Elon was too tough or hot-tempered ortyrannical,” Popple said. “But these were hard times, and those of us close to theoperational realities of the company knew it. I appreciated that he didn’tsugarcoat things.”On the marketing front, Musk would run daily Google searches for newsstories about Tesla. If he saw a bad story, he ordered someone to “fix it” eventhough the Tesla public relations people could do little to sway the reporters.One employee missed an event to witness the birth of his child. Musk fired offan e-mail saying, “That is no excuse. I am extremely disappointed. You need tofigure out where your priorities are. We’re changing the world and changinghistory, and you either commit or you don’t.”*Marketing people who made grammatical mistakes in e-mails were let go, aswere other people who hadn’t done anything “awesome” in recent memory. “Hecan be incredibly intimidating at times but doesn’t have a real sense for just howimposing he can be,” said one former Tesla executive. “We’d have thesemeetings and take bets on who was going to get bloodied and bruised. If you toldhim that you made a particular choice because ‘it was the standard way thingshad always been done,’ he’d kick you out of a meeting fast. He’d say, ‘I neverwant to hear that phrase again. What we have to do is fucking hard and half-assing things won’t be tolerated.’ He just destroys you and, if you survive, hedetermines if he can trust you. He has to understand that you’re as crazy as heis.” This ethos filtered through the entire company, and everyone quicklyunderstood that Musk meant business.Straubel, while sometimes on the bad end of the critiques, welcomed Musk’shard-charging presence. The five years to get to this point had been an enjoyableslog for him. Straubel had transformed from a quiet, capable engineer whoshuffled around Tesla’s factory floor with his head down into the most crucialmember of the technical team. He knew more about the batteries and the electricdrivetrain than just about anyone else at the company. He also began developinga role as a go-between for employees and Musk. Straubel’s engineering smartsand work ethic had earned Musk’s respect, and Straubel found that he coulddeliver difficult messages to Musk on behalf of other employees. As he woulddo for years to come, Straubel also proved willing to check his ego at the door.All that mattered was getting the Roadster and the follow-on sedan to market topopularize electric cars, and Musk looked like the best person to make thathappen.Other employees had enjoyed the thrill of the engineering challenge over thepast five years but were burnt-out beyond repair. Wright didn’t believe that anelectric car for the masses would ever take off. He left and started his owncompany dedicated to making electric versions of delivery trucks. Berdichevskyhad been a crucial, do-anything young engineer for much of Tesla’s existence.Now that the company employed about three hundred people, he felt lesseffective and didn’t relish the idea of suffering for another five years to bring thesedan to market. He would leave Tesla, get a couple of degrees from Stanford,and cofound a startup looking to make a revolutionary new battery that couldsoon go into electric cars. With Eberhard gone, Tarpenning found Tesla less fun.He didn’t see eye to eye with Drori and also shied away from the idea of fryinghis soul to get the sedan out. Lyons stuck around longer, which is a minormiracle. At various points, he had led the development of most of the coretechnology behind the Roadster, including the battery packs, the motor, thepower electronics, and, yes, the transmission. This meant that for about fiveyears Lyons had been among Tesla’s most capable employees and the guyconstantly in the doghouse for being behind on something and thus holding therest of the company up. He suffered through some of Musk’s more colorfultirades—directed either at him or suppliers that had let Tesla down—thatincluded talk of people’s balls being chopped off and other violent or sexual acts.Lyons also saw an exhausted, stressed-out Musk spit coffee across a conferenceroom table because it was cold and then, without a pause, demand that theemployees work harder, do more, and mess up less. Like so many people privyto these performances, Lyons came away with no illusions about Musk’spersonality but with the utmost respect for his vision and drive to execute.“Working at Tesla back then was like being Kurtz in Apocalypse Now,” Lyonssaid. “Don’t worry about the methods or if they’re unsound. Just get the jobdone. It comes from Elon. He listens, asks good questions, is fast on his feet, andgets to the bottom of things.”Tesla could survive the loss of some of these early hires. Its strong brand hadallowed the company to keep recruiting top talent, including people from largeautomotive companies who knew how to get over the last set of challengesblocking the Roadster from reaching customers. But Tesla’s major issue nolonger revolved around effort, engineering, or clever marketing. Heading into2008, the company was running out of money. The Roadster had cost about $140million to develop, way over the $25 million originally estimated in the 2004business plan. Under normal circumstances, Tesla had probably done enough toraise more funds. These, however, were not normal times. The big automakers inthe United States were charging toward bankruptcy in the middle of the worstfinancial crisis since the Great Depression. In the midst of all this, Musk neededto convince Tesla’s investors to fork over tens of millions of additional dollars,and those investors had to go to their constituents to lay out why this made anysense. As Musk put it, “Try to imagine explaining that you’re investing in anelectric car company, and everything you read about the car company soundslike it is shit and doomed and it’s a recession and no one is buying cars.” AllMusk had to do to dig Tesla out of this conundrum was lose his entire fortuneand verge on a nervous breakdown.