8PAIN, SUFFERING, AND SURVIVALAS HE PREPARED TO BEGIN FILMING IRON MAN IN EARLY 2007, thedirector Jon Favreau rented out a complex in Los Angeles that once belonged toHughes Aircraft, the aerospace and defense contractor started about eighty yearsearlier by Howard Hughes. The facility had a series of interlocking hangars andserved as a production office for the movie. It also supplied Robert Downey Jr.,who was to play Iron Man and his human creator Tony Stark, with a splash ofinspiration. Downey felt nostalgic looking at one of the larger hangars, whichhad fallen into a state of disrepair. Not too long ago, that building had playedhost to the big ideas of a big man who shook up industries and did things hisown way.Downey heard some rumblings about a Hughes-like figure named Elon Muskwho had constructed his own, modern-day industrial complex about ten milesaway. Instead of visualizing how life might have been for Hughes, Downeycould perhaps get a taste of the real thing. He set off in March 2007 for SpaceX’sheadquarters in El Segundo and wound up receiving a personal tour from Musk.“My mind is not easily blown, but this place and this guy were amazing,”Downey said.To Downey, the SpaceX facility looked like a giant, exotic hardware store.Enthusiastic employees were zipping about, fiddling with an assortment ofmachines. Young white-collar engineers interacted with blue-collar assemblyline workers, and they all seemed to share a genuine excitement for what theywere doing. “It felt like a radical startup company,” Downey said. After theinitial tour, Downey came away pleased that the sets being hammered out at theHughes factory did have parallels to the SpaceX factory. “Things didn’t feel outof place,” he said.Beyond the surroundings, Downey really wanted a peek inside Musk’spsyche. The men walked, sat in Musk’s office, and had lunch. Downeyappreciated that Musk was not a foul-smelling, fidgety, coder whack job. WhatDowney picked up on instead were Musk’s “accessible eccentricities” and thefeeling that he was an unpretentious sort who could work alongside the people inthe factory. Both Musk and Stark were the type of men, according to Downey,who “had seized an idea to live by and something to dedicate themselves to” andwere not going to waste a moment.When he returned to the Iron Man production office, Downey asked thatFavreau be sure to place a Tesla Roadster in Tony Stark’s workshop. On asuperficial level, this would symbolize that Stark was so cool and connected thathe could get a Roadster before it even went on sale. On a deeper level, the carwas to be placed as the nearest object to Stark’s desk so that it formed somethingof a bond between the actor, the character, and Musk. “After meeting Elon andmaking him real to me, I felt like having his presence in the workshop,” Downeysaid. “They became contemporaries. Elon was someone Tony probably hung outwith and partied with or more likely they went on some weird jungle trektogether to drink concoctions with the shamans.”After Iron Man came out, Favreau began talking up Musk’s role as theinspiration for Downey’s interpretation of Tony Stark. It was a stretch on manylevels. Musk is not exactly the type of guy who downs scotch in the back of aHumvee while part of a military convoy in Afghanistan. But the press lapped upthe comparison, and Musk started to become more of a public figure. Peoplewho sort of knew him as “that PayPal guy” began to think of him as the rich,eccentric businessman behind SpaceX and Tesla.Musk enjoyed his rising profile. It fed his ego and provided some fun. He andJustine bought a house in Bel Air. Their neighbor to one side was Quincy Jones,the music producer, and their other neighbor was Joe Francis, the infamouscreator of the Girls Gone Wild videos. Musk and some former PayPalexecutives, having settled their differences, produced Thank You for Smokingand used Musk’s jet in the movie. While not a hard-drinking carouser, Musktook part in the Hollywood nightlife and its social scene. “There were just a lotof parties to go to,” said Bill Lee, Musk’s close friend. “Elon was neighbors withtwo quasi-celebrities. Our friends were making movies and through thisconfluence of our networks, there was something to go out and do every night.”In one interview, Musk calculated that his life had become 10 percent playboyand 90 percent engineer.10 “We had a domestic staff of five; during the day ourhome transformed into a workplace,” Justine wrote in magazine article. “Wewent to black-tie fundraisers and got the best tables at elite Hollywoodnightclubs, with Paris Hilton and Leonardo DiCaprio partying next to us. WhenGoogle cofounder Larry Page got married on Richard Branson’s privateCaribbean island, we were there, hanging out in a villa with John Cusack andwatching Bono pose with swarms of adoring women outside the reception tent.”Justine appeared to relish their status even more than Musk. A writer offantasy fiction novels, she kept a blog detailing the couple’s family life and theiradventures on the town. In one entry, Justine had Musk saying that he’d prefer tosleep with Veronica than Betty from the Archie comics and that he’d like to visita Chuck E. Cheese sometime. In another entry, she wrote about meetingLeonardo DiCaprio at a club and having him beg for a free Tesla Roadster, onlyto be turned down. Justine handed out nicknames to oft-occurring characters inthe blog, so Bill Lee became “Bill the Hotel Guy” because he owns a hotel in theDominican Republic, and Joe Francis appeared as “Notorious Neighbor.” It’shard to imagine Musk, who keeps to himself, hanging out with someone asostentatious as Francis, but the men got along well. When Francis took over anamusement park for his birthday, Musk attended and then ended up partying atFrancis’s house. Justine wrote, “E was there for a bit but admitted he also foundit ‘kind of lame’—he’s been to a couple of parties at NN’s house now and endsup feeling self-conscious, ‘because it just seems like there are always theseskeevy guys wandering around the house trolling for girls. I don’t want to beseen as one of those guys.’” When Francis got ready to buy a Roadster, hestopped by the Musks’ house and handed over a yellow envelope with $100,000in cash.For a while, the blog provided a rare, welcome glimpse into the life of anunconventional CEO. Musk seemed charming. The public learned that he boughtJustine a nineteenth-century edition of Pride and Prejudice, that Musk’s bestfriends gave him the nickname “Elonius,” and that Musk likes to place one-dollar wagers on all manner of things—Can you catch herpes from the GreatBarrier Reef? Is it possible to balance two forks with a toothpick?—that heknows he will win. Justine told one story about Musk traveling to Necker Island,in the British Virgin Islands, to hang out with Tony Blair and Richard Branson.A photo of the three men appeared later in the press that depicted Musk with avacant stare. “This was E’s I’m-thinking-about-a-rocket-problem stance, whichmakes me pretty sure that he had just gotten some kind of bothersome work-related e-mail, and was clearly oblivious to the fact that a picture was beingtaken at all,” she wrote. “This is also the reason I get suck [sic] a kick out of it—the spouse the camera caught is the exact spouse I encountered, say, last night enroute to the bathroom, standing in the hallway frowning with his arms folded.”Justine letting the world into the couple’s bathroom should have served as awarning of things to come. Her blog would soon turn into one of Musk’s worstnightmares.The press had not run into a guy like Musk for a very long time. His shine asan Internet millionaire kept getting, well, shinier thanks to PayPal’s ongoingsuccess. He also had an element of mystery. There was the weird name. Andthere was the willingness to spend vast sums of money on spaceships andelectric cars, which came across as a combination of daring, flamboyant, anddownright flabbergasting. “Elon Musk has been called ‘part playboy, part spacecowboy,’ an image hardly dispelled by a car collection that has boasted aPorsche 911 Turbo, 1967 Series 1 Jaguar, a Hamann BMW M5 plus theaforementioned McLaren F1—which he has driven at up to 215mph on a privateairstrip,” a British reporter gushed in 2007. “Then there was the L39 Sovietmilitary jet, which he sold after becoming a father.” The press had picked up onthe fact that Musk tended to talk a huge game and then struggle to deliver on hispromises in time, but they didn’t much care. The game he talked was so muchbigger than anyone else’s that reporters were comfortable giving Musk leeway.Tesla became the darling of Silicon Valley’s bloggers, who tracked its everymove and were breathless in their coverage. Similarly, reporters coveringSpaceX were overjoyed that a young, feisty company had arrived to needleBoeing, Lockheed, and, to a large extent, NASA. All Musk had to do waseventually bring some of these wondrous things he’d been funding to market.While Musk put on a good show for the public and press, he’d started to getvery worried about his businesses. SpaceX’s second launch attempt had failed,and the reports coming in from Tesla kept getting worse. Musk had started thesetwo adventures with a fortune nearing $200 million and had chewed throughmore than half the money with little to show for it. As each Tesla delay turnedinto a PR fiasco, the Musk glow dimmed. People in Silicon Valley began togossip about Musk’s money problems. Reporters who months earlier had beenheaping adulation on Musk turned on him. The New York Times picked up onTesla’s transmission problems. Automotive websites griped that the Roadstermight never ship. By the end of 2007, things got downright nasty. Valleywag,Silicon Valley’s gossip blog, began to take a particular interest in Musk. OwenThomas, the site’s lead writer, dug into the histories of Zip2 and PayPal andplayed up the times Musk was ousted as CEO to undermine some of hisentrepreneurial street cred. Thomas then championed the premise that Musk wasa master manipulator who played fast and loose with other people’s money. “It’swonderful that Musk has realized even a small part of his childhood fantasies,”Thomas wrote. “But he risks destroying his dreams by refusing to reconcile themwith reality.” Valleywag anointed the Tesla Roadster as its No. 1 fail of 2007among technology companies.As his businesses and public persona suffered, Musk’s home life degraded aswell. His triplets—Kai, Damian, and Saxon—had arrived near the end of 2006and joined their brothers Griffin and Xavier. According to Musk, Justine sufferedfrom postpartum depression following the birth of the triplets. “In the spring of2007, our marriage was having real issues,” Musk said. “It was on the rocks.”Justine’s blog posts back up his sentiments. She described a much less romanticMusk and felt people treated her as “an arm ornament who couldn’t possiblyhave anything interesting to say” rather than as an author and her husband’sequal. During one trip to St. Barts, the Musks ended up sharing dinner with somewealthy, influential couples. When Justine let out her political views, one of themen at the table made a crack about her being so opinionated. “E chuckled back,patted my hand the way you pat a child’s,” Justine wrote on her blog. From thatpoint on, Justine ordered Musk to introduce her as a published novelist and notjust his wife and mother of his children. The results? “E’s way of doing thisthroughout the rest of the trip: ‘Justine wants me to tell you that she’s writtennovels,’ which made people look at me like oh, that’s just so cute and didn’treally help my case.”As 2007 rolled into 2008, Musk’s life became more tumultuous. Teslabasically had to start over on much of the Roadster, and SpaceX still had dozensof people living in Kwajalein awaiting the next launch of the Falcon 1. Bothendeavors were vacuuming up Musk’s money. He started selling off prizedpossessions like the McLaren to generate extra cash. Musk tended to shieldemployees from the gravity of his fiscal situation by always encouraging them todo their best work. At the same time, he personally oversaw all significantpurchases at both companies. Musk also trained employees to make the righttrade-offs between spending money and productivity. This struck many of theSpaceX employees as a novel idea, since they were used to traditional aerospacecompanies that had huge, multiyear government contracts and no day-to-daysurvival pressure. “Elon would always be at work on Sunday, and we had somechats where he laid out his philosophy,” said Kevin Brogan, the early SpaceXemployee. “He would say that everything we did was a function of our burn rateand that we were burning through a hundred thousand dollars per day. It was thisvery entrepreneurial, Silicon Valley way of thinking that none of the aerospaceengineers in Los Angeles were dialed into. Sometimes he wouldn’t let you buy apart for two thousand dollars because he expected you to find it cheaper orinvent something cheaper. Other times, he wouldn’t flinch at renting a plane forninety thousand dollars to get something to Kwaj because it saved an entireworkday, so it was worth it. He would place this urgency that he expected therevenue in ten years to be ten million dollars a day and that every day we wereslower to achieve our goals was a day of missing out on that money.”Musk had become all consumed with Tesla and SpaceX out of necessity, andthere can be no doubt that this exacerbated the tensions in his marriage. TheMusks had a team of nannies to help with their five children, but Elon could notspend much time at home. He worked seven days a week and quite often split histime between Los Angeles and San Francisco. Justine needed a change. Duringmoments of self-reflection, she felt sickened, perceiving herself a trophy wife.Justine longed to be Elon’s partner again and to feel some of that spark fromtheir early days before life had turned so dazzling and demanding. It’s not clearhow much Musk let on to Justine about his dwindling bank account. She haslong maintained that Musk kept her in the dark about the family’s financialarrangements. But some of Musk’s closest friends did get a glimpse into theworsening financial situation. In the first half of 2008, Antonio Gracias, thefounder and CEO of Valor Equity, met Musk for dinner. Gracias had been aninvestor in Tesla and had become one of Musk’s closest friends and allies, and hecould see Musk agonizing over his future. “Things were starting to be difficultwith Justine, but they were still together,” Gracias said. “During that dinner,Elon said, ‘I will spend my last dollar on these companies. If we have to moveinto Justine’s parents’ basement, we’ll do it.’”The option of moving in with Justine’s parents expired on June 16, 2008,when Musk filed for divorce. The couple did not disclose the situation rightaway, although Justine left hints on her blog. In late June, she posted a quotationfrom Moby without any additional context: “There’s no such thing as a well-adjusted public figure. If they were well adjusted they wouldn’t try to be a publicfigure.” The next entry had Justine house hunting for undisclosed reasons withSharon Stone, and a couple of entries later she talked about “a major drama” thatshe’d been dealing with. In September, Justine wrote her first blog post explicitlyabout the divorce, saying, “We had a good run. We married young, took it as faras we could and now it is over.” Valleywag naturally followed with a story aboutthe divorce and noted that Musk had been seen out with a twenty-somethingactress.The media coverage and divorce freed Justine to write about her private life ina much more liberated way. In the posts that followed, she gave her account ofhow the marriage ended, her views on Musk’s girlfriend and future second wife,and the inner workings of the divorce proceedings. For the first time, the publichad access to a deeply unpleasant portrayal of Musk and received some firsthandaccounts—albeit from an ex-wife—of his hardline behavior. The writing mayhave been biased, but it provided a window into how Musk operated. Here’s onepost about the lead-up to the divorce and its rapid execution:Divorce, for me, was like the bomb you set off when all other options havebeen exhausted. I had not yet given up on the diplomacy option, which waswhy I hadn’t already filed. We were still in the early stages of maritalcounseling (three sessions total). Elon, however, took matters into his ownhands—he tends to like to do that—when he gave me an ultimatum: “Eitherwe fix [the marriage] today, or I will divorce you tomorrow.”That night, and again the next morning, he asked me what I wanted to do.I stated emphatically that I was not ready to unleash the dogs of divorce; Isuggested that “we” hold off for at least another week. Elon nodded,touched the top of my head, and left. Later that same morning I tried tomake a purchase and discovered that he had cut off my credit card, which iswhen I also knew that he had gone ahead and filed (as it was, E did not tellme directly; he had another person do it).For Musk, each online missive from Justine created another public relationscrisis that added to the endless stream of issues faced by his companies. Theimage he’d sculpted over the years appeared ready to crumble alongside hisbusinesses. It was a disaster scenario.Soon enough, the Musks had achieved celebrity divorce status. Mainstreamoutlets joined Valleywag in poring over court filings tied to the breakup,particularly as Justine fought for more money. During the PayPal days, Justinehad signed a postnuptial agreement and now argued that she didn’t really havethe time or inclination to dig into the ramifications of the paperwork. Justinetook to her blog in an entry titled “golddigger,” and said she was fighting for adivorce settlement that would include their house, alimony and child support, $6million in cash, 10 percent of Musk’s Tesla stock, 5 percent of Musk’s SpaceXstock, and a Tesla Roadster. Justine also appeared on CNBC’s show DivorceWars and wrote an article for Marie Claire titled “‘I Was a Starter Wife’: InsideAmerica’s Messiest Divorce.”The public tended to side with Justine during all of this and couldn’t quitefigure out why a billionaire was fighting his wife’s seemingly fair requests. Amajor problem for Musk, of course, was that his assets were anything but liquidwith most of his net worth being tied up in Tesla and SpaceX stock. The coupleeventually settled with Justine getting the house, $2 million in cash (minus herlegal fees), $80,000 a month in alimony and child support for seventeen years,and a Tesla Roadster.*Years after the settlement, Justine still struggled to speak about herrelationship with Musk. During our interview, she broke down in tears severaltimes and needed moments to compose her thoughts. Musk, she said, had hiddenmany things from her during their marriage and ultimately treated her much likea business adversary to be conquered during the divorce. “We were at war for awhile, and when you go to war with Elon, it’s pretty brutal,” she said. Well aftertheir marriage ended, Justine continued to blog about Musk. She wrote aboutRiley and provided commentary on his parenting. One post gave Musk a hardtime for banning stuffed animals from the house when their twins turned seven.Asked about this, Justine said, “Elon is hard-core. He grew up in a tough cultureand tough circumstances. He had to become very tough to not only thrive but toconquer the world. He doesn’t want to raise soft overprivileged kids with nodirection.” Comments like these seemed to indicate that Justine still admired orat least understood Musk’s strong will.*In the weeks after he first filed for divorce in mid-June of 2008, Musktumbled into a deep funk. Bill Lee started to worry about his friend’s mentalstate and, as one of Musk’s more free-spirited friends, wanted to do something tocheer him up. Now and again, Musk and Lee, an investor, would take tripsoverseas and mix business and pleasure. The time was right for just such ajourney, and they set off for London at the start of July.The decompression program began poorly. Musk and Lee visited theheadquarters of Aston Martin to see the company’s CEO and get a tour of hisfactory. The executive treated Musk like an amateur car builder, talking down tohim and suggesting that he knew more about electric vehicles than anyone elseon the planet. “He was a complete douche,” as Lee put it, and the men did theirbest to make a hasty exit back to central London. Along the way, Musk had anagging stomach pain turn severe. At the time, Lee was married to Sarah Gore,the daughter of former vice president Al Gore, who had been a medical student,and so he called her for advice. They decided that Musk might be suffering fromappendicitis, and Lee took him to a medical clinic in the middle of a shoppingmall. When the tests came back negative, Lee set to work trying to goad Muskinto a night on the town. “Elon didn’t want to go out, and I didn’t really, either,”Lee said. “But I was like, ‘No, come on. We’re all the way here.’”Lee coaxed Musk into going to a club called Whisky Mist, in Mayfair. Peoplehad packed the small, high-end dance spot and Musk wanted to leave after tenminutes. The well-connected Lee texted a promoter friend of his, who pulledsome strings to get Musk escorted into the VIP area. The promoter then reachedout to some of his prettiest friends, including a twenty-two-year-old up-and-coming actress named Talulah Riley, and they soon arrived at the club as well.Riley and her two gorgeous friends had come from a charity gala and were infull-length, flowing gowns. “Talulah was in this huge Cinderella thing,” Leesaid. Musk and Riley were introduced by people at the club, and he perked at thesight of her dazzling figure.Musk and Riley sat at a table with their friends but immediately zeroed in oneach other. Riley had just hit it big with her portrayal of Mary Bennet in Prideand Prejudice and thought of herself as quite the hotshot. The older Musk,meanwhile, took on the role of the soft-spoken, sweet engineer. He whipped outhis phone and displayed photos of the Falcon 1 and Roadster, although Rileythought he had just done some work on these projects and didn’t realize he ranthe companies building the machines. “I remember thinking that this guyprobably didn’t get to talk to young actresses a lot and that he seemed quitenervous,” Riley said. “I decided to be really nice to him and give him a niceevening. Little did I know that he’d spoken to a lot of pretty girls in his life.”*The more Musk and Riley talked, the more Lee egged them on. It was the firsttime in weeks that his friend appeared happy. “His stomach didn’t hurt; he’s notbummed, this is great,” Lee said. Despite being dressed for a fairy tale, Rileydidn’t fall in love with Musk at first sight. But she did become more impressedand intrigued as the night went on, particularly after the club promoterintroduced Musk to a stunning model, and he politely said “Hello” and then satright back down with Riley. “I figured he couldn’t be all bad after that,” saidRiley, who then allowed Musk to place his hand on her knee. Musk asked Rileyout to dinner the next night, and she accepted.With her curvy figure, sultry eyes, and playful good-girl demeanor, Riley wasa budding film star but didn’t really act the part. She grew up in the idyllicEnglish countryside, went to a top school, and, until a week before she metMusk, had been living at home with her parents. After the night at Whisky Mist,Riley called her family to tell them about the interesting guy she had met whobuilds rockets and cars. Her father used to head up the National Crime Squadand went straight to his computer to conduct a background check thatilluminated Musk’s resume as a married international playboy with five kids.Riley’s father chided his daughter for being a fool, but she held out hope thatMusk had an explanation and went to dinner with him anyway.Musk brought Lee to the dinner, and Riley brought her friend Tamsin Egerton,also a beautiful actress. Things were cooler throughout the meal as the groupdined in a depressingly empty restaurant. Riley waited to see what Musk wouldbring up on his own. Eventually, he did announce his five sons and his pendingdivorce. The confession proved enough to keep Riley interested and curiousabout where things would lead. Following the meal, Musk and Riley broke offon their own. They went for a walk through Soho and then stopped at CafeBoheme, where Riley, a lifelong teetotaler, sipped an apple juice. Musk keptRiley’s attention, and the romance began in earnest.The couple had lunch the next day and then went to the White Cube, a modernart gallery, and then back to Musk’s hotel room. Musk told Riley, a virgin, thathe wanted to show her his rockets. “I was skeptical, but he did actually show merocket videos,” she said. Once Musk went back to the United States,* they keptin touch via e-mail for a couple of weeks, and then Riley booked a flight to LosAngeles. “I wasn’t even thinking girlfriend or anything like that,” Riley said. “Iwas just having fun.”Musk had other ideas. Riley had been in California for just five days when hemade his move as they lay in bed talking in a tiny room at the Peninsula hotel inBeverley Hills. “He said, ‘I don’t want you to leave. I want you to marry me.’ Ithink I laughed. Then, he said, ‘No. I’m serious. I’m sorry I don’t have a ring.’ Isaid, ‘We can shake on it if you like.’ And we did. I don’t remember what I wasthinking at the time, and all I can say is that I was twenty-two.”Riley had been a model daughter up to that point, never giving her parentsmuch of anything to worry about. She did well at school, had scored sometremendous acting gigs, and had a soft, sweet personality that her friendsdescribed as Snow White brought to life. But there she was on the hotel’sbalcony, informing her parents that she had agreed to marry a man fourteen yearsher senior, who had just filed for divorce from his first wife, had five kids andtwo companies, and she didn’t even see how she could possibly love him afterknowing him for a matter of weeks. “I think my mother had a nervousbreakdown,” Riley said. “But I had always been highly romantic, and it actuallydidn’t strike me as that strange.” Riley flew back to England to gather her things,and her parents flew back with her to the United States to meet Musk, whobelatedly asked Riley’s father for his blessing. Musk did not have his own house,which left the couple moving into a home that belonged to Musk’s friend thebillionaire Jeff Skoll. “I had been living there a week when this random guywalked in,” Riley said. “I said, ‘Who are you?’ He said, ‘I am the homeowner.Who are you?’ I told him, and then he just walked out.” Musk later proposed toRiley again on the balcony of Skoll’s house, unveiling a massive ring. (He hassince bought her three engagement rings, including the giant first one, aneveryday ring, and one designed by Musk that has a diamond surrounded by tensapphires.) “I remember him saying, ‘Being with me was choosing the hardpath.’ I didn’t quite understand at the time, but I do now. It’s quite hard, quite thecrazy ride.”Riley experienced a baptism by fire. The whirlwind romance had given herthe impression that she was engaged to a world conquering, jet-settingbillionaire. That was true in theory but a murkier proposition in practice. As lateJuly rolled around, Musk could see that he had just enough cash on hand toscrape through to the end of the year. Both SpaceX and Tesla would need cashinfusions at some point just to pay the employees, and it was unclear where thatmoney would come from with the world’s financial markets in disarray andinvestments being put on hold. If things had been going more smoothly at thecompanies, Musk could have felt more confident about raising money, but theywere not. “He would come home every day, and there would be some calamity,”Riley said. “He was under immense pressure from all quarters. It washorrendous.”SpaceX’s third flight from Kwajalein jumped out as Musk’s most pressingconcern. His team of engineers had remained camped out on the island,preparing the Falcon 1 for another run. A typical company would focus just onthe task at hand. Not SpaceX. It had shipped the Falcon 1 to Kwaj in April withone set of engineers and then put another group of engineers on a new project todevelop the Falcon 9, a nine-engine rocket that would take the place of theFalcon 5 and serve as a possible replacement to the retiring space shuttle.SpaceX had yet to prove it could get to space successfully, but Musk keptpositioning it to bid on big-ticket NASA contracts.*On July 30, 2008, the Falcon 9 had a successful test fire in Texas with all nineof its engines lighting up and producing 850,000 pounds of thrust. Three dayslater, in Kwaj, SpaceX’s engineers fueled up the Falcon 1 and crossed theirfingers. The rocket had an air force satellite as its payload, along with a coupleof experiments from NASA. All told, the cargo weighed 375 pounds.SpaceX had been making significant changes to its rocket since the last, failedlaunch. A traditional aerospace company would not have wanted the added risk,but Musk insisted that SpaceX push its technology forward while at the sametime trying to make it work right. Among the biggest changes for the Falcon 1was a new version of the Merlin 1 engine that relied on a tweaked coolingsystem.The first launch attempt on August 2, 2008, aborted at T minus zero seconds.SpaceX regrouped and tried to launch again the same day. This time everythingseemed to be going well. The Falcon 1 soared into the sky and flewspectacularly without any indication of a problem. SpaceX employees watchinga webcast of the proceedings back in California let out hoots and whistles. Then,right at the moment when the first stage and second stage were to separate, therewas a malfunction. An analysis after the fact would show that the new engineshad delivered an unexpected thrust during the separation process that caused thefirst stage to bump up into the second stage, damaging the top part of the rocketand its engine.*The failed launch left many SpaceX employees shattered. “It was so profoundseeing the energy shift over the room in the course of thirty seconds,” said DollySingh, a recruiter at SpaceX. “It was like the worst fucking day ever. You don’tusually see grown-ups weeping, but there they were. We were tired and brokenemotionally.” Musk addressed the workers right away and encouraged them toget back to work. “He said, ‘Look. We are going to do this. It’s going to be okay.Don’t freak out,’” Singh recalled. “It was like magic. Everyone chilled outimmediately and started to focus on figuring out what just happened and how tofix it. It went from despair to hope and focus.” Musk put up a positive front tothe public as well. In a statement, he said that SpaceX had another rocket waitingto attempt a fourth launch and a fifth launch planned shortly after that. “I havealso given the go-ahead to begin fabrication of flight six,” he said. “Falcon 9development will also continue unabated.”In reality, the third launch was a disaster with cascading consequences. Sincethe second stage of the rocket did not fire properly, SpaceX never got a chance tosee if it had really fixed the fuel-sloshing issues that had plagued the secondflight. Many of the SpaceX engineers were confident that they had solved thisproblem and were anxious to get to the fourth launch, believing that they had aneasy answer for the recent thrust problem. For Musk, the situation seemedgraver. “I was super depressed,” Musk said. “If we hadn’t solved the slushcoupling problem on flight two, or there was just some random other thing thatoccurred—say a mistake in the launch process or the manufacturing processunrelated to anything previous—then game over.” SpaceX simply did not haveenough money to try a fifth flight. He’d put $100 million into the company andhad nothing to spare because of the issues at Tesla. “Flight four was it,” Musksaid. If, however, SpaceX could nail the fourth flight, it would instill confidenceon the part of the U.S. government and possible commercial customers, pavingthe way for the Falcon 9 and even more ambitious projects.Leading up to the third launch, Musk had been his usual ultra-involved self.Anyone at SpaceX who held the launch back went onto Musk’s critical-path shitlist. Musk would hound the person responsible about the delays but, typically, hewould also do everything in his power to help solve problems. “I was personallyholding up the launch once and had to give Elon twice-daily updates about whatwas going on,” said Kevin Brogan. “But Elon would say, ‘There are fivehundred people at this company. What do you need?’” One of the calls musthave taken place while Musk courted Riley because Brogan remembered Muskphoning from the bathroom of a London club to find out how welding had goneon a large part of the rocket. Musk fielded another call in the middle of the nightwhile sleeping next to Riley and had to whisper as he berated the engineers.“He’s giving us the pillow talk voice, so we all have to huddle around thespeakerphone, while he tells us, ‘You guys need to get your shit together,’”Brogan said.With the fourth launch, the demands and anticipation had ratcheted to thepoint that people started making silly mistakes. Typically, the body of the Falcon1 rocket traveled to Kwaj via barge. This time Musk and the engineers were tooexcited and desperate to wait for the ocean journey. Musk rented a military cargoplane to fly the rocket body from Los Angeles to Hawaii and then on to Kwaj.This would have been a fine idea except the SpaceX engineers forgot to factor inwhat the pressurized plane would do to the body of the rocket, which is less thanan eighth of an inch thick. As the plane started its descent into Hawaii, everyoneinside of it could hear strange noises coming from the cargo hold. “I looked backand could see the stage crumpling,” said Bulent Altan, the former head ofavionics at SpaceX. “I told the pilot to go up, and he did.” The rocket hadbehaved much like an empty water bottle will on a plane, with the air pressurepushing against the sides of the bottle and making it buckle. Altan calculated thatthe SpaceX team on the plane had about thirty minutes to do something aboutthe problem before they would need to land. They pulled out their pocketknivesand cut away the shrink wrap that held the rocket’s body tight. Then they found amaintenance kit on the plane and used wrenches to open up some nuts on therocket that would allow its internal pressure to match that of the plane’s. Whenthe plane landed, the engineers divvied up the duties of calling SpaceX’s topexecutives to tell them about the catastrophe. It was 3 A.M. Los Angeles time,and one of the executives volunteered to deliver the horrific news to Musk. Thethinking at the time was that it would take three months to repair the damage.The body of the rocket had caved in in several places, baffles placed inside thefuel tank to stop the sloshing problem had broken, and an assortment of otherissues had appeared. Musk ordered the team to continue on to Kwaj and sent in areinforcement team with repair parts. Two weeks later, the rocket had been fixedinside of the makeshift hangar. “It was like being stuck in a foxhole together,”Altan said. “You weren’t going to quit and leave the person next to you behind.When it was all done, everyone felt amazing.”The fourth and possibly final launch for SpaceX took place on September 28,2008. The SpaceX employees had worked nonstop shifts under agonizingpressure for six weeks to reach this day. Their pride as engineers and their hopesand dreams were on the line. “The people watching back at the factory weretrying their best not to throw up,” said James McLaury, a machinist at SpaceX.Despite their past flubs, the engineers on Kwaj were confident that this launchwould work. Some of these people had spent years on the island going throughone of the more surreal engineering exercises in human history. They had beenseparated from their families, assaulted by the heat, and exiled on their tinylaunchpad outpost—sometimes without much food—for days on end as theywaited for the launch windows to open and dealt with the aborts that followed.So much of that pain and suffering and fear would be forgotten if this launchwent successfully.In the late afternoon on the twenty-eighth, the SpaceX team raised the Falcon1 into its launch position. Once again, it stood tall, looking like a bizarre artifactof an island tribe as palm trees swayed beside it and a smattering of cloudscrossed through the spectacular blue sky. By this time, SpaceX had upped itswebcast game, turning each launch into a major production both for itsemployees and the public. Two SpaceX marketing executives spent twentyminutes before the launch going through all the technical ins and outs of thelaunch. The Falcon 1 was not carrying real cargo this time; neither the companynor the military wanted to see something else blow up or get lost at sea, so therocket held a 360-pound dummy payload.The fact that SpaceX had been reduced to launch theater did not faze theemployees or dampen their enthusiasm. As the rocket rumbled and then climbedhigher, the employees back at SpaceX headquarters let out raucous cheers. Eachmilestone that followed—clearing the island, engine checks coming back good—was again met with whistles and shouts. As the first stage fell away, thesecond stage fired up about ninety seconds into the flight and the employeesturned downright rapturous, filling the webcast with their ecstatic hollering.“Perfect,” said one of the talking heads. The Kestrel engine glowed red andstarted its six-minute burn. “When the second stage cleared, I could finally startbreathing again and my knees stopped buckling,” said McLaury.The fairing opened up around the three-minute mark and fell back towardEarth. And, finally, around nine minutes into its journey, the Falcon 1 shut downjust as planned and reached orbit, making it the first privately built machine toaccomplish such a feat. It took six years—about four and half more than Muskhad once planned—and five hundred people to make this miracle of modernscience and business happen.Earlier in the day, Musk had tried to distract himself from the mountingpressure by going to Disneyland with his brother Kimbal and their children.Musk then had to race back to make the 4 P.M. launch and walked into SpaceX’strailer control room about two minutes before blastoff. “When the launch wassuccessful, everyone burst into tears,” Kimbal said. “It was one of the mostemotional experiences I’ve had.” Musk left the control room and walked out tothe factory floor, where he received a rock star’s welcome. “Well, that wasfreaking awesome,” he said. “There are a lot of people who thought we couldn’tdo it—a lot actually—but as the saying goes, ‘the fourth time is the charm,’right? There are only a handful of countries on Earth that have done this. It’snormally a country thing, not a company thing. . . . My mind is kind of frazzled,so it’s hard for me to say anything, but, man, this is definitely one of the greatestdays in my life, and I think probably for most people here. We showed peoplewe can do it. This is just the first step of many. . . . I am going to have a reallygreat party tonight. I don’t know about you guys.” Mary Beth Brown then tappedMusk on the shoulder and pulled him away to a meeting.The afterglow of this mammoth victory faded soon after the party ended, andthe severity of SpaceX’s financial hell became top of mind again for Musk.SpaceX had the Falcon 9 efforts to support and had also immediately green-lighted the construction of another machine—the Dragon capsule—that wouldbe used to take supplies, and one day humans, to the International Space Station.Historically, either project would cost more than $1 billion to complete, butSpaceX would have to find a way to build both machines simultaneously for afraction of the cost. The company had dramatically increased the rate at which ithired employees and moved into a much larger headquarters in Hawthorne,California. SpaceX had a commercial flight booked to carry a satellite into orbitfor the Malaysian government, but that launch and the payment for it would notarrive until the middle of 2009. In the meantime, SpaceX simply struggled tomake its payroll.The press did not know the extent of Musk’s financial woes, but they knewenough to turn detailing Tesla’s precarious financial situation into a favoredpastime. A website called the Truth About Cars began a “Tesla Death Watch” inMay 2008 and followed up with dozens of entries throughout the year. The blogtook special pleasure in rejecting the idea that Musk was a true founder of thecompany, presenting him as the moneyman and chairman who had more or lessstolen Tesla from the genius engineer Eberhard. When Eberhard started a blogdetailing the pros and cons of being a Tesla customer, the auto site was all toohappy to echo his gripes. Top Gear, a popular British television show, ripped theRoadster apart, making it look as if the car had run out of juice during a roadtest. “People joke about the Tesla Death Watch and all that, but it was harsh,”said Kimbal Musk. “One day there were fifty articles about how Tesla will die.”Then, in October 2008 (just a couple weeks after SpaceX’s successful launch),Valleywag appeared on the scene again. First it ridiculed Musk for officiallytaking over as CEO of Tesla and replacing Drori, on the grounds that Musk hadjust lucked into his past successes. It followed that by printing a tell-all e-mailfrom a Tesla employee. The report said that Tesla had just gone through a roundof layoffs, shut down its Detroit office, and had only $9 million left in the bank.“We have over 1,200 reservations, which manes [sic] we’ve taken multiples oftens of millions of cash from our customers and have spent them all,” the Teslaemployee wrote. “Meanwhile, we only delivered less than 50 cars. I actuallytalked a close friend of mine into putting down $60,000 for a Tesla Roadster. Icannot conscientiously be a bystander anymore and allow my company todeceive the public and defraud our dear customers. Our customers and thegeneral public are the reason Tesla is so loved. The fact that they are being liedto is just wrong.”*Yes, Tesla deserved much of the negative attention. Musk, though, felt like the2008 climate with the hatred of bankers and the rich had turned him into aparticularly juicy target. “I was just getting pistol-whipped,” Musk said. “Therewas a lot of schadenfreude at the time, and it was bad on so many levels. Justinewas torturing me in the press. There were always all these negative articles aboutTesla, and the stories about SpaceX’s third failure. It hurt really bad. You havethese huge doubts that your life is not working, your car is not working, you’regoing through a divorce and all of those things. I felt like a pile of shit. I didn’tthink we would overcome it. I thought things were probably fucking doomed.”When Musk ran through the calculations concerning SpaceX and Tesla, itoccurred to him that only one company would likely even have a chance atsurvival. “I could either pick SpaceX or Tesla or split the money I had leftbetween them,” Musk said. “That was a tough decision. If I split the money,maybe both of them would die. If I gave the money to just one company, theprobability of it surviving was greater, but then it would mean certain death forthe other company. I debated that over and over.” While Musk meditated on this,the economy worsened quickly and so too did Musk’s financial condition. As2008 came to an end, Musk had run out of money.Riley began to see Musk’s life as a Shakespearean tragedy. Sometimes Muskwould open up to her about the issues, and other times he retreated into himself.Riley spied on Musk while he read e-mail and watched him grimace as the badnews poured in. “You’d witness him having these conversations in his head,” shesaid. “It’s really hard to watch someone you love struggle like that.” Because ofthe long hours that he worked and his eating habits, Musk’s weight fluctuatedwildly. Bags formed under his eyes, and his countenance started to resemble thatof a shattered runner at the back end of an ultra-marathon. “He looked like deathitself,” Riley said. “I remember thinking this guy would have a heart attack anddie. He seemed like a man on the brink.” In the middle of the night, Musk wouldhave nightmares and yell out. “He was in physical pain,” Riley said. “He wouldclimb on me and start screaming while still asleep.” The couple had to startborrowing hundreds of thousands of dollars from Musk’s friend Skoll, andRiley’s parents offered to remortgage their house. Musk no longer flew his jetback and forth between Los Angles and Silicon Valley. He took Southwest.Burning through about $4 million a month, Tesla needed to close anothermajor round of funding to get through 2008 and stay alive. Musk had to lean onfriends just to try to make payroll from week to week, as he negotiated withinvestors. He sent impassioned pleas to anyone he could think of who might beable to spare some money. Bill Lee invested $2 million in Tesla, and Sergey Brininvested $500,000. “A bunch of Tesla employees wrote checks to keep thecompany going,” said Diarmuid O’Connell, the vice president of businessdevelopment at Tesla. “They turned into investments, but, at the time, it wastwenty-five or fifty thousand dollars that you didn’t expect to see again. It justseemed like holy shit, this thing is going to crater.” Kimbal had lost most of hismoney during the recession when his investments bottomed out but sold what hehad left and put it into Tesla as well. “I was close to bankruptcy,” Kimbal said.Tesla had set the prepayments that customers made for the Roadsters aside, butMusk now needed to use that money to keep the company going and soon thosefunds were gone, too. These fiscal maneuvers worried Kimbal. “I’m sure Elonwould have found a way to make things right, but he definitely took risks thatseemed like they could have landed him in jail for using someone else’s money,”he said.In December 2008, Musk mounted simultaneous campaigns to try to save hiscompanies. He heard a rumor that NASA was on the verge of awarding acontract to resupply the space station. SpaceX’s fourth launch had put it in aposition to receive some of this money, which was said to be in excess of $1billion. Musk reached out through some back channels in Washington and foundout that SpaceX might even be a front-runner for the deal. Musk began doingeverything in his power to assure people that the company could meet thechallenge of getting a capsule to the ISS. As for Tesla, Musk had to go to hisexisting investors and ask them to pony up for another round of funding thatneeded to close by Christmas Eve to avoid bankruptcy. To give the investorssome measure of confidence, Musk made a last-ditch effort to raise all thepersonal funds he could and put them into the company. He took out a loan fromSpaceX, which NASA approved, and earmarked the money for Tesla. Muskwent to the secondary markets to try to sell some of his shares in SolarCity. Healso seized about $15 million that came through when Dell acquired a datacenter software startup called Everdream, founded by Musk’s cousins, in whichhe had invested. “It was like the fucking Matrix,” Musk said, describing hisfinancial maneuvers. “The Everdream deal really saved my butt.”Musk had cobbled together $20 million, and asked Tesla’s existing investors—since no new investors materialized—to match that figure. The investorsagreed, and on December 3, 2008, they were in the process of finalizing thepaperwork for the funding round when Musk noticed a problem. VantagePointCapital Partners had signed all of the paperwork except for one crucial page.Musk phoned up Alan Salzman, VantagePoint’s cofounder and managingpartner, to ask about the situation. Salzman informed Musk that the firm had aproblem with the investment round because it undervalued Tesla. “I said, ‘I’vegot an excellent solution then. Take my entire portion of the deal. I had a realhard time coming up with the money. Based on the cash we have in the bankright now, we will bounce payroll next week. So unless you’ve got another idea,can you either just participate as much as you’d like, or allow the round to gothrough because otherwise we will be bankrupt.’” Salzman balked and toldMusk to come in the following week at 7 A.M. to present to VantagePoint’s topbrass. Not having a week of time to work with, Musk asked to come in the nextday, and Salzman refused that offer, forcing Musk to continue taking on loans.“The only reason he wanted the meeting at his office was for me to come onbended knee begging for money so he could say, ‘No,’” Musk theorized. “Whata fuckhead.”VantagePoint declined to speak about this period, but Musk believed thatSalzman’s tactics were part of a mission to bankrupt Tesla. Musk feared thatVantagePoint would oust him as CEO, recapitalize Tesla, and emerge as themajor owner of the carmaker. It could then sell Tesla to a Detroit automaker orfocus on selling electric drivetrains and battery packs instead of making cars.Such reasoning would have been quite practical from a business standpoint butdid not match up with Musk’s goals for Tesla. “VantagePoint was forcing thatwisdom down the throat of an entrepreneur who wanted to do something biggerand bolder,” said Steve Jurvetson, a partner at Draper Fisher Jurvetson and Teslainvestor. “Maybe they’re used to a CEO buckling, but Elon doesn’t do that.”Instead, Musk took another huge risk. Tesla recharacterized the funding as a debtround rather than an equity round, knowing that VantagePoint could not interferewith a debt deal. The tricky part of this strategy was that investors like Jurvetsonwho wanted to help Tesla were put in a bind because venture capital firms arenot structured to do debt deals, and convincing their backers to alter their normalrules of engagement for a company that could very well go bankrupt in a matterof days would be a very tough ask. Knowing this, Musk bluffed. He told theinvestors that he would take another loan from SpaceX and fund the entire round—all $40 million—himself. The tactic worked. “When you have scarcity, itnaturally reinforces greed and leads to more interest,” Jurvetson said. “It wasalso easier for us to go back to our firms and say, ‘Here is the deal. Go or nogo?’” The deal ended up closing on Christmas Eve, hours before Tesla wouldhave gone bankrupt. Musk had just a few hundred thousand dollars left andcould not have made payroll the next day. Musk ultimately put in $12 million,and the investment firms put up the rest. As for Salzman, Musk said, “He shouldbe ashamed of himself.”At SpaceX, Musk and the company’s top executives had spent most ofDecember in a state of fear. According to reports in the press, SpaceX, theonetime front-runner for the large NASA contract, had suddenly lost favor withthe space agency. Michael Griffin, who had once almost been a cofounder ofSpaceX, was the head of NASA and had turned on Musk. Griffin did not care forMusk’s aggressive business tactics, seeing him as borderline unethical. Othershave suggested that Griffin ended up being jealous of Musk and SpaceX.* OnDecember 23, 2008, however, SpaceX received a shock. People inside NASAhad backed SpaceX to become a supplier for the ISS. The company received$1.6 billion as payment for twelve flights to the space station. Staying withKimbal in Boulder, Colorado, for the holidays, Musk broke down in tears as theSpaceX and Tesla transactions processed. “I hadn’t had an opportunity to buy aChristmas present for Talulah or anything,” he said. “I went running down thefucking street in Boulder, and the only place that was open sold these shittytrinkets, and they were about to close. The best thing I could find were theseplastic monkeys with coconuts—those ‘see no evil, hear no evil’ monkeys.”For Gracias, the Tesla and SpaceX investor and Musk’s friend, the 2008period told him everything he would ever need to know about Musk’s character.He saw a man who arrived in the United States with nothing, who had lost achild, who was being pilloried in the press by reporters and his ex-wife and whoverged on having his life’s work destroyed. “He has the ability to work harderand endure more stress than anyone I’ve ever met,” Gracias said. “What he wentthrough in 2008 would have broken anyone else. He didn’t just survive. He keptworking and stayed focused.” That ability to stay focused in the midst of a crisisstands as one of Musk’s main advantages over other executives and competitors.“Most people who are under that sort of pressure fray,” Gracias said. “Theirdecisions go bad. Elon gets hyperrational. He’s still able to make very clear,long-term decisions. The harder it gets, the better he gets. Anyone who saw whathe went through firsthand came away with more respect for the guy. I’ve justnever seen anything like his ability to take pain.”