5PAYPAL MAFIA BOSSTHE SALE OF ZIP2 INFUSED ELON MUSK WITH A NEW BRAND OFCONFIDENCE. Much like the videogame characters he adored, Musk hadleveled up. He had solved Silicon Valley and become what everyone at the timewanted to be—a dot-com millionaire. His next venture would need to live up tohis rapidly inflating ambition. This left Musk searching for an industry that hadtons of money and inefficiencies that he and the Internet could exploit. Muskbegan thinking back to his time as an intern at the Bank of Nova Scotia. His bigtakeaway from that job, that bankers are rich and dumb, now had the feel of amassive opportunity.During his time working for the head of strategy at the bank in the early1990s, Musk had been asked to take a look at the company’s third-world debtportfolio. This pool of money went by the depressing name of “less-developedcountry debt,” and Bank of Nova Scotia had billions of dollars of it. Countriesthroughout South America and elsewhere had defaulted in the years prior,forcing the bank to write down some of its debt value. Musk’s boss wanted himto dig into the bank’s holdings as a learning experiment and try to determine howmuch the debt was actually worth.While pursuing this project, Musk stumbled upon what seemed like anobvious business opportunity. The United States had tried to help reduce the debtburden of a number of developing countries through so-called Brady bonds, inwhich the U.S. government basically backstopped the debt of countries likeBrazil and Argentina. Musk noticed an arbitrage play. “I calculated the backstopvalue, and it was something like fifty cents on the dollar, while the actual debtwas trading at twenty-five cents,” Musk said. “This was like the biggestopportunity ever, and nobody seemed to realize it.” Musk tried to remain cooland calm as he rang Goldman Sachs, one of the main traders in this market, andprobed around about what he had seen. He inquired as to how much Braziliandebt might be available at the 25-cents price. “The guy said, ‘How much do youwant?’ and I came up with some ridiculous number like ten billion dollars,”Musk said. When the trader confirmed that was doable, Musk hung up thephone. “I was thinking that they had to be fucking crazy because you coulddouble your money. Everything was backed by Uncle Sam. It was a no-brainer.”Musk had spent the summer earning about fourteen dollars an hour andgetting chewed out for using the executive coffee machine, among other statusinfractions, and figured his moment to shine and make a big bonus had arrived.He sprinted up to his boss’s office and pitched the opportunity of a lifetime.“You can make billions of dollars for free,” he said. His boss told Musk to writeup a report, which soon got passed up to the bank’s CEO, who promptly rejectedthe proposal, saying the bank had been burned on Brazilian and Argentinian debtbefore and didn’t want to mess with it again. “I tried to tell them that’s not thepoint,” Musk said. “The point is that it’s fucking backed by Uncle Sam. Itdoesn’t matter what the South Americans do. You cannot lose unless you thinkthe U.S. Treasury is going to default. But they still didn’t do it, and I wasstunned. Later in life, as I competed against the banks, I would think back to thismoment, and it gave me confidence. All the bankers did was copy whateveryone else did. If everyone else ran off a bloody cliff, they’d run right off acliff with them. If there was a giant pile of gold sitting in the middle of the roomand nobody was picking it up, they wouldn’t pick it up, either.”In the years that followed, Musk considered starting an Internet bank anddiscussed it openly during his internship at Pinnacle Research in 1995. Theyouthful Musk lectured the scientists about the inevitable transition coming infinance toward online systems, but they tried to talk him down, saying that itwould takes ages for Web security to be good enough to win over consumers.Musk, though, remained convinced that the finance industry could do with amajor upgrade and that he could have a big influence on banking with arelatively small investment. “Money is low bandwidth,” he said, during a speechat Stanford University in 2003, to describe his thinking. “You don’t need somesort of big infrastructure improvement to do things with it. It’s really just anentry in a database.”The actual plan that Musk concocted was beyond grandiose. As theresearchers at Pinnacle had pointed out, people were barely comfortable buyingbooks online. They might take their chances entering a credit card number butexposing just their bank accounts to the Web was out of the question to many.Pah. So what? Musk wanted to build a full-service financial institution online: acompany that would have savings and checking accounts as well as brokerageservices and insurance. The technology to build such a service was possible, butnavigating the regulatory hell of creating an online bank from scratch looked likean intractable problem to optimists and an impossibility to more level heads.This was not dishing out directions to a pizzeria or putting up a house listing. Itwas dealing with people’s finances, and there would be real repercussions if theservice did not work as billed.Undaunted, Musk kicked this new plan into action before Zip2 had even beensold. He chatted up some of the best engineers at the company to get a feel forwho might be willing to join him in another venture. Musk also bounced hisideas off some contacts he’d made at the bank in Canada. In January 1999, withZip2’s board seeking a buyer, Musk began to formalize his banking plan. Thedeal with Compaq was announced the next month. And in March, Muskincorporated X.com, a finance startup with a pornographic-sounding name.It had taken Musk less than a decade to go from being a Canadian backpackerto becoming a multimillionaire at the age of twenty-seven. With his $22 million,he moved from sharing an apartment with three roommates to buying an 1,800-square-foot condo and renovating it. He also bought a $1 million McLaren F1sports car and a small prop plane and learned to fly. Musk embraced thenewfound celebrity that he’d earned as part of the dot-com millionaire set. He letCNN show up at his apartment at 7 A.M. to film the delivery of the car. A blackeighteen-wheeler pulled up in front of Musk’s place and then lowered the sleek,sliver vehicle onto the street, while Musk stood slack-jawed with his armsfolded. “There are sixty-two McLarens in the world, and I will own one ofthem,” he told CNN. “Wow, I can’t believe it’s actually here. That’s pretty wild,man.”CNN interspersed video of the car delivery with interviews with Musk. Thewhole time he looked like a caricature of an engineer who had made it big.Musk’s hair had started thinning, and he had a closely cropped cut thataccentuated his boyish face. He wore an all-too-big brown sport coat andchecked his cell phone from his lavish car, sitting next to his gorgeous girlfriend,Justine, and he seemed spellbound by his life. Musk rolled out one laughablerich-guy line after another, talking first about the Zip2 deal—“Receiving cash iscash. I mean, those are just a large number of Ben Franklins”—next about theawesomeness of his life—“There it is, gentlemen, the fastest car in the world”—and then about his prodigious ambition—“I could go and buy one of the islandsin the Bahamas and turn it into my personal fiefdom, but I am much moreinterested in trying to build and create a new company.” The camera crewfollowed Musk to the X.com offices, where his cocksure delivery led to anotherround of cringe-worthy statements: “I do not fit the picture of a banker,”“Raising fifty million dollars is a matter of making a series of phone calls, andthe money is there,” “I think X.com could absolutely be a multibillion-dollarbonanza.”Musk purchased the McLaren from a seller in Florida, snatching the car awayfrom Ralph Lauren, who had also inquired about buying it. Even very wealthypeople like Lauren would tend to reserve something like a McLaren for specialevents or the occasional Sunday drive. Not Musk. He drove it all around SiliconValley and parked it on the street by the X.com offices. His friends werehorrified to see such a work of art covered with bird droppings or in the parkinglot of a Safeway. One day, Musk emailed fellow McLaren owner Larry Ellison,the billionaire cofounder of the software maker Oracle, out of the blue to see ifhe wanted to go race cars around a track for fun. Jim Clark, another billionairewho liked fast things, caught wind of the proposal and told a friend that heneeded to rush over to the local Ferrari dealership to buy something that couldcompete. Musk had joined the big boys’ club. “Elon was super-excited about allof this,” said George Zachary, a venture capitalist and close friend of Musk’s.“He showed me the correspondence with Larry.” The next year, while drivingdown Sand Hill Road to meet with an investor, Musk turned to a friend in the carand said, “Watch this.” He floored the car, did a lane change, spun out, and hit anembankment, which started the car spinning in midair like a Frisbee. Thewindows and wheels were blown to smithereens, and the body of the cardamaged. Musk again turned to his companion and said, “The funny part is itwasn’t insured.” The two of them then thumbed a ride to the venture capitalist’soffice.To his credit, Musk did not fully buy in to this playboy persona. He actuallyplowed the majority of the money he made from Zip2 into X.com. There werepractical reasons for this decision. Investors catch a break under the tax law ifthey roll a windfall into a new venture within a couple of months. But even bySilicon Valley’s high-risk standards, it was shocking to put so much of one’snewfound wealth into something as iffy as an online bank. All told, Muskinvested about $12 million into X.com, leaving him, after taxes, with $4 millionor so for personal use. “That’s part of what separates Elon from mere mortals,”said Ed Ho, the former Zip2 executive, who went on to cofound X.com. “He’swilling to take an insane amount of personal risk. When you do a deal like that,it either pays off or you end up in a bus shelter somewhere.”Musk’s decision to invest so much money in X.com looks even more unusualin hindsight. Much of the point of being a dot-com success in 1999 was to proveyourself once, stash away your millions, and then use your credentials to talkother people into betting their money on your next venture. Musk wouldcertainly go on to rely on outside investors, but he put major skin in the game aswell. So while Musk could be found on television talking like the rest of the self-absorbed dot-com schmucks, he behaved more like a throwback to SiliconValley’s earlier days, when the founders of companies like Intel were willing totake huge gambles on themselves.Where Zip2 had been a neat, useful idea, X.com held the promise offomenting a major revolution. Musk, for the first time, would be confronting adeep-pocketed, entrenched industry head-on with the hopes of upending all ofthe incumbents. Musk also began to hone his trademark style of entering anultracomplex business and not letting the fact that he knew very little about theindustry’s nuances bother him in the slightest. He had an inkling that the bankerswere doing finance all wrong and that he could run the business better thaneveryone else. Musk’s ego and confidence had started heading toward the levelsthat would inspire some and leave others thinking of him as pompous andunscrupulous. The creation of X.com would ultimately reveal a great deal aboutMusk’s creativity, relentless drive, confrontational style, and foibles as a leader.Musk would also get another taste of being pushed aside at his own companyand the pain that accompanies a grand vision left unfulfilled.Musk assembled what looked like an all-star crew to start X.com. Ho hadworked at SGI and Zip2 as an engineer, and his peers marveled at his coding andteam-management skills. They were joined by a pair of Canadians with financeexperience—Harris Fricker and Christopher Payne. Musk had met Frickerduring his time as an intern at the Bank of Nova Scotia, and the two really hit itoff. A Rhodes scholar, Fricker brought the knowledge of the banking world’smechanics that X.com would need. Payne was Fricker’s friend from theCanadian finance community. All four men were considered cofounders of thecompany, while Musk emerged as the largest shareholder thanks to his hefty up-front investment. X.com began, like so many Silicon Valley operations, at ahouse where the cofounders began brainstorming, and then moved to moreformal offices at 394 University Avenue in Palo Alto.The cofounders were aligned philosophically around the idea that the bankingindustry had fallen behind the times. Visiting a branch bank to speak with a tellerseemed pretty archaic now that the Internet had arrived. The rhetoric soundedgood, and the four men were enthused. The only thing stopping them was reality.Musk had a modicum of banking experience and had resorted to buying a bookon the industry to help understand its inner workings. The more the cofoundersthought about their plan of attack, the more they realized the regulatory issuesblocking the creation of an online bank were insurmountable. “As four and fivemonths went by, the onion just kept unwrapping,” said Ho.*From the outset, there were personality clashes as well. Musk had become abudding superstar in Silicon Valley and had the press fawning over him. Thisdidn’t sit that well with Fricker, who’d moved from Canada and pegged X.comas his chance to make a mark on the world as a banking whiz. Fricker, accordingto numerous people, wanted to run X.com and do so in a more conventionalmanner. He found Musk’s visionary statements to the press about rethinking theentire banking industry silly since the company was struggling to build much ofanything. “We were out promising the sun, moon, and the stars to the media,”Fricker said. “Elon would say that this is not a normal business environment, andyou have to suspend normal business thinking. He said, ‘There is a happy-gasfactory up on the hill, and it’s pumping stuff into the Valley.’” Fricker would notbe the last person to accuse Musk of overhyping products and playing the public,although whether this is a flaw or one of Musk’s great talents as a businessmanis up for debate.The squabble between Fricker and Musk came to a quick, nasty end. Just fivemonths after X.com had started, Fricker initiated a coup. “He said either he takesover as CEO or he’s just going to take everyone from the company and create hisown company,” Musk said. “I don’t do well with blackmail. I said, ‘You shouldgo do that.’ So he did.” Musk tried to talk Ho and some of the other keyengineers into staying, but they sided with Fricker and left. Musk ended up witha shell of a company and a handful of loyal employees. “After all that wentdown, I remember sitting with Elon in his office,” said Julie Ankenbrandt, anearly X.com employee who stayed. “There were a million laws in place to blocksomething like X.com from happening, but Elon didn’t care. He just looked atme and said, ‘I guess we should hire some more people.’”*Musk had been trying to raise funding for X.com and had been forced to go toventure capitalists and confess that there wasn’t much in the way of a companyleft. Mike Moritz, a famed investor from Sequoia Capital, backed the companynonetheless, making a bet on Musk and little else. Musk hit the streets of SiliconValley once again and managed to attract engineers with his rah-rah speechesabout the future of Internet banking. Scott Anderson, a young computer scientist,started on August 1, 1999, just a few days after the exodus, and bought right intothe vision. “You look back, and it was total insanity,” Anderson said. “We hadwhat amounted to a Hollywood movie set of a website. It barely got past theVCs.”Week by week, more engineers arrived and the vision became more real. Thecompany secured a banking license and a mutual fund license and formed apartnership with Barclays. By November, X.com’s small software team hadcreated one of the world’s first online banks complete with FDIC insurance toback the bank accounts and three mutual funds for investors to choose. Muskgave the engineers $100,000 of his own money to conduct their testing. On thenight before Thanksgiving in 1999, X.com went live to the public. “I was thereuntil two A.M.,” Anderson said. “Then, I went home to cook Thanksgivingdinner. Elon called me a few hours later and asked me to come into the office torelieve some of the other engineers. Elon stayed there forty-eight straight hours,making sure things worked.”Under Musk’s direction, X.com tried out some radical banking concepts.Customers received a $20 cash card just for signing up to use the service and a$10 card for every person they referred. Musk did away with niggling fees andoverdraft penalties. In a very modern twist, X.com also built a person-to-personpayment system in which you could send someone money just by plugging theire-mail address into the site. The whole idea was to shift away from slow-movingbanks with their mainframes taking days to process payments and to create akind of agile bank account where you could move money around with a coupleof clicks on a mouse or an e-mail. This was revolutionary stuff, and more than200,000 people bought into it and signed up for X.com within the first couple ofmonths of operation.Soon enough, X.com had a major competitor. A couple of brainy kids namedMax Levchin and Peter Thiel had been working on a payment system of theirown at their startup called Confinity. The duo actually rented their office space—a glorified broom closet—from X.com and were trying to make it possible forowners of Palm Pilot handhelds to swap money via the infrared ports on thedevices. Between X.com and Confinity, the small office on University Avenuehad turned into the frenzied epicenter of the Internet finance revolution. “It wasthis mass of adolescent men that worked so hard,” Ankenbrandt said. “It stunkso badly in there. I can still smell it—leftover pizza, body odor, and sweat.”The pleasantries between X.com and Confinity came to an abrupt end. TheConfinity founders moved to an office down the street and, like X.com, beganfocusing their attention on Web and e-mail-based payments with their serviceknown as PayPal. The companies became locked in a heated battle to match eachother’s features and attract more users, knowing that whoever got bigger fasterwould win. Tens of millions of dollars were spent on promotions, while millionsmore were lost battling hackers who had seized upon the services as newplaygrounds for fraud. “It was like the Internet version of making it rain at a stripclub,” said Jeremy Stoppelman, an X.com engineer who went on to become theCEO of Yelp. “You gave away money as fast as you could.”The race to win Internet payments gave Musk a chance to show off his quickthinking and work ethic. He kept devising plans to counter the advantage PayPalhad established on auction sites like eBay. And he rallied the X.com employeesto implement the tactics as fast as possible using brute-force appeals to theircompetitive natures. “There really wasn’t anything suave about him,”Ankenbrandt said. “We all worked twenty hours a day, and he worked twenty-three hours.”In March 2000, X.com and Confinity finally decided to stop trying to spendeach other into oblivion and to join forces. Confinity had what looked like thehottest product in PayPal but was paying out $100,000 a day in awards to newcustomers and didn’t have the cash reserves to keep going. X.com, by contrast,still had plenty of cash reserves and the more sophisticated banking products. Ittook the lead in setting the merger terms, leaving Musk as the largest shareholderof the combined company, which would be called X.com. Shortly after the dealclosed, X.com raised $100 million from backers including Deutsche Bank andGoldman Sachs and boasted that it had more than one million customers.*The two companies tried hard to mesh their cultures, with modest success.Groups of employees from X.com tied their computer monitors to their deskchairs with power cords and rolled them down the street to the Confinity officesto work alongside their new colleagues. But the teams could never quite see eyeto eye. Musk kept championing the X.com brand, while most everyone elsefavored PayPal. More fights broke out over the design of the company’stechnology infrastructure. The Confinity team led by Levchin favored movingtoward open-source software like Linux, while Musk championed Microsoft’sdata-center software as being more likely to keep productivity high. Thissquabble may sound silly to outsiders, but it was the equivalent of a religiouswar to the engineers, many of whom viewed Microsoft as a dated evil empireand Linux as the modern software of the people. Two months after the merger,Thiel resigned and Levchin threatened to walk out over the technology rift.Musk was left to run a fractured company.The technology issues X.com had been facing worsened as the computingsystems failed to keep up with an exploding customer base. Once a week, thecompany’s website collapsed. Most of the engineers were ordered to start workdesigning a new system, which distracted key technical personnel and leftX.com vulnerable to fraud. “We were losing money hand over fist,” saidStoppelman. As X.com became more popular and its transaction volumeexploded, all of its problems worsened. There was more fraud. There were morefees from banks and credit card companies. There was more competition fromstartups. X.com lacked a cohesive business model to offset the losses and turn aprofit from the money it managed. Roelof Botha, the startup’s chief financialofficer and now a prominent venture capitalist at Sequoia, did not think Muskprovided the board with a true picture of X.com’s issues. A growing number ofother people at the company questioned Musk’s decision-making in the face ofall the crises.What followed was one of the nastiest coups in Silicon Valley’s long,illustrious history of nasty coups. A small group of X.com employees gatheredone night at Fanny & Alexander, a now-defunct bar in Palo Alto, andbrainstormed about how to push out Musk. They decided to sell the board on theidea of Thiel returning as CEO. Instead of confronting Musk directly with thisplan, the conspirators decided to take action behind Musk’s back.Musk and Justine had been married in January 2000 but had been too busy fora honeymoon. Nine months later, in September, they planned to mix businessand pleasure by going on a fundraising trip and ending it with a honeymoon inSydney to catch the Olympics. As they boarded their flight one night, X.comexecutives delivered letters of no confidence to X.com’s board. Some of thepeople loyal to Musk had sensed something was wrong, but it was too late. “Iwent to the office at ten thirty that night, and everyone was there,” Ankenbrandtsaid. “I could not believe it. I am frantically trying to call Elon, but he’s on aplane.” By the time he landed, Musk had been replaced by Thiel.When Musk finally heard what had happened, he hopped on the next planeback to Palo Alto. “It was shocking, but I will give Elon this—I thought hehandled it pretty well,” Justine said. For a brief period, Musk tried to fight back.He urged the board to reconsider its decision. But when it became clear that thecompany had already moved on, Musk relented. “I talked to Moritz and a fewothers,” Musk said. “It wasn’t so much that I wanted to be CEO but more like,‘Hey, I think there are some pretty important things that need to happen, and ifI’m not CEO, I’m not sure they are going to happen.’ But then I talked to Maxand Peter, and it seemed like they would make these things happen. So then, Imean, it’s not the end of the world.”Many of the X.com employees who had been with Musk since early on wereless than impressed by what had happened. “I was floored by it and angry,” saidStoppelman. “Elon was sort of a rock star in my view. I was very vocal abouthow I thought it was bullshit. But I knew fundamentally that the company wasdoing well. It was a rocket ship, and I wasn’t going to leave.” Stoppelman, thentwenty-three, went into a conference room and tore into Thiel and Levchin.“They let me vent it all out, and their reaction was part of the reason I stayed.”Others remained embittered. “It was backhanded and cowardly,” said BrandenSpikes, a Zip2 and X.com engineer. “I would have been more behind it if Elonhad been in the room.”By June 2001, Musk’s influence on the company was fading quickly. Thatmonth, Thiel rebranded X.com as PayPal. Musk rarely lets a slight gounpunished. Throughout this ordeal, however, he showed incredible restraint. Heembraced the role of being an advisor to the company and kept investing in it,increasing his stake as PayPal’s largest shareholder. “You would expect someonein Elon’s position to be bitter and vindictive, but he wasn’t,” said Botha. “Hesupported Peter. He was a prince.”The next few months would end up being key for Musk’s future. The dot-comjoyride was coming to a quick end, and people wanted to try to cash out in anyway possible. When executives from eBay began approaching PayPal about anacquisition, the inclination for most people was to sell and sell fast. Musk andMoritz, though, urged the board to reject a number of offers and hold out formore money. PayPal had revenue of about $240 million per year, and looked likeit might make it as an independent company and go public. Musk and Moritz’sresistance paid off and then some. In July 2002, eBay offered $1.5 billion forPayPal, and Musk and the rest of the board accepted the deal. Musk netted about$250 million from the sale to eBay, or $180 million after taxes—enough to makewhat would turn out to be his very wild dreams possible.The PayPal episode was a mixed bag for Musk. His reputation as a leadersuffered in the aftermath of the deal, and the media turned on him in earnest forthe first time. Eric Jackson, an early Confinity employee, wrote The PayPalWars: Battles with eBay, the Media, the Mafia, and the Rest of Planet Earth in2004 and recounted the company’s tumultuous journey. The book painted Muskas an egomaniacal, stubborn jerk, making wrong decisions at every turn, andportrayed Thiel and Levchin as heroic geniuses. Valleywag, the technologyindustry gossip site, piled on as well and turned bashing Musk into one of its petprojects. The criticisms grew to the point that people started wondering aloudwhether or not Musk counted as a true cofounder of PayPal or had just riddenThiel’s coattails to a magical payday. The tone of the book along with the blogposts goaded Musk in 2007 into writing a 2,200-word e-mail to Valleywagmeant to set the record straight with his version of events.In the e-mail, Musk let his literary flair loose and gave the public a direct lookat his combative side. He described Jackson as “a sycophantic jackass” and “onenotch above an intern,” who had little insight into the high-level goings-on at thecompany. “Since Eric worships Peter, the outcome was obvious—Peter soundslike Mel Gibson in Braveheart and my role is somewhere between negligibleand a bad seed,” Musk wrote. Musk then detailed seven reasons why hedeserved cofounder status of PayPal, including his role as its largest shareholder,the hiring of a lot of the top talent, the creation of a number of the company’smost successful business ideas, and his time as CEO when the company wentfrom sixty to several hundred employees.Almost everyone I interviewed from the PayPal days leaned toward agreeingwith Musk’s overall assessment. They said that Jackson’s account bordered onfantasy when it came to celebrating the Confinity team over Musk and theX.com team. “There are a lot of PayPal people that suffer from warpedmemories,” said Botha.But these same people reached another consensus, saying that Musk hadmishandled the branding, technology infrastructure, and fraud situations. “I thinkit would have killed the company if Elon had stayed on as CEO for six moremonths,” said Botha. “The mistakes Elon was making at the time wereamplifying the risk of the business.” (For more on Musk’s take on the PayPalyears, see Appendix 2.)The suggestions that Musk did not count as a “true” cofounder of PayPal seemasinine in retrospect. Thiel, Levchin, and other PayPal executives have said asmuch in the years since the eBay deal closed. The only useful thing suchcriticisms produced were the bombastic counteroffensives from Musk, whichrevealed touches of insecurity and the seriousness with which Musk insists thatthe historical record reflect his take on events. “He comes from the school ofthought in the public relations world that you let no inaccuracy go uncorrected,”said Vince Sollitto, the former communications chief at PayPal. “It sets aprecedent, and you should fight every out-of-place comma tooth and nail. Hetakes things very personally and usually seeks war.”The stronger critique of Musk during this period of his life was that he hadsucceeded to a large degree despite himself. Musk’s traits as a confrontationalknow-it-all and his abundant ego created deep, lasting fractures within hiscompanies. While Musk consciously tried to temper his behavior, these effortswere not enough to win over investors and more experienced executives. At bothZip2 and PayPal, the companies’ boards came to the conclusion that Musk wasnot yet CEO material. It can also be argued that Musk had become a hyperbolichuckster, who overreached and oversold his companies’ technology. Musk’sbiggest detractors have made all of these arguments either in public or privateand a half dozen or so of them said far worse things to me about his characterand actions, describing Musk as unethical in business and vicious with hispersonal attacks. Almost universally, these people were unwilling to go on therecord with their comments, claiming to be afraid Musk would pursue litigationagainst them or ruin their ability to do business.These criticisms must be weighed against Musk’s track record. Hedemonstrated an innate ability to read people and technology trends at theinception of the consumer Web. While others tried to wrap their heads aroundthe Internet’s implications, Musk had already set off on a purposeful plan ofattack. He envisioned many of the early pieces of technology—directories,maps, sites that focused on vertical markets—that would become mainstays onthe Web. Then, just as people became comfortable with buying things fromAmazon.com and eBay, Musk made the great leap forward to full-fledgedInternet banking. He would bring standard financial instruments online and thenmodernize the industry with a host of new concepts. He exhibited a deep insightinto human nature that helped his companies pull off exceptional marketing,technology, and financial feats. Musk was already playing the entrepreneur gameat the highest level and working the press and investors like few others could.Did he hype things up and rub people the wrong way? Absolutely—and withspectacular results.Based in large part on Musk’s guidance, PayPal survived the bursting of thedot-com bubble, became the first blockbuster IPO after the 9/11 attacks, and thensold to eBay for an astronomical sum while the rest of the technology industrywas mired in a dramatic downturn. It was nearly impossible to survive let aloneemerge as a winner in the midst of such a mess.PayPal also came to represent one of the greatest assemblages of business andengineering talent in Silicon Valley history. Both Musk and Thiel had a keen eyefor young, brilliant engineers. The founders of startups as varied as YouTube,Palantir Technologies, and Yelp all worked at PayPal. Another set of people—including Reid Hoffman, Thiel, and Botha—emerged as some of the technologyindustry’s top investors. PayPal staff pioneered techniques in fighting onlinefraud that have formed the basis of software used by the CIA and FBI to trackterrorists and of software used by the world’s largest banks to combat crime.This collection of super-bright employees has become known as the PayPalMafia—more or less the current ruling class of Silicon Valley—and Musk is itsmost famous and successful member.Hindsight also continues to favor Musk’s unbridled vision over the morecautious pragmatism of executives at Zip2 and PayPal. Had it chased consumersas Musk urged, Zip2 may have ended up as a blockbuster mapping and reviewservice. As for PayPal, an argument can still be made that the investors sold outtoo early and should have listened more to Musk’s demands to remainindependent. By 2014, PayPal had amassed 153 million users and was valued atclose to $32 billion as a stand-alone company. A flood of payment and bankingstartups have appeared as well—Square, Stripe, and Simple, to name threeamong the S’s—that have looked to fulfill much of the original X.com vision.If X.com’s board had been a bit more patient with Musk, there’s good reasonto believe he would have succeeded with delivery of the “online bank to rulethem all” that he had set out to create. History has demonstrated that whileMusk’s goals can sound absurd in the moment, he certainly believes in them and,when given enough time, tends to achieve them. “He always works from adifferent understanding of reality than the rest of us,” Ankenbrandt said. “He isjust different than the rest of us.”While navigating the business tumult of Zip2 and PayPal, Musk found amoment of peace in his personal life. He’d spent years courting Justine Wilsonfrom afar, flying her out for visits on the weekends. For a long time, hisoppressive hours and his roommates put a crimp on the relationship. But theZip2 sale let Musk buy a place of his own and pay a bit more attention to Justine.Like any couple, they had their ups and downs, but that passion of young loveremained. “We fought a lot, but when we weren’t fighting, there was a deepsense of compassion—a bond,” Justine said. The couple had been sparring for afew days about phone calls Justine kept getting from an ex-boyfriend—“Elondidn’t like that”—and had a major spat while walking near the X.com offices. “Iremember thinking it was a lot of drama, and that if I was going to put up with it,we might as well be married. I told him he should just propose to me,” Justinesaid. It took Musk a few minutes to cool down and then he did just that,proposing on the spot. A few days later, a more chivalrous Musk returned to thesidewalk, got down on bended knee, and presented Justine with a ring.Justine knew all about Musk’s grim childhood and the intense range ofemotions he could exhibit. Her romantic sensibilities overrode any trepidationshe might have had about these parts of Musk’s history and character andcentered instead on his strength. Musk often talked fondly about Alexander theGreat, and Justine saw him as her own conquering hero. “He wasn’t afraid ofresponsibility,” she said. “He didn’t run from things. He wanted to get marriedand have kids early on.” Musk also exuded a confidence and passion that madeJustine think life with him would always be okay. “Money is not his motivation,and, quite frankly, I think it just happens for him,” Justine said. “It’s just there.He knows he can generate it.”At their wedding reception, Justine encountered the other side of theconquering hero. Musk pulled Justine close while they danced, and informed her,“I am the alpha in this relationship.”3 Two months later, Justine signed apostnuptial financial agreement that would come back to haunt her and enteredinto an enduring power struggle. She described the situation years later in anarticle for Marie Claire, writing, “He was constantly remarking on the ways hefound me lacking. ‘I am your wife,’ I told him repeatedly, ‘not your employee.’‘If you were my employee,’ he said just as often, ‘I would fire you.’”The newlyweds were not helped by the drama at X.com. They’d put off theirhoneymoon and then had it derailed by the coup. It took until late December2000 for things to calm down enough for Musk to take his first vacation in years.He arranged a two-week trip, with the first part taking place in Brazil and thesecond in South Africa at a game reserve near the Mozambique border. While inAfrica, Musk contracted the most virulent version of malaria—falciparummalaria—which accounts for the vast majority of malaria deaths.Musk returned to California in January, which is when the illness took hold.He started to get sick and was bedridden for a few days before Justine took himto a doctor who then ordered that Musk be rushed in an ambulance to SequoiaHospital in Redwood City.* Doctors there misdiagnosed and mistreated hiscondition to the point that Musk was near death. “Then, there happened to be aguy visiting from another hospital who had seen a lot more malaria cases,” Musksaid. He spied Musk’s blood work in the lab and ordered an immediatemaximum dosage of doxycycline, an antibiotic. The doctor told Musk that if hehad turned up a day later, the medicine likely would no longer have beeneffective.Musk spent ten agonizing days in the intensive care unit. The experienceshocked Justine. “He’s built like a tank,” she said. “He has a level of stamina andan ability to deal with levels of stress that I’ve never seen in anyone else. To seehim laid low like that in total misery was like a visit to an alternate universe.” Ittook Musk six months to recover. He lost forty-five pounds over the course ofthe illness and had a closet full of clothes that no longer fit. “I came very close todying,” Musk said. “That’s my lesson for taking a vacation: vacations will killyou.”