9LIFTOFFTHE FALCON 9 HAS BECOME SPACEX’S WORKHORSE. The rocketlooks—let’s face it—like a giant white phallus. It stands 224.4 feet tall, is 12 feetacross, and weighs 1.1 million pounds. The rocket is powered by nine enginesarranged in an “octaweb” pattern at its base with one engine in the center andeight others encircling it. The engines connect to the first stage, or the main bodyof the rocket, which bears the blue SpaceX insignia and an American flag. Theshorter second stage of the rocket sits on top of the first and is the one thatactually ends up doing things in space. It can be outfitted with a roundedcontainer for carrying satellites or a capsule capable of transporting humans. Bydesign, there’s nothing particularly flashy about the Falcon 9’s outwardappearance. It’s the spaceship equivalent of an Apple laptop or a Braun kettle—an elegant, purposeful machine stripped of frivolity and waste.SpaceX sometimes uses Vandenberg Air Force Base in Southern California tosend up these Falcon 9 rockets. Were it not owned by the military, the basewould be a resort. The Pacific Ocean runs for miles along its border, and itsgrounds have wide-open shrubby fields dotted by green hills. Nestled into onehilly spot just at the ocean’s edge are a handful of launchpads. On launch days,the white Falcon 9 breaks up the blue and green landscape, pointing skyward andleaving no doubt about its intentions.About four hours before a launch, the Falcon 9 starts getting filled with animmense amount of liquid oxygen and rocket-grade kerosene. Some of the liquidoxygen vents out of the rocket as it awaits launch and is kept so cold that it boilsoff on contact with the metal and air, forming white plumes that stream down therocket’s sides. This gives the impression of the Falcon 9 huffing and puffing as itlimbers up before the journey. The engineers inside of SpaceX’s mission controlmonitor these fuel systems and all manner of other items. They chat back andforth through headsets and begin cycling through their launch checklist,consumed by what people in the business call “go fever” as they move from oneapproval to the next. Ten minutes before launch, the humans step out of the wayand leave the remaining processes up to automated machines. Everything goesquiet, and the tension builds until right before the main event. That’s when, outof nowhere, the Falcon 9 breaks the silence by letting out a loud gasp.A white latticed support structure pulls away from its body. The T-minus-ten-seconds countdown begins. Nothing much happens from ten down to four. At thecount of three, however, the engines ignite, and the computers conduct a last, oh-so-rapid, health check. Four enormous metal clamps hold the rocket down, ascomputing systems evaluate all nine engines and measure if there’s sufficientdownward force being produced. By the time zero arrives, the rocket has decidedthat all is well enough to go through with its mission, and the clamps release.The rocket goes to war with inertia, and then, with flames surrounding its baseand snow-thick plumes of the liquid oxygen filling the air, it shoots up. Seeingsomething so large hold so straight and steady while suspended in midair is hardfor the brain to register. It is foreign, inexplicable. About twenty seconds afterliftoff, the spectators placed safely a few miles away catch the first faceful of theFalcon 9’s rumble. It’s a distinct sound—a sort of staccato crackling that arisesfrom chemicals whipped into a violent frenzy. Pant legs vibrate from shockwaves produced by a stream of sonic booms coming out of the Falcon 9’sexhaust. The white rocket climbs higher and higher with impressive stamina.After about a minute, it’s just a red spot in the sky, and then—poof—it’s gone.Only a cynical dullard could come away from witnessing this feeling anythingother than wonder at what man can accomplish.For Elon Musk, this spectacle has turned into a familiar experience. SpaceXhas metamorphosed from the joke of the aeronautics industry into one of its mostconsistent operators. SpaceX sends a rocket up about once a month, carryingsatellites for companies and nations and supplies to the International SpaceStation. Where the Falcon 1 blasting off from Kwajalein was the work of astartup, the Falcon 9 taking off from Vandenberg is the work of an aerospacesuperpower. SpaceX can undercut its U.S. competitors—Boeing, LockheedMartin, Orbital Sciences—on price by a ridiculous margin. It also offers U.S.customers a peace of mind that its rivals can’t. Where these competitors rely onRussian and other foreign suppliers, SpaceX makes all of its machines fromscratch in the United States. Because of its low costs, SpaceX has once againmade the United States a player in the worldwide commercial launch market. Its$60 million per launch cost is much less than what Europe and Japan charge andtrumps even the relative bargains offered by the Russians and Chinese, who havethe added benefit of decades of sunk government investment into their spaceprograms as well as cheap labor.The United States continues to take great pride in having Boeing competeagainst Airbus and other foreign aircraft makers. For some reason, though,government leaders and the public have been willing to concede much of thecommercial launch market. It’s a disheartening and shortsighted position. Thetotal market for satellites, related services, and the rocket launches needed tocarry them to space has exploded over the past decade from about $60 billion peryear to more than $200 billion.11 A number of countries pay to send up their ownspy, communication, and weather satellites. Companies then turn to space fortelevision, Internet, radio, weather, navigation, and imaging services. Themachines in space supply the fabric of modern life, and they’re going to becomemore capable and interesting at a rapid pace. A whole new breed of satellitemakers has just appeared on the scene with the ability to answer Google-likequeries about our planet. These satellites can zoom in on Iowa and determinewhen cornfields are at peak yields and ready to harvest, and they can count carsin Wal-Mart parking lots throughout California to calculate shopping demandduring the holiday season. The startups making these types of innovativemachines must often turn to the Russians to get them into space, but SpaceXintends to change that.The United States has remained competitive in the most lucrative parts of thespace industry, building the actual satellites and complementary systems andservices to run them. Each year, the United States makes about one-third of allsatellites and takes about 60 percent of the global satellite revenue. The majorityof this revenue comes from business done with the U.S. government. China,Europe, and Russia account for almost all of the remaining satellite sales andlaunches. It’s expected that China’s role in the space industry will increase, whileRussia has vowed to spend $50 billion on revitalizing its space program. Thisleaves the United States dealing with two of its least-favored nations in spacematters and doing so without much leverage. Case in point: the retirement of thespace shuttle made the United States totally dependent on the Russians to getastronauts to the ISS. Russia gets to charge $70 million per person for the tripand to cut the United States off as it sees fit during political rifts. At present,SpaceX looks like the best hope of breaking this cycle and giving back toAmerica its ability to take people into space.SpaceX has become the free radical trying to upend everything about thisindustry. It doesn’t want to handle a few launches per year or to rely ongovernment contracts for survival. Musk’s goal is to use manufacturingbreakthroughs and launchpad advances to create a drastic drop in the cost ofgetting things to space. Most significant, he’s been testing rockets that can pushtheir payload to space and then return to Earth and land with supreme accuracyon a pad floating at sea or even their original launchpad. Instead of having itsrockets break apart after crashing into the sea, SpaceX will use reverse thrustersto lower them down softly and reuse them. Within the next few years, SpaceXexpects to cut its price to at least one-tenth that of its rivals. Reusing its rocketswill drive the bulk of this reduction and SpaceX’s competitive advantage.Imagine one airline that flies the same plane over and over again, competingagainst others that dispose of their planes after every flight.* Through its costadvantages, SpaceX hopes to take over the majority of the world’s commerciallaunches, and there’s evidence that the company is on its way toward doing justthat. To date, it has flown satellites for Canadian, European, and Asiancustomers and completed about two dozen launches. Its public launch manifeststretches out for a number of years, and SpaceX has more than fifty flightsplanned, which are all together worth more than $5 billion. The companyremains privately owned with Musk as the largest shareholder alongside outsideinvestors including venture capital firms like the Founders Fund and DraperFisher Jurvetson, giving it a competitive ethos its rivals lack. Since getting pastits near-death experience in 2008, SpaceX has been profitable and is estimated tobe worth $12 billion.Zip2, PayPal, Tesla, SolarCity—they are all expressions of Musk. SpaceX isMusk. Its foibles emanate directly from him, as do its successes. Part of thiscomes from Musk’s maniacal attention to detail and involvement in everySpaceX endeavor. He’s hands-on to a degree that would make Hugh Hefner feelinadequate. Part of it stems from SpaceX being the apotheosis of the Cult ofMusk. Employees fear Musk. They adore Musk. The give up their lives forMusk, and they usually do all of this simultaneously.Musk’s demanding management style can only flourish because of theotherworldly—in a literal sense—aspirations of the company. While the rest ofthe aerospace industry has been content to keep sending what look like relicsfrom the 1960s into space, SpaceX has made a point of doing just the opposite.Its reusable rockets and reusable spaceships look like true twenty-first-centurymachines. The modernization of the equipment is not just for show. It reflectsSpaceX’s constant push to advance its technology and change the economics ofthe industry. Musk does not simply want to lower the cost of deploying satellitesand resupplying the space station. He wants to lower the cost of launches to thepoint that it becomes economical and practical to fly thousands upon thousandsof supply trips to Mars and start a colony. Musk wants to conquer the solarsystem, and, as it stands, there’s just one company where you can work if thatsort of quest gets you out of bed in the morning.It seems unfathomable, but the rest of the space industry has made spaceboring. The Russians, who dominate much of the business of sending things andpeople to space, do so with decades-old equipment. The cramped Soyuz capsulethat takes people to the space station has mechanical knobs and computerscreens that appear unchanged from its inaugural 1966 flight. Countries new tothe space race have mimicked the antiquated Russian and American equipmentwith maddening accuracy. When young people get into the aerospace industry,they’re forced to either laugh or cry at the state of the machines. Nothing sucksthe fun out of working on a spaceship like controlling it with mechanisms lastseen in a 1960s laundromat. And the actual work environment is as outmoded asthe machines. Hotshot college graduates have historically been forced to pickbetween a variety of slow-moving military contractors and interesting butineffectual startups.Musk has managed to take these negatives surrounding the aerospace businessand turn them into gains for SpaceX. He’s presented the company as anythingbut another aerospace contractor. SpaceX is the hip, forward-thinking placethat’s brought the perks of Silicon Valley—namely frozen yogurt, stock options,speedy decision making, and a flat corporate structure—to a staid industry.People who know Musk well tend to describe him more as a general than a CEO,and this is apt. He’s built an engineering army by having the pick of just aboutanyone in the business that SpaceX wants.The SpaceX hiring model places some emphasis on getting top marks at topschools. But most of the attention goes toward spotting engineers who haveexhibited type A personality traits over the course of their lives. The company’srecruiters look for people who might excel at robot-building competitions orwho are car-racing hobbyists who have built unusual vehicles. The object is tofind individuals who ooze passion, can work well as part of a team, and havereal-world experience bending metal. “Even if you’re someone who writes codefor your job, you need to understand how mechanical things work,” said DollySingh, who spent five years as the head of talent acquisition at SpaceX. “Wewere looking for people that had been building things since they were little.”Sometimes these people walked through the front door. Other times, Singhrelied on a handful of enterprising techniques to find them. She became famousfor trawling through academic papers to find engineers with very specific skills,cold-calling researchers at labs and plucking possessed engineers out of college.At trade shows and conferences, SpaceX recruiters wooed interesting candidatesthey had spotted with a cloak-and-dagger shtick. They would hand out blankenvelopes that contained invitations to meet at a specific time and place, usuallya bar or restaurant near the event, for an initial interview. The candidates thatshowed up would discover they were among only a handful of people who beenanointed out of all the conference attendees. They were immediately made tofeel special and inspired.Like many tech companies, SpaceX subjects potential hires to a gauntlet ofinterviews and tests. Some of the interviews are easygoing chats in which bothparties get to feel each other out; others are filled with quizzes that can be quitehard. Engineers tend to face the most rigorous interrogations, although businesstypes and salesmen are made to suffer, too. Coders who expect to pass throughstandard challenges have rude awakenings. Companies will typically challengesoftware developers on the spot by asking them to solve problems that require acouple of dozen lines of code. The standard SpaceX problem requires fivehundred or more lines of code. All potential employees who make their way tothe end of the interview process then handle one more task. They’re asked towrite an essay for Musk about why they want to work at SpaceX.The reward for solving the puzzles, acting clever in interviews, and penningup a good essay is a meeting with Musk. He interviewed almost every one ofSpaceX’s first one thousand hires, including the janitors and technicians, and hascontinued to interview the engineers as the company’s workforce swelled. Eachemployee receives a warning before going to meet with Musk. The interview, heor she is told, could last anywhere from thirty seconds to fifteen minutes. Elonwill likely keep on writing e-mails and working during the initial part of theinterview and not speak much. Don’t panic. That’s normal. Eventually, he willturn around in his chair to face you. Even then, though, he might not makeactual eye contact with you or fully acknowledge your presence. Don’t panic.That’s normal. In due course, he will speak to you. From that point, the tales ofengineers who have interviewed with Musk run the gamut from torturousexperiences to the sublime. He might ask one question or he might ask several.You can be sure, though, that he will roll out the Riddle: “You’re standing on thesurface of the Earth. You walk one mile south, one mile west, and one milenorth. You end up exactly where you started. Where are you?” One answer tothat is the North Pole, and most of the engineers get it right away. That’s whenMusk will follow with “Where else could you be?” The other answer issomewhere close to the South Pole where, if you walk one mile south, thecircumference of the Earth becomes one mile. Fewer engineers get this answer,and Musk will happily walk them through that riddle and others and cite anyrelevant equations during his explanations. He tends to care less about whetheror not the person gets the answer than about how they describe the problem andtheir approach to solving it.When speaking to potential recruits, Singh tried to energize them and be upfront about the demands of SpaceX and of Musk at the same time. “Therecruiting pitch was SpaceX is special forces,” she said. “If you want as hard asit gets, then great. If not, then you shouldn’t come here.” Once at SpaceX, thenew employees found out very quickly if they were indeed up for the challenge.Many of them would quit within the first few months because of the ninety-plus-hour workweeks. Others quit because they could not handle just how directMusk and the other executives were during meetings. “Elon doesn’t know aboutyou and he hasn’t thought through whether or not something is going to hurtyour feelings,” Singh said. “He just knows what the fuck he wants done. Peoplewho did not normalize to his communication style did not do well.”There’s an impression that SpaceX suffers from incredibly high turnover, andthe company has without question churned through a fair number of bodies.Many of the key executives who helped start the company, however, have hungon for a decade or more. Among the rank-and-file engineers, most people stayon for at least five years to have their stock options vest and to see their projectsthrough. This is typical behavior for any technology company. SpaceX andMusk also seem to inspire an unusual level of loyalty. Musk has managed toconjure up that Steve Jobs–like zeal among his troops. “His vision is so clear,”Singh said. “He almost hypnotizes you. He gives you the crazy eye, and it’s like,yes, we can get to Mars.” Take that a bit further and you arrive at a pleasure-pain, sadomasochistic vibe that comes with working for Musk. Numerous peopleinterviewed for this book decried the work hours, Musk’s blunt style, and hissometimes ludicrous expectations. Yet almost every person—even those whohad been fired—still worshipped Musk and talked about him in terms usuallyreserved for superheroes or deities.SpaceX’s original headquarters in El Segundo were not quite up to thecompany’s desired image as a place where the cool kids want to work. This isnot a problem for SpaceX’s new facility in Hawthorne. The building’s address is1 Rocket Road, and it has the Hawthorne Municipal Airport and several toolingand manufacturing companies as neighbors. While the SpaceX buildingresembles the others in size and shape, its all-white color makes it the obviousoutlier. The structure looks like a gargantuan, rectangular glacier that’s beenplanted in the midst of a particularly soulless portion of Los Angeles County’ssprawl.Visitors to SpaceX have to walk past a security guard and through a smallexecutive parking lot where Musk parks his black Model S, which flanks thebuilding’s entryway. The front doors are reflective and hide what’s on the inside,which is more white. There are white walls in the foyer, a funky white table inthe waiting area, and a white checkin desk with a pair of orchids sitting in whitepots. After going through the registration process, guests are given a name badgeand led into the main SpaceX office space. Musk’s cubicle—a supersize unit—sits to the right where he has a couple of celebratory Aviation Week magazinecovers up on the wall, pictures of his boys, next to a huge flat-screen monitor,and various knickknacks on his desk, including a boomerang, some books, abottle of wine, and a giant samurai sword named Lady Vivamus, which Muskreceived when he won the Heinlein Prize, an award given for big achievementsin commercial space. Hundreds of other people work in cubicles amid the big,wide-open area, most of them executives, engineers, software developers, andsalespeople tapping away on their computers. The conference rooms thatsurround their desks all have space-themed names like Apollo or Wernher vonBraun and little nameplates that explain the label’s significance. The largestconference rooms have ultramodern chairs—high-backed, sleek red jobs thatsurround large glass tables—while panoramic photos of a Falcon 1 taking offfrom Kwaj or the Dragon capsule docking with the ISS hang on the walls in thebackground.Take away the rocket swag and the samurai sword and this central part of theSpaceX office looks just like what you might find at your run-of-the-mill SiliconValley headquarters. The same thing cannot be said for what visitors encounteras they pass through a pair of double doors into the heart of the SpaceX factory.The 550,000-square-foot factory floor is difficult to process at first glance. It’sone continuous space with grayish epoxied floors, white walls, and whitesupport columns. A small city’s worth of stuff—people, machines, noise—hasbeen piled into this area. Just near the entryway, one of the Dragon capsules thathas gone to the ISS and returned to Earth hangs from the ceiling with black burnmarks running down its side. Just under the capsule on the ground are a pair ofthe twenty-five-foot-long landing legs built by SpaceX to let the Falcon rocketcome to a gentle rest on the ground after a flight so it can be flown again. To theleft side of this entryway area there’s a kitchen, and to the right side there’s themission control room. It’s a closed-off area with expansive glass windows andfronted by wall-size screens for tracking a rocket’s progress. It has four rows ofdesks with about ten computers each for the mission control staff. Step a bitfarther into the factory and there are a handful of industrial work areas separatedfrom each other in the most informal of ways. In some spots there are blue lineson the floor to mark off an area and in other spots blue workbenches have beenarranged in squares to cordon off the space. It’s a common sight to have one ofthe Merlin engines raised up in the middle of one of these work areas with a halfdozen technicians wiring it up and tuning its bits and pieces.Just behind these workspaces is a glass-enclosed square big enough to fit twoof the Dragon capsules. This is a clean room where people must wear lab coatsand hairnets to fiddle with the capsules without contaminating them. About fortyfeet to the left, there are several Falcon 9 rockets lying next to each otherhorizontally that have been painted and await transport. There are some areastucked in between all of this that have blue walls and appear to have beencovered by fabric. These are top-secret zones where SpaceX might be workingon a fanciful astronaut’s outfit or rocket part that it has to hide from visitors andemployees not tied to the projects. There’s a large area off to the side whereSpaceX builds all of its electronics, another area for creating specializedcomposite materials, and another for making the bus-sized fairings that wraparound the satellites. Hundreds of people move about at the same time throughthe factory—a mix of gritty technicians with tattoos and bandanas, and young,white-collar engineers. The sweaty smell of kids who have just come off theplayground permeates the building and hints at its nonstop activity.Musk has left his personal touches throughout the factory. There are smallthings like the data center that has been bathed in blue lights to give it a sci-fifeel. The refrigerator-sized computers under the lights have been labeled withbig block letters to make it look like they were made by Cyberdyne Systems, thefictional company from the Terminator movie franchise. Near the elevators,Musk has placed a glowing life-size Iron Man figure. Surely the factory’s mostMuskian element is the office space that has been built smack-dab in its center.This is a three-story glass structure with meeting rooms and desks that rises upbetween various welding and construction areas. It looks and feels bizarre tohave a see-through office inside this hive of industry. Musk, though, wanted hisengineers to watch what was going on with the machines at all times and tomake sure they had to walk through the factory and talk to the technicians on theway to their desks.The factory is a temple devoted to what SpaceX sees as its major weapon inthe rocket-building game, in-house manufacturing. SpaceX manufacturesbetween 80 percent and 90 percent of its rockets, engines, electronics, and otherparts. It’s a strategy that flat-out dumbfounds SpaceX’s competitors, like UnitedLaunch Alliance, or ULA, which openly brags about depending on more than1,200 suppliers to make its end products. (ULA, a partnership between LockheedMartin and Boeing, sees itself as an engine of job creation rather than a model ofinefficiency.)A typical aerospace company comes up with the list of parts that it needs for alaunch system and then hands off their design and specifications to myriad thirdparties who then actually build the hardware. SpaceX tends to buy as little aspossible to save money and because it sees depending on suppliers—especiallyforeign ones—as a weakness. This approach comes off as excessive at firstblush. Companies have made things like radios and power distribution units fordecades. Reinventing the wheel for every computer and machine on a rocketcould introduce more chances for error and, in general, be a waste of time. Butfor SpaceX, the strategy works. In addition to building its own engines, rocketbodies, and capsules, SpaceX designs its own motherboards and circuits, sensorsto detect vibrations, flight computers, and solar panels. Just by streamlining aradio, for instance, SpaceX’s engineers have found that they can reduce theweight of the device by about 20 percent. And the cost savings for a homemaderadio are dramatic, dropping from between $50,000 to $100,000 for theindustrial-grade equipment used by aerospace companies to $5,000 for SpaceX’sunit.It’s hard to believe these kinds of price differentials at first, but there aredozens if not hundreds of places where SpaceX has secured such savings. Theequipment at SpaceX tends to be built out of readily available consumerelectronics as opposed to “space grade” equipment used by others in theindustry. SpaceX has had to work for years to prove to NASA that standardelectronics have gotten good enough to compete with the more expensive,specialized gear trusted in years past. “Traditional aerospace has been doingthings the same way for a very, very long time,” said Drew Eldeen, a formerSpaceX engineer. “The biggest challenge was convincing NASA to givesomething new a try and building a paper trail that showed the parts were highenough quality.” To prove that it’s making the right choice to NASA and itself,SpaceX will sometimes load a rocket with both the standard equipment andprototypes of its own design for testing during flight. Engineers then comparethe performance characteristics of the devices. Once a SpaceX design equals oroutperforms the commercial products, it becomes the de facto hardware.There have also been numerous times when SpaceX has done pioneering workon advancing very complex hardware systems. A classic example of this is oneof the factory’s weirder-looking contraptions, a two-story machine designed toperform what’s known as friction stir welding. The machine allows SpaceX toautomate the welding process for massive sheets of metal like the ones that makeup the bodies of the Falcon rockets. An arm takes one of the rocket’s bodypanels, lines it up against another body panel, and then joins them together witha weld that could run twenty feet or more. Aerospace companies typically try toavoid welds whenever possible because they create weaknesses in the metal, andthat’s limited the size of metal sheets they can use and forced other designconstraints. From the early days of SpaceX, Musk pushed the company to masterfriction stir welding, in which a spinning head is smashed at high speeds into thejoin between two pieces of metal in a bid to make their crystalline structuresmerge. It’s as if you heated two sheets of aluminum foil and then joined them byputting your thumb down on the seam and twisting the metal together. This typeof welding tends to result in much stronger bonds than traditional welds.Companies had performed friction stir welding before but not on structures aslarge as a rocket’s body or to the degree to which SpaceX has used thetechnique. As a result of its trials and errors, SpaceX can now join large, thinsheets of metal and shave hundreds of pounds off the weight of the Falconrockets, as it’s able to use lighter-weight alloys and avoid using rivets, fasteners,and other support structures. Musk’s competitors in the auto industry might soonneed to do the same because SpaceX has transferred some of the equipment andtechniques to Tesla. The hope is that Tesla will be able to make lighter, strongercars.The technology has proven so valuable that SpaceX’s competitors have startedto copy it and have tried to poach some of the company’s experts in the field.Blue Origin, Jeff Bezos’s secretive rocket company, has been particularlyaggressive, hiring away Ray Miryekta, one of the world’s foremost friction stirwelding experts and igniting a major rift with Musk. “Blue Origin does thesesurgical strikes on specialized talent* offering like double their salaries. I thinkit’s unnecessary and a bit rude,” Musk said. Within SpaceX, Blue Origin ismockingly referred to as BO and at one point the company created an e-mailfilter to detect messages with “blue” and “origin” to block the poaching. Therelationship between Musk and Bezos has soured, and they no longer chat abouttheir shared ambition of getting to Mars. “I do think Bezos has an insatiabledesire to be King Bezos,” Musk said. “He has a relentless work ethic and wantsto kill everything in e-commerce. But he’s not the most fun guy, honestly.”*In the early days of SpaceX, Musk knew little about the machines and amountof grunt work that goes into making rockets. He rebuffed requests to buyspecialized tooling equipment, until the engineers could explain in clear termswhy they needed certain things and until experience taught him better. Musk alsohad yet to master some of the management techniques for which he wouldbecome both famous and to some degree infamous.Musk’s growth as a CEO and rocket expert occurred alongside SpaceX’smaturation as a company. At the start of the Falcon 1 journey, Musk was aforceful software executive trying to learn some basic things about a verydifferent world. At Zip2 and PayPal, he felt comfortable standing up for hispositions and directing teams of coders. At SpaceX, he had to pick things up onthe job. Musk initially relied on textbooks to form the bulk of his rocketryknowledge. But as SpaceX hired one brilliant person after another, Muskrealized he could tap into their stores of knowledge. He would trap an engineerin the SpaceX factory and set to work grilling him about a type of valve orspecialized material. “I thought at first that he was challenging me to see if Iknew my stuff,” said Kevin Brogan, one of the early engineers. “Then I realizedhe was trying to learn things. He would quiz you until he learned ninety percentof what you know.” People who have spent significant time with Musk willattest to his abilities to absorb incredible quantities of information with near-flawless recall. It’s one of his most impressive and intimidating skills and seemsto work just as well in the present day as it did when he was a child vacuumingbooks into his brain. After a couple of years running SpaceX, Musk had turnedinto an aerospace expert on a level that few technology CEOs ever approach intheir respective fields. “He was teaching us about the value of time, and we wereteaching him about rocketry,” Brogan said.In regards to time, Musk may well set more aggressive delivery targets forvery difficult-to-make products than any executive in history. Both hisemployees and the public have found this to be one of the more jarring aspectsof Musk’s character. “Elon has always been optimistic,” Brogan said. “That’s thenice word. He can be a downright liar about when things need to get done. Hewill pick the most aggressive time schedule imaginable assuming everythinggoes right, and then accelerate it by assuming that everyone can work harder.”Musk has been pilloried by the press for setting and then missing productdelivery dates. It’s one of the habits that got him in the most trouble as SpaceXand Tesla tried to bring their first products to market. Time and again, Muskfound himself making a public appearance where he had to come up with a newbatch of excuses for a delay. Reminded about the initial 2003 target date to flythe Falcon 1, Musk acted shocked. “Are you serious?” he said. “We said that?Okay, that’s ridiculous. I think I just didn’t know what the hell I was talkingabout. The only thing I had prior experience in was software, and, yeah, you canwrite a bunch of software and launch a website in a year. No problem. This isn’tlike software. It doesn’t work that way with rockets.” Musk simply cannot helphimself. He’s an optimist by nature, and it can feel like he makes calculations forhow long it will take to do something based on the idea that things will progresswithout flaw at every step and that all the members of his team have Muskianabilities and work ethics. As Brogan joked, Musk might forecast how long asoftware project will take by timing the amount of seconds needed physically towrite a line of code and then extrapolating that out to match however many linesof code he expects the final piece of software to be. It’s an imperfect analogy butone that does not seem that far off from Musk’s worldview. “Everything he doesis fast,” Brogan said. “He pees fast. It’s like a fire hose—three seconds and out.He’s authentically in a hurry.”Asked about his approach, Musk said,I certainly don’t try to set impossible goals. I think impossible goals aredemotivating. You don’t want to tell people to go through a wall by bangingtheir head against it. I don’t ever set intentionally impossible goals. But I’vecertainly always been optimistic on time frames. I’m trying to recalibrate tobe a little more realistic.I don’t assume that it’s just like 100 of me or something like that. I mean,in the case of the early SpaceX days, it would have been just the lack ofunderstanding of what it takes to develop a rocket. In that case I was off by,say, 200 percent. I think future programs might be off by anywhere from like25 percent to 50 percent as opposed to 200 percent.So, I think generally you do want to have a timeline where, based oneverything you know about, the schedule should be X, and you executetowards that, but with the understanding that there will be all sorts of thingsthat you don’t know about that you will encounter that will push the datebeyond that. It doesn’t mean that you shouldn’t have tried to aim for thatdate from the beginning because aiming for something else would havebeen an arbitrary time increase.It’s different to say, “Well, what do you promise people?” Because youwant to try to promise people something that includes schedule margin. Butin order to achieve the external promised schedule, you’ve got to have aninternal schedule that’s more aggressive than that. Sometimes you still missthe external schedule.SpaceX, by the way, is not alone here. Being late is par for the course inthe aerospace industry. It’s not a question of if it’s late, it’s how late will theprogram be. I don’t think an aerospace program has been completed ontime since bloody World War II.Dealing with the epically aggressive schedules and Musk’s expectations hasrequired SpaceX’s engineers to develop a variety of survival techniques. Muskoften asks for highly detailed proposals for how projects will be accomplished.The employees have learned never to break the time needed to accomplishsomething down into months or weeks. Musk wants day-by-day and hour-by-hour forecasts and sometimes even minute-by-minute countdowns, and thefallout from missed schedules is severe. “You had to put in when you would goto the bathroom,” Brogan said. “I’m like, ‘Elon, sometimes people need to take along dump.’” SpaceX’s top managers work together to, in essence, create fakeschedules that they know will please Musk but that are basically impossible toachieve. This would not be such a horrible situation if the targets were keptinternal. Musk, however, tends to quote these fake schedules to customers,unintentionally giving them false hope. Typically, it falls to Gwynne Shotwell,SpaceX’s president, to clean up the resulting mess. She will either need to ringup a customer to give them a more realistic timeline or concoct a litany ofexcuses to explain away the inevitable delays. “Poor Gwynne,” Brogan said.“Just to hear her on the phone with the customers is agonizing.”There can be no question that Musk has mastered the art of getting the mostout of his employees. Interview three dozen SpaceX engineers and each one ofthem will have picked up on a managerial nuance that Musk has used to getpeople to meet his deadlines. One example from Brogan: Where a typicalmanager may set the deadline for the employee, Musk guides his engineers intotaking ownership of their own delivery dates. “He doesn’t say, ‘You have to dothis by Friday at two P.M.,’” Brogan said. “He says, ‘I need the impossible doneby Friday at two P.M. Can you do it?’ Then, when you say yes, you are notworking hard because he told you to. You’re working hard for yourself. It’s adistinction you can feel. You have signed up to do your own work.” And byrecruiting hundreds of bright, self-motivated people, SpaceX has maximized thepower of the individual. One person putting in a sixteen-hour day ends up beingmuch more effective than two people working eight-hour days together. Theindividual doesn’t have to hold meetings, reach a consensus, or bring otherpeople up to speed on a project. He just keeps working and working andworking. The ideal SpaceX employee is someone like Steve Davis, the directorof advanced projects at SpaceX. “He’s been working sixteen hours a day everyday for years,” Brogan said. “He gets more done than eleven people workingtogether.”To find Davis, Musk called a teaching assistant* in Stanford’s aeronauticsdepartment and asked him if there were any hardworking, bright master’s anddoctoral candidates who didn’t have families. The TA pointed Musk to Davis,who was pursuing a master’s degree in aerospace engineering to add to degreesin finance, mechanical engineering, and particle physics. Musk called Davis on aWednesday and offered him a job the following Friday. Davis was the twenty-second SpaceX hire and has ended up the twelfth most senior person still at thecompany. He turned thirty-five in 2014.Davis did his tour of duty on Kwaj and considered it the greatest time of hislife. “Every night, you could either sleep by the rocket in this tent shelter wherethe geckos crawled all over you or take this one-hour boat ride that made youseasick back to the main island,” he said. “Every night, you had to pick the painthat you remembered least. You got so hot and exhausted. It was just amazing.”After working on the Falcon 1, Davis moved to the Falcon 9 and then Dragon.The Dragon capsule took SpaceX four years to design. It’s likely the fastestproject of its ilk done in the history of the aerospace industry. The project startedwith Musk and a handful of engineers, most of them under thirty years old, andpeaked at one hundred people.* They cribbed from past capsule work and readover every paper published by NASA and other aeronautics bodies aroundprojects like Gemini and Apollo. “If you go search for something like Apollo’sreentry guidance algorithm, there are these great databases that will just spit outthe answer,” Davis said. The engineers at SpaceX then had to figure out how toadvance these past efforts and bring the capsule into the modern age. Some ofthe areas of improvement were obvious and easily accomplished, while othersrequired more ingenuity. Saturn 5 and Apollo had colossal computing bays thatproduced only a fraction of the computer horsepower that can be achieved todayon, say, an iPad. The SpaceX engineers knew they could save a lot of room bycutting out some of the computers while also adding capabilities with their morepowerful equipment. The engineers decided that while Dragon would look a lotlike Apollo, it would have steeper wall angles, to clear space for gear and for theastronauts that the company hoped to fly. SpaceX also got the recipe for its heatshield material, called PICA, through a deal with NASA. The SpaceX engineersfound out how to make the PICA material less expensively and improved theunderlying recipe so that Dragon—from day one—could withstand the heat of areentry coming back from Mars.* The total cost for Dragon came in at $300million, which would be on the order of 10 to 30 times less than capsule projectsbuilt by other companies. “The metal comes in, we roll it out, weld it, and makethings,” Davis said. “We build almost everything in-house. That is why the costshave come down.”Davis, like Brogan and plenty of other SpaceX engineers, has had Musk askfor the seemingly impossible. His favorite request dates back to 2004. SpaceXneeded an actuator that would trigger the gimbal action used to steer the upperstage of Falcon 1. Davis had never built a piece of hardware before in his lifeand naturally went out to find some suppliers who could make anelectromechanical actuator for him. He got a quote back for $120,000. “Elonlaughed,” Davis said. “He said, ‘That part is no more complicated than a garagedoor opener. Your budget is five thousand dollars. Go make it work.’” Davisspent nine months building the actuator. At the end of the process, he toiled forthree hours writing an e-mail to Musk covering the pros and cons of the device.The e-mail went into gory detail about how Davis had designed the part, why hehad made various choices, and what its cost would be. As he pressed send, Davisfelt anxiety surge through his body knowing that he’d given his all for almost ayear to do something an engineer at another aerospace company would not evenattempt. Musk rewarded all of this toil and angst with one of his standardresponses. He wrote back, “Ok.” The actuator Davis designed ended up costing$3,900 and flew with Falcon 1 into space. “I put every ounce of intellectualcapital I had into that e-mail and one minute later got that simple response,”Davis said. “Everyone in the company was having that same experience. One ofmy favorite things about Elon is his ability to make enormous decisions veryquickly. That is still how it works today.”Kevin Watson can attest to that. He arrived at SpaceX in 2008 after spendingtwenty-four years at NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory. Watson worked on awide variety of projects at JPL, including building and testing computingsystems that could withstand the harsh conditions of space. JPL would typicallybuy expensive, specially toughened computers, and this frustrated Watson. Hedaydreamed about ways to handcraft much cheaper, equally effective computers.While having his job interview with Musk, Watson learned that SpaceX neededjust this type of thinking. Musk wanted the bulk of a rocket’s computing systemsto cost no more than $10,000. It was an insane figure by aerospace industrystandards, where the avionics systems for a rocket typically cost well over $10million. “In traditional aerospace, it would cost you more than ten thousanddollars just for the food at a meeting to discuss the cost of the avionics,” Watsonsaid.During the job interview, Watson promised Musk that he could do theimprobable and deliver the $10,000 avionics system. He began working onmaking the computers for Dragon right after being hired. The first system wascalled CUCU, pronounced “cuckoo.” This communications box would go insidethe International Space Station and communicate back with Dragon. A numberof people at NASA referred to the SpaceX engineers as “the guys in the garage”and were cynical about the startup’s ability to do much of anything, includingbuilding this type of machine. But SpaceX produced the communicationcomputer in record time, and it ended up as the first system of its kind to passNASA’s protocol tests on the first try. NASA officials were forced to say“cuckoo” over and over again during meetings—a small act of defiance SpaceXhad planned all along to torture NASA. As the months went on, Watson andother engineers built out the complete computing systems for Dragon and thenadapted the technology for Falcon 9. The result was a fully redundant avionicsplatform that used a mix of off-the-shelf computing gear and products built in-house by SpaceX. It cost a bit more than $10,000 but came close to meetingMusk’s goal.SpaceX reinvigorated Watson, who had become disenchanted with JPL’sacceptance of wasteful spending and bureaucracy. Musk had to sign off on everyexpenditure over $10,000. “It was his money that we were spending, and he waskeeping an eye on it, as he damn well should,” Watson said. “He made surenothing stupid was happening.” Decisions were made quickly during weeklymeetings, and the entire company bought into them. “It was amazing how fastpeople would adapt to what came out of those meetings,” Watson said. “Theentire ship could turn ninety degrees instantly. Lockheed Martin could never doanything like that.” Watson continued:Elon is brilliant. He’s involved in just about everything. He understandseverything. If he asks you a question, you learn very quickly not to go givehim a gut reaction. He wants answers that get down to the fundamentallaws of physics. One thing he understands really well is the physics of therockets. He understands that like nobody else. The stuff I have seen him doin his head is crazy. He can get in discussions about flying a satellite andwhether we can make the right orbit and deliver Dragon at the same timeand solve all these equations in real time. It’s amazing to watch the amountof knowledge he has accumulated over the years. I don’t want to be theperson who ever has to compete with Elon. You might as well leave thebusiness and find something else fun to do. He will outmaneuver you,outthink you, and out-execute you.One of Watson’s top discoveries at SpaceX was the test bed on the third floorof the Hawthorne factory. SpaceX has test versions of all the hardware andelectronics that go into a rocket laid out on metal tables. It has in effectreplicated the innards of a rocket end to end in order to run thousands of flightsimulations. Someone “launches” the rocket from a computer and then everypiece of mechanical and computing hardware is monitored with sensors. Anengineer can tell a valve to open, then check to see if it opened, how quickly itopened, and the level of current running to it. This testing apparatus lets SpaceXengineers practice ahead of launches and figure out how they would deal with allmanner of anomalies. During the actual flights, SpaceX has people in the testfacility who can replicate errors seen on Falcon or Dragon and make adjustmentsaccordingly. SpaceX has made numerous changes on the fly with this system. Inone case someone spotted an error in a software file in the hours right before alaunch. SpaceX’s engineers changed the file, checked how it affected the testhardware, and, when no problems were detected, sent the file to the Falcon 9,waiting on the launchpad, all in less than thirty minutes. “NASA wasn’t used tothis,” Watson said. “If something went wrong with the shuttle, everyone was justresigned to waiting three weeks before they could try and launch again.”12From time to time, Musk will send out an e-mail to the entire company toenforce a new policy or let them know about something that’s bothering him.One of the more famous e-mails arrived in May 2010 with the subject line:Acronyms Seriously Suck:There is a creeping tendency to use made up acronyms at SpaceX.Excessive use of made up acronyms is a significant impediment tocommunication and keeping communication good as we grow is incrediblyimportant. Individually, a few acronyms here and there may not seem sobad, but if a thousand people are making these up, over time the result willbe a huge glossary that we have to issue to new employees. No one canactually remember all these acronyms and people don’t want to seem dumbin a meeting, so they just sit there in ignorance. This is particularly tough onnew employees.That needs to stop immediately or I will take drastic action—I have givenenough warnings over the years. Unless an acronym is approved by me, itshould not enter the SpaceX glossary. If there is an existing acronym thatcannot reasonably be justified, it should be eliminated, as I have requestedin the past.For example, there should be no “HTS” [horizontal test stand] or “VTS”[vertical test stand] designations for test stands. Those are particularlydumb, as they contain unnecessary words. A “stand” at our test site isobviously a test stand. VTS-3 is four syllables compared with “Tripod,”which is two, so the bloody acronym version actually takes longer to saythan the name!The key test for an acronym is to ask whether it helps or hurtscommunication. An acronym that most engineers outside of SpaceX alreadyknow, such as GUI, is fine to use. It is also ok to make up a fewacronyms/contractions every now and again, assuming I have approvedthem, eg MVac and M9 instead of Merlin 1C-Vacuum or Merlin 1C-SeaLevel, but those need to be kept to a minimum.This was classic Musk. The e-mail is rough in its tone and yet not reallyunwarranted for a guy who just wants things done as efficiently as possible. Itobsesses over something that other people might find trivial and yet he has adefinite point. It’s comical in that Musk wants all acronym approvals to rundirectly through him, but that’s entirely in keeping with the hands-onmanagement style that has, mainly, worked well at both SpaceX and Tesla.Employees have since dubbed the acronym policy the ASS Rule.The guiding principle at SpaceX is to embrace your work and get stuff done.People who await guidance or detailed instructions languish. The same goes forworkers who crave feedback. And the absolute worst thing that someone can dois inform Musk that what he’s asking is impossible. An employee could betelling Musk that there’s no way to get the cost on something like that actuatordown to where he wants it or that there is simply not enough time to build a partby Musk’s deadline. “Elon will say, ‘Fine. You’re off the project, and I am nowthe CEO of the project. I will do your job and be CEO of two companies at thesame time. I will deliver it,’” Brogan said. “What’s crazy is that Elon actuallydoes it. Every time he’s fired someone and taken their job, he’s delivered onwhatever the project was.”It is jarring for both parties when the SpaceX culture rubs against morebureaucratic bodies like NASA, the U.S. Air Force, and the Federal AviationAdministration. The first inklings of these difficulties appeared on Kwaj, wheregovernment officials sometimes questioned what they saw as SpaceX’s cavalierapproach to the launch process. There were times when SpaceX would want tomake a change to its launch procedures and any such change would require apile of paperwork. SpaceX, for example, would have written down all the stepsneeded to replace a filter—put on gloves, wear safety goggles, remove a nut—and then want to alter this procedure or use a different type of filter. The FAAwould need a week to review the new process before SpaceX could actually goabout changing the filter on the rocket, a lag that both the engineers and Muskfound ridiculous. On one occasion after this type of thing happened, Musk laidinto an FAA official while on a conference call with members of the SpaceXteam and NASA. “It got hot and heated, and he berated this guy on a personallevel for like ten minutes,” Brogan said.Musk did not recall this incident but did remember other confrontations withthe FAA. One time he compiled a list of things an FAA subordinate had saidduring a meeting that Musk found silly and sent the list along to the guy’s boss.“And then his dingbat manager sent me this long e-mail about how he had beenin the shuttle program and in charge of twenty launches or something like thatand how dare I say that the other guy was wrong,” Musk said. “I told him, ‘Notonly is he wrong, and let me rearticulate the reasons, but you’re wrong, and letme articulate the reasons.’ I don’t think he sent me another e-mail after that.We’re trying to have a really big impact on the space industry. If the rules aresuch that you can’t make progress, then you have to fight the rules.“There is a fundamental problem with regulators. If a regulator agrees tochange a rule and something bad happens, they could easily lose their career.Whereas if they change a rule and something good happens, they don’t even geta reward. So, it’s very asymmetric. It’s then very easy to understand whyregulators resist changing the rules. It’s because there’s a big punishment on oneside and no reward on the other. How would any rational person behave in sucha scenario?”In the middle of 2009, SpaceX hired Ken Bowersox, a former astronaut, as itsvice president of astronaut safety and mission assurance. Bowersox fit the moldof recruit prized by a classic big aerospace company. He had a degree inaerospace engineering from the U.S. Naval Academy, had been a test pilot in theair force, and flew on the space shuttle a handful of times. Many people withinSpaceX saw his arrival at the company as a good thing. He was considered adiligent, dignified sort who would provide a second set of eyes to many ofSpaceX’s procedures, checking to make sure the company went about things in asafe, standardized manner. Bowersox ended up smack in the middle of theconstant pull and push at SpaceX between doing things efficiently and agonizingover traditional procedures. He and Musk were increasingly at odds as themonths passed, and Bowersox started to feel as if his opinions were beingignored. During one incident in particular, a part made it all the way to the teststand with a major flaw—described by one engineer as the equivalent of a coffeecup not having a bottom—instead of being caught at the factory. According toobservers, Bowersox argued that SpaceX should go back and investigate theprocess that led to the mistake and fix its root cause. Musk had already decidedthat he knew the basis of the problem and dismissed Bowersox after a couple ofyears on the job. (Bowersox declined to speak on the record about his time atSpaceX.) A number of people inside SpaceX saw the Bowersox incident as anexample of Musk’s hard-charging manner undermining some much-neededprocess. Musk had a totally different take on the situation, casting Bowersox asnot being up to the engineering demands at SpaceX.A handful of high-ranking government officials gave me their candid takes onMusk, albeit without being willing to put their names to the remarks. One foundMusk’s treatment of air force generals and military men of similar rankappalling. Musk has been known to let even high-ranking officials have it whenhe thinks they’re off base and is not apologetic about this. Another could notbelieve it when Musk would call very intelligent people idiots. “Imagine theworst possible way that could come out, and it would come out,” this personsaid. “Life with Elon is like being in a very intimate married couple. He can beso gentle and loyal and then really hard on people when it isn’t necessary.” Oneformer official felt that Musk would need to temper himself better in the years tocome if SpaceX was to keep currying favor with the military and governmentagencies in its bid to defeat the incumbent contractors. “His biggest enemy willbe himself and the way he treats people,” this person said.When Musk rubs outsiders the wrong way, Shotwell is often there to try tosmooth over the situation. Like Musk, she has a salty tongue and a fierypersonality, but Shotwell is willing to play the role of the conciliator. These skillshave allowed her to handle the day-to-day operations at SpaceX, leaving Muskto focus on the company’s overall strategy, the product designs, marketing, andmotivating employees. Like all of Musk’s most trusted lieutenants, Shotwell hasbeen willing to stay largely in the background, do her work, and focus on thecompany’s cause.Shotwell grew up in the suburbs of Chicago, the daughter of an artist (mom)and a neurosurgeon (dad). She played the part of a bright, pretty girl, gettingstraight A’s at school and joining the cheerleading squad. Shotwell had notexpressed a major inclination toward the sciences and knew only one version ofan engineer—the guy who drives a train. But there were clues that she was wireda bit different. She was the daughter who mowed the lawn and helped put thefamily basketball hoop together. In third grade, Shotwell developed a briefinterest in car engines, and her mom bought a book detailing how they work.Later, in high school, Shotwell’s mom forced her to attend a lecture at the IllinoisInstitute of Technology on a Saturday afternoon. As Shotwell listened to one ofthe panels, she grew enamored with a fifty-year-old mechanical engineer. “Shehad these beautiful clothes, this suit and shoes that I loved,” Shotwell said. “Shewas tall and carried off the heels really well.” Shotwell chatted with the engineerafter the talk, learning about her job. “That was the day I decided to become amechanical engineer,” she said.Shotwell went on to receive an undergraduate degree in mechanicalengineering and a master’s degree in applied mathematics from NorthwesternUniversity. Then she took a job at Chrysler. It was a type of managementtraining program meant for hotshot recent graduates who appeared to haveleadership potential. Shotwell started out going to auto mechanics school—“Iloved that”—and then from department to department. While working onengines research, Shotwell found that there were two very expensive Craysupercomputers sitting idle because none of the veterans knew how to use them.A short while later, she logged onto the computers and set them up to runcomputational fluid dynamics, or CFD, operations to simulate the performanceof valves and other components. The work kept Shotwell interested, but theenvironment started to grate on her. There were rules for everything, includinglots of union regulations around who could operate certain machines. “I pickedup a tool once, and got written up,” she said. “Then I opened a bottle of liquidnitrogen and got written up. I started thinking that the job was not what I hadanticipated it would be.”Shotwell pulled out of the Chrysler training program, regrouped at home, andthen briefly pursued her doctorate in applied mathematics. While back on theNorthwestern campus, one of her professors mentioned an opportunity at theAerospace Corporation. Anything but a household name, Aerospace Corporationhas been headquartered in El Segundo since 1960, serving as a kind of neutral,nonprofit organization that advises the air force, NASA, and other federal bodieson space programs. The company has a bureaucratic feel but has proved veryuseful over the years with its research activities and ability to champion and nixcostly endeavors. Shotwell started at Aerospace in October 1988 and worked ona wide range of projects. One job required her to develop a thermal model thatdepicted how temperature fluctuations in the space shuttle’s cargo bay affectedthe performance of equipment on various payloads. She spent ten years atAerospace and honed her skills as a systems engineer. By the end, though,Shotwell had become irritated by the pace of the industry. “I didn’t understandwhy it had to take fifteen years to make a military satellite,” she said. “You couldsee my interest was waning.”For the next four years, Shotwell worked at Microcosm, a space startup justdown the road from the Aerospace Corporation, and became the head of itsspace systems division and business development. Boasting a combination ofsmarts, confidence, direct talk, and good looks, Shotwell developed a reputationas a strong saleswoman. In 2002, one of her coworkers, Hans Koenigsmann, leftfor SpaceX. Shotwell took Koenigsmann out for a going-away lunch anddropped him off at SpaceX’s then rinky-dink headquarters. “Hans told me to goin and meet Elon,” Shotwell said. “I did, and that’s when I told him, ‘You need agood business development person.’” The next day Mary Beth Brown calledShotwell and told her that Musk wanted to interview her for the new vicepresident of business development position. Shotwell ended up as employee No.7. “I gave three weeks’ notice at Microcosm and remodeled my bathroombecause I knew I would not have a life after taking the job,” she said.Through the early years of SpaceX, Shotwell pulled off the miraculous feat ofselling something the company did not have. It took SpaceX so much longerthan it had planned to have a successful flight. The failures along the way wereembarrassing and bad for business. Nonetheless, Shotwell managed to sell abouta dozen flights to a mix of government and commercial customers beforeSpaceX put its first Falcon 1 into orbit. Her deal-making skills extended tonegotiating the big-ticket contracts with NASA that kept SpaceX alive during itsleanest years, including a $278 million contract in August 2006 to begin work onvehicles that could ferry supplies to the ISS. Shotwell’s track record of successturned her into Musk’s ultimate confidante at SpaceX, and at the end of 2008,she became president and chief operating officer at the company.Part of Shotwell’s duties include reinforcing the SpaceX culture as thecompany grows larger and larger and starts to resemble the traditional aerospacegiants that it likes to mock. Shotwell can switch on an easygoing, affable air andaddress the entire company during a meeting or convince a collection of possiblerecruits why they should sign up to be worked to the bone. During one suchmeeting with a group of interns, Shotwell pulled about a hundred people into thecorner of the cafeteria. She wore high-heel black boots, skintight jeans, a tanjacket, and a scarf and had big hoop earnings dangling beside her shoulder-length blond hair. Pacing back and forth in front of the group with a microphonein hand, she asked them to announce what school they came from and whatproject they were working on while at SpaceX. One student went to Cornell andworked on Dragon, another went to USC and did propulsion system design, andanother went to the University of Illinois and worked with the aerodynamicsgroup. It took about thirty minutes to make it all the way around the room, andthe students were, at least by academic pedigree and bright-eyed enthusiasm,among the most impressive youngsters in the world. The students pepperedShotwell with questions—her best moment, her advice for being successful,SpaceX’s competitive threats—and she replied with a mix of earnest answersand rah-rah stuff. Shotwell made sure to emphasize the lean, innovative edgeSpaceX has over the more traditional aerospace companies. “Our competitorsare scared shitless of us,” Shotwell told the group. “The behemoths are going tohave to figure out how to get it together and compete. And it is our job to havethem die.”One of SpaceX’s biggest goals, Shotwell said, was to fly as often as possible.The company has never sought to make a fortune off each flight. It would rathermake a little on each launch and keep the flights flowing. A Falcon 9 flight costs$60 million, and the company would like to see that figure drop to about $20million through economies of scale and improvements in launch technology.SpaceX spent $2.5 billion to get four Dragon capsules to the ISS, nine flightswith the Falcon 9, and five flights with the Falcon 1. It’s a price-per-launch totalthat the rest of the players in the industry cannot comprehend let alone aspire to.“I don’t know what those guys do with their money,” Shotwell said. “They aresmoking it. I just don’t know.” As Shotwell saw it, a number of new nationswere showing interest in launches, eyeing communications technology asessential to growing their economies and leveling their status with developednations. Cheaper flights would help SpaceX take the majority of the businessfrom that new customer set. The company also expected to participate in anexpanding market for human flights. SpaceX has never had any interest in doingthe five-minute tourist flights to low Earth orbit like Virgin Galactic and XCOR.It does, however, have the ability to carry researchers to orbiting habitats beingbuilt by Bigelow Aerospace and to orbiting science labs being constructed byvarious countries. SpaceX will also start making its own satellites, turning thecompany into a one-stop space shop. All of these plans hinge on SpaceX beingable to prove that it can fly on schedule every month and churn through the $5billion backlog of launches. “Most of our customers signed up early and wantedto be supportive and got good deals on their missions,” she said. “We are in aphase now where we need to launch on time and make launching Dragons moreefficient.”For a short while, the conversation with the interns bogged down. It turned tosome of the annoyances of SpaceX’s campus. The company leases its facilityand has not been able to build things like a massive parking structure that wouldmake life easier for its three-thousand-person workforce. Shotwell promised thatmore parking, more bathrooms, and more of the freebies that technology startupsin Silicon Valley offer their employees would be on the way. “I want a day care,”she said.But it was while discussing SpaceX’s grandest missions that Shotwell reallycame into her own and seemed to inspire the interns. Some of them clearlydreamed of becoming astronauts, and Shotwell said that working at SpaceX wasalmost certainly their best chance to get to space now that NASA’s astronautcorps had dwindled. Musk had made designing cool-looking, “non–Stay Puft”spacesuits a personal priority. “They can’t be clunky and nasty,” Shotwell said.“You have to do better than that.” As for where the astronauts would go: well,there were the space habitats, the moon, and, of course, Mars as options. SpaceXhas already started testing a giant rocket, called the Falcon Heavy, that will takeit much farther into space than the Falcon 9, and it has another, even largerspaceship on the way. “Our Falcon Heavy rocket will not take a busload ofpeople to Mars,” she said. “So, there’s something after Heavy. We’re working onit.” To make something like that vehicle happen, she said, the SpaceX employeesneeded to be effective and pushy. “Make sure your output is high,” Shotwellsaid. “If we’re throwing a bunch of shit in your way, you need to be mouthyabout it. That’s not a quality that’s widely accepted elsewhere, but it is atSpaceX.” And, if that sounded harsh, so be it. As Shotwell saw it, thecommercial space race was coming down to SpaceX and China and that’s it. Andin the bigger picture, the race was on to ensure man’s survival. “If you hatepeople and think human extinction is okay, then fuck it,” Shotwell said. “Don’tgo to space. If you think it is worth humans doing some risk management andfinding a second place to go live, then you should be focused on this issue andwilling to spend some money. I am pretty sure we will be selected by NASA todrop landers and rovers off on Mars. Then the first SpaceX mission will be todrop off a bunch of supplies, so that once people get there, there will be places tolive and food to eat and stuff for them to do.”It’s talk like this that thrills and amazes people in the aerospace industry, whohave long been hoping that some company would come along and trulyrevolutionize space travel. Aeronautics experts will point out that twenty yearsafter the Wright brothers started their experiments, air travel had become routine.The launch business, by contrast, appears to have frozen. We’ve been to themoon, sent research vehicles to Mars, and explored the solar system, but all ofthese things are still immensely expensive one-off projects. “The cost remainsextraordinarily high because of the rocket equation,” said Carol Stoker, theplanetary scientist at NASA. Thanks to military and government contracts fromagencies like NASA, the aerospace industry has historically had massive budgetsto work with and tried to make the biggest, most reliable machines it could. Thebusiness has been tuned to strive for maximum performance, so that theaerospace contractors can say they met their requirements. That strategy makessense if you’re trying to send up a $1 billion military satellite for the U.S.government and simply cannot afford for the payload to blow up. But on thewhole, this approach stifles the pursuit of other endeavors. It leads to bloat andexcess and a crippling of the commercial space industry.Outside of SpaceX, the American launch providers are no longer competitiveagainst their peers in other countries. They have limited launch abilities andquestionable ambition. SpaceX’s main competitor for domestic military satellitesand other large payloads is United Launch Alliance (ULA), a joint ventureformed in 2006 when Boeing and Lockheed Martin combined forces. Thethinking at the time about the union was that the government did not haveenough business for two companies and that combining the research andmanufacturing work of Boeing and Lockheed would result in cheaper, saferlaunches. ULA has leaned on decades of work around the Delta (Boeing) andAtlas (Lockheed) launch vehicles and has flown many dozens of rocketssuccessfully, making it a model of reliability. But neither the joint venture norBoeing nor Lockheed, both of which can offer commercial services on theirown, come close to competing on price against SpaceX, the Russians, or theChinese. “For the most part, the global commercial market is dominated byArianespace [Europe], Long March [China] or Russian vehicles,” said DaveBearden, the general manager of civil and commercial programs at theAerospace Corporation. “There are just different labor rates and differences inthe way they are built.”To put things more bluntly, ULA has turned into an embarrassment for theUnited States. In March 2014, ULA’s then CEO, Michael Gass, faced off againstMusk during a congressional hearing that dealt, in part, with SpaceX’s request totake on more of the government’s annual launch load. A series of slides wererolled out that showed how the government payments for launches haveskyrocketed since Boeing and Lockheed went from a duopoly to a monopoly.According to Musk’s math presented at the hearing, ULA charged $380 millionper flight, while SpaceX would charge $90 million per flight. (The $90 millionfigure was higher than SpaceX’s standard $60 million because the governmenthas certain additional requirements for particularly sensitive launches.) Bysimply picking SpaceX as its launch provider, Musk pointed out, the governmentwould save enough money to pay for the satellite going on the rocket. Gass hadno real retort. He claimed Musk’s figures for the ULA launch price wereinaccurate but failed to provide a figure of his own. The hearing also came astensions between the United States and Russia were running high due to Russia’saggressive actions in Ukraine. Musk rightly noted that the United States couldsoon be placing sanctions on Russia that could carry over to aerospaceequipment. ULA, as it happens, relies on Russian-made engines to send upsensitive U.S. military equipment in its Atlas V rockets. “Our Falcon 9 andFalcon Heavy launch vehicles are truly American,” Musk said. “We design andmanufacture our rockets in California and Texas.” Gass countered that ULA hadbought a two-year supply of Russian engines and purchased the blueprints to themachines and had them translated from Russian to English, and he said this witha straight face. (A few months after the hearing, ULA replaced Gass as CEO andsigned a deal with Blue Origin to develop American-made rockets.)Some of the most disheartening moments of the hearing arrived when SenatorRichard Shelby of Alabama took the microphone for questioning. ULA hasmanufacturing facilities in Alabama and close ties to the senator. Shelby feltcompelled to play the role of hometown booster by repeatedly pointing out thatULA had enjoyed sixty-eight successful launches and then asking Musk what hemade of that accomplishment. The aerospace industry stands as one of Shelby’sbiggest donors and he’s ended up surprisingly pro-bureaucracy andanticompetition when it comes to getting things into space. “Typicallycompetition results in better quality and lower-priced contracts—but the launchmarket is not typical,” Shelby said. “It is limited demand framed by government-industrial policies.” The March hearing in which Shelby made these statementswould turn out to be something of a sham. The government had agreed to putfourteen of its sensitive launches up for bid instead of just awarding themdirectly to ULA. Musk had come to Congress to present his case for whySpaceX made sense as a viable candidate for those and other launches. The dayafter the hearing, the air force cut the number of launches up for bid fromfourteen to between seven and one. One month later, SpaceX filed a lawsuitagainst the air force asking for a chance to earn its launch business. “SpaceX isnot seeking to be awarded contracts for these launches,” the company said on itsfreedomtolaunch.com website. “We are simply seeking the right to compete.”*SpaceX’s main competitor for ISS resupply missions and commercialsatellites in the United States is Orbital Sciences Corporation. Founded inVirginia in 1982, the company started out not unlike SpaceX, as the new kid thatraised outside funding and focused on putting smaller satellites into low-Earthorbit. Orbital is more experienced, although it has a limited roster of machinetypes. Orbital depends on suppliers, including Russian and Ukrainian companies,for its engines and rocket bodies, making it more of an assembler of spacecraftthan a true builder like SpaceX. And, also unlike SpaceX, Orbital’s capsulescannot withstand the journey back from the ISS to Earth, so it’s unable to returnexperiments and other goods. In October 2014, one of Orbital’s rockets blew upon the launchpad. With its ability to launch on hold while it investigated theincident, Orbital reached out to SpaceX for help. It wanted to see if Musk hadany extra capacity to take care of some of Orbital’s customers. The companyalso signaled that it would move away from using Russian engines as well.As for getting humans to space, SpaceX and Boeing were the victors in a four-year NASA competition to fly astronauts to the ISS. SpaceX will get $2.6billion, and Boeing will get $4.2 billion to develop their capsules and ferrypeople to the ISS by 2017. The companies would, in effect, be replacing thespace shuttle and restoring the United States’ ability to conduct manned flights.“I actually don’t mind that Boeing gets twice as much money for meeting thesame NASA requirements as SpaceX with worse technology,” Musk said.“Having two companies involved is better for the advancement of humanspaceflight.”SpaceX had once looked like it too would be a one-trick pony. The company’soriginal plans were to have the smallish Falcon 1 function as its primaryworkhorse. At $6 million to $12 million per flight, the Falcon 1 was by far thecheapest means of getting something into orbit, thrilling people in the spaceindustry. When Google announced its Lunar X Prize in 2007—$30 million inawards to people who could land a robot on the moon—many of the proposalsthat followed selected the Falcon 1 as their preferred launch vehicle because itseemed like the only reasonably priced option for getting something to themoon. Scientists around the world were equally excited, thinking that for thefirst time they had a means of placing experiments into orbit in a cost-effectiveway. But for all the enthusiastic talk about the Falcon 1, the demand neverarrived. “It became very clear that there was a huge need for the Falcon 1 but nomoney for it,” said Shotwell. “The market has to be able to sustain a certainamount of vehicles, and three Falcon 1s per year does not make a business.” Thelast Falcon 1 launch took place in July 2009 from Kwajalein, when SpaceXcarried a satellite into orbit for the Malaysian government. People in theaerospace industry have been grumbling ever since. “We gave Falcon 1 a hell ofa shot,” Shotwell said. “I was emotional about it and disappointed. I’danticipated a flood of orders but, after eight years, they just did not come.”SpaceX has since expanded its launch capabilities at a remarkable pace andlooks like it might be on the verge of getting that $12 million per flight optionback. In June 2010, the Falcon 9 flew for the first time and orbited Earthsuccessfully. In December 2010, SpaceX proved that the Falcon 9 could carrythe Dragon capsule into space and that the capsule could be recovered safelyafter an ocean landing.* It became the first commercial company ever to pull offthis feat. Then, in May 2012, SpaceX went through the most significant momentin the company’s history since that first successful launch on Kwajalein.On May 22, at 3:44 A.M., a Falcon 9 rocket took off from the Kennedy SpaceCenter in Cape Canaveral, Florida. The rocket did its yeoman-like work boostingDragon into space. Then the capsule’s solar panels fanned out and Dragonbecame dependent on its eighteen Draco thrusters, or small rocket engines, toguide its path to the International Space Station. The SpaceX engineers workedin shifts—some of them sleeping on cots at the factory—as it took the capsulethree days for Dragon to make its journey. They spent most of the time observingDragon’s flight and checking to see that its sensor systems were picking up theISS. Originally, Dragon planned to dock with the ISS around 4 A.M. on thetwenty-fifth, but as the capsule approached the space station, an unexpected glintkept throwing off the calculations of a laser used to measure the distancebetween Dragon and the ISS. “I remember it being two and a half hours ofstruggle,” Shotwell said. Her outfit of Uggs, a fishnet sweater, and leggingsstarted to feel like pajamas as the night wore on, and the engineers battled thisunplanned difficulty. Fearing all the time that the mission would be aborted,SpaceX decided to upload some new software to the Dragon that would cut thesize of the visual frame used by the sensors to eliminate the effect of the sunlighton the machine. Then, just before 7 A.M., Dragon got close enough to the ISS forDon Pettit, an astronaut, to use a fifty-eight-foot robotic arm to reach out andgrab the resupply capsule. “Houston, Station, it looks like we’ve got us a dragonby the tail,” Pettit said.13“I’d been digesting my guts,” Shotwell said. “And then I am drinkingchampagne at six in the morning.” About thirty people were in the control roomwhen the docking happened. Over the next couple of hours, workers streamedinto the SpaceX factory to soak up the elation of the moment. SpaceX had setanother first, as the only private company to dock with the ISS. A couple ofmonths later SpaceX received $440 million from NASA to keep developingDragon so that it could transport people. “Elon is changing the way aerospacebusiness is done,” said NASA’s Stoker. “He’s managed to keep the safety factorup while cutting costs. He’s just taken the best things from the tech industry likethe open-floor office plans and having everyone talking and all this humaninteraction. It’s a very different way to most of the aerospace industry, which isdesigned to produce requirements documents and project reviews.”In May 2014, Musk invited the press to SpaceX’s headquarters to demonstratewhat some of that NASA money had bought. He unveiled the Dragon V2, orversion two, spacecraft. Unlike most executives, who like to show their productsoff at trade shows or daytime events, Musk prefers to hold true Hollywood-stylegalas in the evenings. People arrived in Hawthorne by the hundreds and snackedon hors d’oeuvres until the 7:30 P.M. showing. Musk appeared wearing a purplishvelvet jacket and popping open the capsule’s door with a bump of his fist like theFonz. What he revealed was spectacular. The cramped quarters of past capsuleswere gone. There were seven thin, sturdy, contoured seats arranged with fourseats close to the main console and a row of three seats in the back. Muskwalked around in the capsule to show how roomy it was and then plopped downin the central captain’s chair. He reached up and unlocked a four-paneled flat-screen console that gracefully slid down right in front of the first row of seats.*In the middle of the console was a joystick for flying the aircraft and somephysical buttons for essential functions that astronauts could press in case of anemergency or a malfunctioning touchscreen. The inside of the capsule had abright, metallic finish. Someone had finally built a spaceship worthy of scientistand moviemaker dreams.There was substance to go with the style. The Dragon 2 will be able to dockwith the ISS and other space habitats automatically without needing theintervention of a robotic arm. It will run on a SuperDraco engine—a thrustermade by SpaceX and the first engine ever built completely by a 3-D printer to gointo space. This means that a machine guided by a computer formed the engineout of single piece of metal—in this case the high-strength alloy Inconel—sothat its strength and performance should exceed anything built by humans bywelding various parts together. And most mind-boggling of all, Musk revealedthat the Dragon 2 will be able to land anywhere on Earth that SpaceX wants byusing the SuperDraco engines and thrusters to come to a gentle stop on theground. No more landings at sea. No more throwing spaceships away. “That ishow a twenty-first-century spaceship should land,” Musk said. “You can justreload propellant and fly again. So long as we continue to throw away rocketsand spacecraft, we will never have true access to space.”The Dragon 2 is just one of the machines that SpaceX continues to develop inparallel. One of the company’s next milestones will be the first flight of theFalcon Heavy, which is designed to be the world’s most powerful rocket.*SpaceX has found a way to combine three Falcon 9s into a single craft with 27of the Merlin engines and the ability to carry more than 53 metric tons of stuffinto orbit. Part of the genius of Musk and Mueller’s designs is that SpaceX canreuse the same engine in different configurations—from the Falcon 1 up to theFalcon Heavy—saving on cost and time. “We make our main combustionchambers, turbo pump, gas generators, injectors, and main valves,” Mueller said.“We have complete control. We have our own test site, while most of the otherguys use government test sites. The labor hours are cut in half and so is the workaround the materials. Four years ago, we could make two rockets a year and nowwe can make twenty a year.” SpaceX boasts that the Falcon Heavy can take uptwice the payload of the nearest competitor—the Delta IV Heavy fromBoeing/ULA—at one-third the cost. SpaceX is also busy building a spaceportfrom the ground up. The goal is to be able to launch many rockets an hour fromthis facility located in Brownsville, Texas, by automating the processes neededto stand a rocket up on the pad, fuel it, and send it off.Just as it did in the early days, SpaceX continues to experiment with thesenew vehicles during actual launches in ways that other companies would darenot do. SpaceX will often announce that it’s trying out a new engine or itslanding legs and place the emphasis on that one upgrade in the marketingmaterial leading up to a launch. It’s common, though, for SpaceX to test out adozen other objectives in secret during a mission. Musk essentially asksemployees to do the impossible on top of the impossible. One former SpaceXexecutive described the working atmosphere as a perpetual-motion machine thatruns on a weird mix of dissatisfaction and eternal hope. “It’s like he haseveryone working on this car that is meant to get from Los Angeles to New Yorkon one tank of gas,” this executive said. “They will work on the car for a yearand test all of its parts. Then, when they set off for New York after that year, allof the vice presidents think privately that the car will be lucky to get to LasVegas. What ends up happening is that the car gets to New Mexico—twice as faras they ever expected—and Elon is still mad. He gets twice as much as anyoneelse out of people.”There’s a degree to which it’s just never enough for Musk, no matter what itis. Case in point: the December 2010 launch in which SpaceX got the Dragoncapsule to orbit Earth and return successfully. This had been one of thecompany’s great achievements, and people had worked tirelessly for months, ifnot years. The launch had taken place on December 8, and SpaceX had aChristmas party on December 16. About ninety minutes before the party started,Musk had called his top executives to SpaceX for a meeting. Six of them,including Mueller, were decked out in party attire and ready to celebrate theholidays and SpaceX’s historic achievement around Dragon. Musk laid intothem for about an hour because the truss structure for a future rocket wasrunning behind schedule. “Their wives were sitting three cubes over waiting forthe berating to end,” Brogan said. Other examples of similar behavior havecropped up from time to time. Musk, for example, rewarded a group of thirtyemployees who had pulled off a tough project for NASA with bonuses thatconsisted of additional stock option grants. Many of the employees, seekinginstant, more tangible gratification, demanded cash. “He chided us for notvaluing the stock,” Drew Eldeen, a former engineer, said. “He said, ‘In the longrun, this is worth a lot more than a thousand dollars in cash.’ He wasn’tscreaming or anything like that, but he seemed disappointed in us. It was hard tohear that.”The lingering question for many SpaceX employees is when exactly they willsee a big reward for all their work. SpaceX’s staff is paid well but by no meansexorbitantly. Many of them expect to make their money when SpaceX files foran initial public offering. The thing is that Musk does not want to go publicanytime soon, and understandably so. It’s a bit hard to explain the whole Marsthing to investors, when it’s unclear what the business model around starting acolony on another planet will be. When the employees heard Musk say that anIPO was years away and would not occur until the Mars mission looked moresecure, they started to grumble, and when Musk found out, he addressed all ofSpaceX in an e-mail that is a fantastic window into his thinking and how itdiffers from almost every other CEO’s. (The full e-mail appears in Appendix 3.)June 7, 2013Going PublicPer my recent comments, I am increasingly concerned about SpaceXgoing public before the Mars transport system is in place. Creating thetechnology needed to establish life on Mars is and always has been thefundamental goal of SpaceX. If being a public company diminishes thatlikelihood, then we should not do so until Mars is secure. This is somethingthat I am open to reconsidering, but, given my experiences with Tesla andSolarCity, I am hesitant to foist being public on SpaceX, especially giventhe long term nature of our mission.Some at SpaceX who have not been through a public companyexperience may think that being public is desirable. This is not so. Publiccompany stocks, particularly if big step changes in technology are involved,go through extreme volatility, both for reasons of internal execution and forreasons that have nothing to do with anything except the economy. Thiscauses people to be distracted by the manic-depressive nature of the stockinstead of creating great products.For those who are under the impression that they are so clever that theycan outsmart public market investors and would sell SpaceX stock at the“right time,” let me relieve you of any such notion. If you really are betterthan most hedge fund managers, then there is no need to worry about thevalue of your SpaceX stock, as you can just invest in other public companystocks and make billions of dollars in the market.Elon10THE REVENGE OF THE ELECTRIC CARTHERE ARE SO MANY TELEVISION COMMERCIALS FOR CARS ANDTRUCKS that it’s easy to become immune to them and ignore what’s takingplace in the ads. That’s okay. Because there’s not really much of note happening.Carmakers looking to put a modicum of effort into their ads have been hawkingthe exact same things for decades: a car with a bit more room, a few extra milesper gallon, better handling, or an extra cup holder. Those that can’t find anythinginteresting at all to tout about their cars turn to scantily clad women, men withBritish accents, and, when necessary, dancing mice in tuxedos to try andconvince people that their products are better than the rest. Next time a car adappears on your television, pause for a moment and really listen to what’s beingsaid. When you realize that the Volkswagen sign-and-drive “event” is code for“we’re making the experience of buying a car slightly less miserable than usual,”you’ll start to appreciate just how low the automotive industry has sunk.In the middle of 2012, Tesla Motors stunned its complacent peers in theautomotive industry. It began shipping the Model S sedan. This all-electricluxury vehicle could go more than 300 miles on a single charge. It could reach60 miles per hour in 4.2 seconds. It could seat seven people, if you used a coupleof optional rear-facing seats in the back for kids. It also had two trunks. Therewas the standard one and then what Tesla calls a “frunk” up front, where thebulky engine would usually be. The Model S ran on an electric battery pack thatmakes up the base of the car and a watermelon-sized electric motor locatedbetween the rear tires. Getting rid of the engine and its din of clangingmachinery also meant that the Model S ran silently. The Model S outclassedmost other luxury sedans in terms of raw speed, mileage, handling, and storagespace.And there was more—like a cutesy thing with the door handles, which wereflush with the car’s body until the driver got close to the Model S. Then thesilver handles would pop out, the driver would open the door and get in, and thehandles would retract flush with the car’s body again. Once inside, the driverencountered a seventeen-inch touchscreen that controlled the vast majority of thecar’s functions, be it raising the volume on the stereo* or opening the sunroofwith a slide of the finger. Whereas most cars have a large dashboard toaccommodate various displays and buttons and to protect people from the noiseof the engine, the Model S offered up vast amounts of space. The Model S hadan ever-present Internet connection, allowing the driver to stream music throughthe touch console and to display massive Google maps for navigation. The driverdidn’t need to turn a key or even push an ignition button to start the car. Hisweight in the seat coupled with a sensor in the key fob, which is shaped like atiny Model S, was enough to activate the vehicle. Made of lightweightaluminum, the car achieved the highest safety rating in history. And it could berecharged for free at Tesla’s stations lining highways across the United Statesand later around the world.For both engineers and green-minded people, the Model S presented a modelof efficiency. Traditional cars and hybrids have anywhere from hundreds tothousands of moving parts. The engine must perform constant, controlledexplosions with pistons, crankshafts, oil filters, alternators, fans, distributors,valves, coils, and cylinders among the many pieces of machinery needed for thework. The oomph produced by the engine must then be passed through clutches,gears, and driveshafts to make the wheels turn, and then exhaust systems have todeal with the waste. Cars end up being about 10–20 percent efficient at turningthe input of gasoline into the output of propulsion. Most of the energy (about 70percent) is lost as heat in the engine, while the rest is lost through windresistance, braking, and other mechanical functions. The Model S, by contrast,has about a dozen moving parts, with the battery pack sending energy instantlyto a watermelon-sized motor that turns the wheels. The Model S ends up beingabout 60 percent efficient, losing most of the rest of its energy to heat. The sedangets the equivalent of about 100 miles per gallon.*Yet another distinguishing characteristic of the Model S was the experience ofbuying and owning the car. You didn’t go to a dealership and haggle with apushy salesman. Tesla sold the Model S directly through its own stores andwebsite. Typically, the stores were placed in high-end malls or affluent suburbs,not far from the Apple stores on which they were modeled. Customers wouldwalk in and find a complete Model S in the middle of the shop and often anexposed version of the car’s base near the back of the store to show off thebattery pack and motor. There were massive touchscreens where people couldcalculate how much they might save on fuel costs by moving to an all-electriccar, and where they could configure the look and add-ons for their future ModelS. Once the configuration process was done, the customer could give the screena big, forceful swipe and his Model S would theatrically appear on an evenbigger screen in the center of the store. If you wanted to sit in the display model,a salesman would pull back a red velvet rope near the driver’s-side door and letyou enter the car. The salespeople were not compensated on commission anddidn’t have to try to talk you into buying a suite of extras. Whether youultimately bought the car in the store or online, it was delivered in a conciergefashion. Tesla would bring it to your home, office, or anywhere else you wantedit. The company also offered customers the option of picking their cars up fromthe factory in Silicon Valley and treating their friends and family to acomplimentary tour of the facility. In the months that followed the delivery, therewere no oil changes or tune-ups to be dealt with because the Model S didn’t needthem. It had done away with so much of the mechanical dreck standard in aninternal combustion vehicle. However, if something did go wrong with the car,Tesla would come pick it up and give the customer a loaner while it repaired theModel S.The Model S also offered a way to fix issues in a manner that people hadnever before encountered with a mass-produced car. Some of the early ownerscomplained about glitches like the door handles not popping out quite right ortheir windshield wipers operating at funky speeds. These were inexcusable flawsfor such a costly vehicle, but Tesla typically moved with clever efficiency toaddress them. While the owner slept, Tesla’s engineers tapped into the car via theInternet connection and downloaded software updates. When the customer tookthe car out for a spin in the morning and found it working right, he was leftfeeling as if magical elves had done the work. Tesla soon began showing off itssoftware skills for jobs other than making up for mistakes. It put out asmartphone app that let people turn on their air-conditioning or heating from afarand to see where the car was parked on a map. Tesla also began installingsoftware updates that imbued the Model S with new features. Overnight, theModel S sometimes got new traction controls for hilly and highway driving orcould suddenly recharge much faster than before or possess a new range of voicecontrols. Tesla had transformed the car into a gadget—a device that actually gotbetter after you bought it. As Craig Venter, one of the earliest Model S ownersand the famed scientist who first decoded man’s DNA, put it, “It changeseverything about transportation. It’s a computer on wheels.”The first people to notice what Tesla had accomplished were the technophilesin Silicon Valley. The region is filled with early adopters willing to buy the latestgizmos and suffer through their bugs. Normally this habit applies to computingdevices ranging from $100 to $2,000 in price. This time around, the earlyadopters proved willing not only to spend $100,000 on a product that might notwork but also to trust their well-being to a startup. Tesla needed this early boostof confidence and got it on a scale few expected. In the first couple of monthsafter the Model S went on sale, you might see one or two per day on the streetsof San Francisco and the surrounding cities. Then you started to see five to tenper day. Soon enough, the Model S seemed to feel like the most common car inPalo Alto and Mountain View, the two cities at the heart of Silicon Valley. TheModel S emerged as the ultimate status symbol for wealthy technophiles,allowing them to show off, get a new gadget, and claim to be helping theenvironment at the same time. From Silicon Valley, the Model S phenomenonspread to Los Angeles, then all along the West Coast and then to Washington,D.C., and New York (although to a lesser degree).At first the more traditional automakers viewed the Model S as a gimmick andits surging sales as part of a fad. These sentiments, however, soon gave way tosomething more akin to panic. In November 2012, just a few months after itstarted shipping, the Model S was named Motor Trend’s Car of the Year in thefirst unanimous vote that anyone at the magazine could remember. The Model Sbeat out eleven other vehicles from companies such as Porsche, BMW, Lexus,and Subaru and was heralded as “proof positive that America can still makegreat things.” Motor Trend celebrated the Model S as the first non–internalcombustion engine car ever to win its top award and wrote that the vehiclehandled like a sports car, drove as smoothly as a Rolls-Royce, held as much as aChevy Equinox, and was more efficient than a Toyota Prius. Several monthslater, Consumer Reports gave the Model S its highest car rating in history—99out of 100—while proclaiming that it was likely the best car ever built. It was atabout this time that sales of the Model S started to soar alongside Tesla’s shareprice and that General Motors, among other automakers, pulled together a teamto study the Model S, Tesla, and the methods of Elon Musk.It’s worth pausing for a moment to meditate on what Tesla had accomplished.Musk had set out to make an electric car that did not suffer from anycompromises. He did that. Then, using a form of entrepreneurial judo, heupended the decades of criticisms against electric cars. The Model S was not justthe best electric car; it was best car, period, and the car people desired. Americahad not seen a successful car company since Chrysler emerged in 1925. SiliconValley had done little of note in the automotive industry. Musk had never run acar factory before and was considered arrogant and amateurish by Detroit. Yet,one year after the Model S went on sale, Tesla had posted a profit, hit $562million in quarterly revenue, raised its sales forecast, and become as valuable asMazda Motor. Elon Musk had built the automotive equivalent of the iPhone.And car executives in Detroit, Japan, and Germany had only their crappy ads towatch as they pondered how such a thing had occurred.You can forgive the automotive industry veterans for being caught unawares.For years Tesla had looked like an utter disaster incapable of doing much ofanything right. It took until early 2009 for Tesla to really hit its stride with theRoadster and work out the manufacturing issues behind the sports car. Just as thecompany tried to build some momentum around the Roadster, Musk sent out ane-mail to customers declaring a price hike. Where the car originally startedaround $92,000, it would now start at $109,000. In the e-mail, Musk said thatfour hundred customers who had already placed their orders for a Roadster butnot yet received them would bear the brunt of the price change and need tocough up the extra cash. He tried to assuage Tesla’s customer base by arguingthat the company had no choice but to raise prices. The manufacturing costs forthe Roadster had come in much higher than the company initially expected, andTesla needed to prove that it could make the cars at a profit to bolster its chancesof securing a large government loan that would be needed to build the Model S,which it vowed to deliver in 2011. “I firmly believe that the plan . . . strikes areasonable compromise between being fair to early customers and ensuring theviability of Tesla, which is obviously in the best interests of all customers,”Musk wrote in the e-mail. “Mass market electric cars have been my goal fromthe beginning of Tesla. I don’t want and I don’t think the vast majority of Teslacustomers want us to do anything to jeopardize that objective.” While someTesla customers grumbled, Musk had largely read his customer base right. Theywould support just about anything he suggested.Following the price increase, Tesla had a safety recall. It said that Lotus, themanufacturer of the Roadster’s chassis, had failed to tighten a bolt properly onits assembly line. On the plus side, Tesla had only delivered about 345Roadsters, which meant that it could fix the problem in a manageable fashion.On the downside, a safety recall was the last thing a car startup needs, even if itwas, as Tesla claimed, more of a proactive measure than anything else. The nextyear, Tesla had another voluntary recall. It had received a report of a power cablegrinding against the body of the Roadster to the point that it caused a shortcircuit and some smoke. That time, Tesla brought 439 Roadsters in for a fix.Tesla did its best to put a positive spin on these issues, saying that it would make“house calls” to fix the Roadsters or pick up the cars and take them back to thefactory. Ever since, Musk has tried to turn any snafu with a Tesla into an excuseto show off the company’s attention to service and dedication to pleasing thecustomer. More often than not, the strategy has worked.On top of the occasional issues with the Roadster, Tesla continued to sufferfrom public perception problems. In June 2009, Martin Eberhard sued Musk andwent to town in the complaint detailing his ouster from the company. Eberhardaccused Musk of libel, slander, and breach of contract. The charges paintedMusk as a bully moneyman who had pushed the soulful inventor out of his owncompany. The lawsuit also accused Musk of trumping up his role in Tesla’sfounding. Musk responded in kind, issuing a blog post that detailed his take onEberhard’s foibles and taking umbrage at the suggestions that he was not a truefounder of the company. A short while later, the two men settled and agreed tostop going at each other. “As cofounder of the company, Elon’s contributions toTesla have been extraordinary,” Eberhard said in a statement at the time. It musthave been excruciating for Eberhard to agree to put that in writing and the veryexistence of that statement points to Musk’s skills and tactics as a hardlinenegotiator. The two men continue to despise each other today, although theymust do so in private, as legally required. Eberhard, though, holds no long-standing grudge against Tesla. His shares in the company ended up becomingvery valuable. He still drives his Roadster, and his wife got a Model S.For so much of its early existence, Tesla appeared in the news for the wrongreasons. There were people in the media and the automotive industry whoviewed it as a gimmick. They seemed to delight in the soap opera–worthy spatsbetween Musk and Eberhard and other disgruntled former employees. Far frombeing seen universally as a successful entrepreneur, Musk was viewed in someSilicon Valley circles as an abrasive blowhard who would get what he deservedwhen Tesla inevitably collapsed. The Roadster would make its way to theelectric-car graveyard. Detroit would prove that it had a better handle on thiswhole car innovation thing than Silicon Valley. The natural order of the worldwould remain intact.A funny thing happened, however. Tesla did just enough to survive. From2008 to 2012, Tesla sold about 2,500 Roadsters.* The car had accomplishedwhat Musk had intended from the outset. It proved that electric cars could be funto drive and that they could be objects of desire. With the Roadster, Tesla keptelectric cars in the public’s consciousness and did so under impossiblecircumstances, namely the collapse of the American automotive industry and theglobal financial markets. Whether Musk was a founder of Tesla in the purestsense of the word is irrelevant at this point. There would be no Tesla to talkabout today were it not for Musk’s money, marketing savvy, chicanery,engineering smarts, and indomitable spirit. Tesla was, in effect, willed intoexistence by Musk and reflects his personality as much as Intel, Microsoft, andApple reflect the personalities of their founders. Marc Tarpenning, the otherTesla cofounder, said as much when he reflected on what Musk has meant to thecompany. “Elon pushed Tesla so much farther than we ever imagined,” he said.As difficult as birthing the Roadster had been, the adventure had whettedMusk’s appetite for what he could accomplish in the automotive industry with aclean slate. Tesla’s next car—code-named WhiteStar—would not be an adaptedversion of another company’s vehicle. It would be made from scratch andstructured to take full advantage of what the electric-car technology offered. Thebattery pack in the Roadster, for example, had to be placed near the rear of thecar because of constraints imposed by the Lotus Elise chassis. This was okay butnot ideal due to the imposing weight of the batteries. With WhiteStar, whichwould become the Model S, Musk and Tesla’s engineers knew from the start thatthey would place the 1,300-pound battery pack on the base of the car. Thiswould give the vehicle a low center of gravity and excellent handling. It wouldalso give the Model S what’s known as a low polar moment of inertia, whichrelates to how a car resists turning. Ideally, you want heavy parts like the engineas close as possible to the car’s center of gravity, which is why the engines ofrace cars tend to be near the middle of the vehicle. Traditional cars are a mess onthis metric, with the bulky engine up front, passengers in the middle, andgasoline sloshing around the rear. In the case of the Model S, the bulk of thecar’s mass is very close to the center of gravity and this has positive follow-oneffects to handling, performance, and safety.The innards, though, were just one part of what would make the Model Sshine. Musk wanted to make a statement with the car’s look as well. It would bea sedan, yes, but it would be a sexy sedan. It would also be comfortable andluxurious and have none of the compromises that Tesla had been forced toembrace with the Roadster. To bring such a beautiful, functional car to life,Musk hired Henrik Fisker, a Danish automobile designer renowned for his workat Aston Martin.Tesla first revealed its plans for the Model S to Fisker in 2007. It asked him todesign a sleek, four-door sedan that would cost between $50,000 and $70,000.Tesla could still barely make Roadsters and had no idea if its all-electricpowertrain would hold up over time. Musk, though, refused to wait and find out.He wanted the Model S to ship in late 2009 or early 2010 and needed Fisker towork fast. By reputation, Fisker had a flair for the dramatic and had producedsome of the most stunning car designs over the past decade, not just for AstonMartin but also for special versions of BMW and Mercedes-Benz vehicles.Fisker had a studio in Orange County, California, and Musk and other Teslaexecutives would meet there to go over his evolving takes on the Model S. Eachvisit was less inspiring than the last. Fisker baffled the Tesla teams with hisstodgy designs. “Some of the early styles were like a giant egg,” said Ron Lloyd,the former vice president of the WhiteStar project at Tesla. “They were terrible.”When Musk pushed back, Fisker blamed the physical constraints Tesla had putin place for the Model S as too restrictive. “He said they would not let him makethe car sexy,” Lloyd said. Fisker tried a couple of different approaches andunveiled some foam models of the car for Musk and his crew to dissect. “Wekept on telling him they were not right,” Lloyd said.Not long after these meetings, Fisker started his own company—FiskerAutomotive—and unveiled the Fisker Karma hybrid in 2008. This luxury sedanlooked like a vehicle Batman might take out for a Sunday drive. With itselongated lines and sharp edges, the car was stunning and truly original. “Itrapidly became clear that he was trying to compete with us,” Lloyd said. AsMusk dug into the situation, he discovered that Fisker had been shopping hisidea for a car company to investors around Silicon Valley for some time. KleinerPerkins Caufield & Byers, one of the more famous venture capital firms inSilicon Valley, once had a chance to invest in Tesla and then ended up puttingmoney into Fisker instead. All of this was too much for Musk, and he launched alawsuit against Fisker in 2008, accusing him of stealing Tesla’s ideas and usingthe $875,000 Tesla had paid for design work to help get his rival car companyoff the ground. (Fisker ultimately prevailed in the dispute with an arbitratorordering Tesla to reimburse Fisker’s legal fees and deeming Tesla’s allegationsbaseless.)Tesla had thought about doing a hybrid like Fisker where a gas engine wouldbe present to recharge the car’s batteries after they had consumed an initialcharge. The car would be able to travel fifty to eighty miles after being pluggedinto an outlet and then take advantage of ubiquitous gas stations as needed to topup the batteries, eliminating range anxiety. Tesla’s engineers prototyped thehybrid vehicle and ran all sorts of cost and performance metrics. In the end, theyfound the hybrid to be too much of a compromise. “It would be expensive, andthe performance would not be as good as the all-electric car,” said J. B. Straubel.“And we would have needed to build a team to compete with the corecompetency of every car company in the world. We would have been bettingagainst all the things we believe in, like the power electronics and batteriesimproving. We decided to put all the effort into going where we think theendpoint is and to never look back.” After coming to this conclusion, Straubeland others inside Tesla started to let go of their anger toward Fisker. Theyfigured he would end up delivering a kluge of a car and get what was coming tohim.A large car company might spend $1 billion and need thousands of people todesign a new vehicle and bring it to market. Tesla had nothing close to theseresources as it gave birth to the Model S. According to Lloyd, Tesla initiallyaimed to make about ten thousand Model S sedans per year and had budgetedaround $130 million to achieve this goal, including engineering the car andacquiring the manufacturing machines needed to stamp out the body parts. “Oneof the things Elon pushed hard with everyone was to do as much as possible in-house,” Lloyd said. Tesla would make up for its lack of R&D money by hiringsmart people who could outwork and outthink the third parties relied on by therest of the automakers. “The mantra was that one great engineer will replacethree medium ones,” Lloyd said.A small team of Tesla engineers began the process of trying to figure out themechanical inner workings of the Model S. Their first step in this journey tookplace at a Mercedes dealership where they test drove a CLS 4-Door Coupe andan E-Class sedan. The cars had the same chassis, and the Tesla engineers tookmeasurements of every inch of the vehicles, studying what they liked and didn’tlike. In the end, they preferred the styling on the CLS and settled on it as theirbaseline for thinking about the Model S.After purchasing a CLS, Tesla’s engineers tore it apart. One team hadreshaped the boxy, rectangular battery pack from the Roadster and made it flat.The engineers cut the floor out of the CLS and plopped in the pack. Next theyput the electronics that tied the whole system together in the trunk. After that,they replaced the interior of the car to restore its fit and finish. Following threemonths of work, Tesla had in effect built an all-electric Mercedes CLS. Teslaused the car to woo investors and future partners like Daimler that wouldeventually turn to Tesla for electric powertrains in their vehicles. Now and again,the Tesla team took the car out for drives on public roads. It weighed more thanthe Roadster but was still fast and had a range of about 120 miles per charge. Toperform these joyrides-cum-tests in relative secrecy, the engineers had to weldthe tips of the exhaust pipes back onto the car to make it look like any otherCLS.It was at this time, the summer of 2008, when an artsy car lover named Franzvon Holzhausen joined Tesla. His job would be to breathe new life into the car’searly designs and, if possible, turn the Model S into an iconic product.*Von Holzhausen grew up in a small Connecticut town. His father worked onthe design and marketing of consumer products, and Franz treated the familybasement full of markers, different kinds of paper, and other materials as aplayground for his imagination. As he grew older, von Holzhausen driftedtoward cars. He and a friend stripped down a dune-buggy motor one winter andthen built it back up, and von Holzhausen always filled the margins of his schoolnotebooks with drawings of cars and had pictures of cars on his bedroom walls.Applying to college, von Holzhausen decided to follow his father’s path andenrolled in the industrial design program at Syracuse University. Then, through achance encounter with another designer during an internship, von Holzhausenheard about the Art Center College of Design in Los Angeles. “This guy hadbeen teaching me about car design and this school in Los Angeles, and I gotsuper-intrigued,” said von Holzhausen. “I went to Syracuse for two years andthen decided to transfer out to California.”The move to Los Angeles kicked off a long and storied design career in theautomotive industry. Von Holzhausen would go on to intern in Michigan withFord and in Europe with Volkswagen, where he began to pick up on a mix ofdesign sensibilities. After graduating in 1992, he started work for Volkswagen onjust about the most exciting project imaginable—a top-secret new version of theBeetle. “It really was a magical time,” von Holzhausen said. “Only fifty peoplein the world knew we were doing this project.” Von Holzhausen had a chance towork on the exterior and interior of the vehicle, including the signature flowervase built into the dashboard. In 1997, Volkswagen launched the “New Beetle,”and von Holzhausen saw firsthand how the look of the car captivated the publicand changed the way people felt about Volkswagen, which had suffered fromwoeful sales in the United States. “It started a rebirth of the VW brand andbrought design back into their mix,” he said.Von Holzhausen spent eight years with VW, climbing the ranks of its designteam and falling in love with the car culture of Southern California. Los Angeleshas long adored its cars, with the climate lending itself to all manner of vehiclesfrom convertibles to surfboard-toting vans. Almost all of the major carmakers setup design studios in the city. The presence of the studios allowed vonHolzhausen to hop from VW to General Motors and Mazda, where he served asthe company’s director of design.GM taught von Holzhausen just how nasty a big car company could become.None of the cars in GM’s lineup really excited him, and it seemed nearimpossible to make a large impact on the company’s culture. He was onemember of a thousand-person design team that divvyed up the makes of carshaphazardly without any consideration as to which person really wanted to workon which car. “They took all the spirit out of me,” said von Holzhausen. “I knewI didn’t want to die there.” Mazda, by contrast, needed and wanted help. It letvon Holzhausen and his team in Los Angeles put their imprint on every car inthe North American vehicle lineup and to produce a set of concept cars thatreshaped how the company approached design. As von Holzhausen put it, “Webrought the zoom-zoom back into the look and feel of the car.”Von Holzhausen started a project to make Mazda’s cars more green byrevaluating the types of materials used to fabricate the seats and the fuels goinginto the vehicles. He had, in fact, just made an ethanol-based concept car when,in early 2008, a friend told him that Tesla needed a chief designer. After playingphone tag for a month with Musk’s assistant, Mary Beth Brown, to inquire aboutthe position, von Holzhausen finally got in touch and met Musk for an interviewat the SpaceX headquarters.Musk instantly saw von Holzhausen, with his bouffant, trendy clothes andlaid-back attitude, as a free-spirited, creative complement and wooed him withvigor. They took a tour of the SpaceX factory in Hawthorne and Tesla’sheadquarters in Silicon Valley. Both facilities were chaotic and reeked of startup.Musk ramped up the charm and sold von Holzhausen on the idea that he had achance to shape the future of the automobile and that it made sense to leave hiscushy job at a big, proven automaker for this once-in-a-lifetime opportunity.“Elon and I went for a drive in the Roadster, and everyone was checking it out,”von Holzhausen said. “I knew I could stay at Mazda for ten years and get verycomfortable or take a huge leap of faith. At Tesla, there was no history, nobaggage. There was just a vision of products that could change the world. Whowouldn’t want to be involved with that?”While von Holzhausen knew the risks of going to a startup, he could not haverealized just how close Tesla was to bankruptcy when he joined the company inAugust 2008. Musk had coaxed von Holzhausen away from a secure job and intothe jaws of death. But in many ways, this is what von Holzhausen sought at thispoint in his career. Tesla did not feel as much like a car company as a bunch ofguys tinkering on a big idea. “To me, it was exciting,” he said. “It was like agarage experiment, and it made cars cool again.” The suits were gone, and sowere the veteran automotive hands dulled by years working in the industry. Intheir stead, von Holzhausen found energetic geeks who didn’t realize that whatthey wanted to do was borderline impossible. Musk’s presence added to theenergy and gave von Holzhausen confidence that Tesla actually could outflankmuch, much larger competitors. “Elon’s mind was always way beyond thepresent moment,” he said. “You could see that he was a step or three ahead ofeveryone else and one hundred percent committed to what we were doing.”Von Holzhausen had examined the drawings of the Model S left by Fisker anda clay model of the car and had come away unimpressed. “It was a blob,” hesaid. “It was clear to me that the people that had been working on this werenovices.” Musk realized the same thing and tried to articulate what he wanted.Even though the words were not precise, they were good enough to give vonHolzhausen a feel for Musk’s vision and the confidence that he could deliver onit. “I said, ‘We’re going to start over. We’re going to work together and makethis awesome.’”To save money, the Tesla design center came to life inside the SpaceX factory.A handful of people on von Holzhausen’s team took over one corner and put upa tent to add some separation and secrecy to what they were doing. In thetradition of many a Musk employee, von Holzhausen had to build his own office.He made a pilgrimage to IKEA to buy some desks and then went to an art storeto get some paper and pens.As von Holzhausen began sketching the outside of the Model S, the Teslaengineers had started up a project to build another electric CLS. They ripped thisone down to its very core, removing all of the body structure and then stretchingthe wheelbase by four inches to match up with some of the early Model Sspecifications. Things began moving fast for everyone involved in the Model Sproject. In the span of about three months, von Holzhausen had designed 95percent of what people see today with the Model S, and the engineers had startedbuilding a prototype exterior around the skeleton.Throughout this process, von Holzhausen and Musk talked every day. Theirdesks were close, and the men had a natural rapport. Musk said he wanted anaesthetic that borrowed from Aston Martin and Porsche and some specificfunctions. He insisted, for example, that the car seat seven people. “It was like‘Holy shit, how do we pull this off in a sedan?’” von Holzhausen said. “But Iunderstood. He had five kids and wanted something that could be thought of as afamily vehicle, and he knew other people would have this issue.”Musk wanted to make another statement with a huge touchscreen. This wasyears before the iPad would be released. The touchscreens that people ran intonow and again at airports or shopping kiosks were for the most part terrible. Butto Musk, the iPhone and all of its touch functions made it obvious that this typeof technology would soon become commonplace. He would make a giant iPhoneand have it handle most of the car’s functions. To find the right size for thescreen, Musk and von Holzhausen would sit in the skeleton car and hold uplaptops of different sizes, placing them horizontally and vertically to see whatlooked best. They settled on a seventeen-inch screen in a vertical position.Drivers would tap on this screen for every task except for opening the glove boxand turning on the emergency lights—jobs required by law to be performed withphysical buttons.Since the battery pack at the base of the car would weigh so much, Musk, thedesigners, and the engineers were always looking for ways to reduce the ModelS’s weight in other spots. Musk opted to solve a big chunk of this problem bymaking the body of the Model S out of lightweight aluminum instead of steel.“The non-battery-pack portion of the car has to be lighter than comparablegasoline cars, and making it all aluminum became the obvious decision,” Musksaid. “The fundamental problem was that if we didn’t make it out of aluminumthe car wasn’t going to be any good.”Musk’s word choice there—“obvious decision”—goes a long way towardexplaining how he operates. Yes, the car needed to be light, and, yes, aluminumwould be an option for making that happen. But at the time, car manufacturers inNorth America had almost no experience producing aluminum body panels.Aluminum tends to tear when worked by large presses. It also develops lines thatlook like stretch marks on skin and make it difficult to lay down smooth coats ofpaint. “In Europe, you had some Jaguars and one Audi that were made ofaluminum, but it was less than five percent of the market,” Musk said. “In NorthAmerica, there was nothing. It’s only recently that the Ford F-150 has arrived asmostly aluminum. Before that, we were the only one.” Inside of Tesla, attemptswere repeatedly made to talk Musk out of the aluminum body, but he would notbudge, seeing it as the only rational choice. It would be up to the Tesla team tofigure out how to make the aluminum manufacturing happen. “We knew it couldbe done,” Musk said. “It was a question of how hard it would be and how long itwould take us to sort it out.”Just about all of the major design choices with the Model S came with similarchallenges. “When we first talked about the touchscreen, the guys came backand said, ‘There’s nothing like that in the automotive supply chain,’” Musk said.“I said, ‘I know. That’s because it’s never been put in a fucking car before.’”Musk figured that computer manufacturers had tons of experience makingseventeen-inch laptop screens and expected them to knock out a screen for theModel S with relative ease. “The laptops are pretty robust,” Musk said. “You candrop them and leave them out in the sun, and they still have to work.” Aftercontacting the laptop suppliers, Tesla’s engineers came back and said that thetemperature and vibration loads for the computers did not appear to be up toautomotive standards. Tesla’s supplier in Asia also kept pointing the carmaker toits automotive division instead of its computing division. As Musk dug into thesituation more, he discovered that the laptop screens simply had not been testedbefore under the tougher automotive conditions, which included largetemperature fluctuations. When Tesla performed the tests, the electronics endedup working just fine. Tesla also started working hand in hand with the Asianmanufacturers to perfect their then-immature capacitive-touch technology and tofind ways to hide the wiring behind the screen that made the touch technologypossible. “I’m pretty sure that we ended up with the only seventeen-inchtouchscreen in the world,” Musk said. “None of the computer makers or Applehad made it work yet.”The Tesla engineers were radical by automotive industry standards but eventhey had problems fully committing to Musk’s vision. “They wanted to put in abloody switch or a button for the lights,” Musk said. “Why would we need aswitch? When it’s dark, turn the lights on.” Next, the engineers put up resistanceto the door handles. Musk and von Holzhausen had been studying a bunch ofpreliminary designs in which the handles had yet to be drawn in and started tofall in love with how clean the car looked. They decided that the handles shouldonly present themselves when a passenger needed to get in the car. Right away,the engineers realized this would be a technological pain, and they completelyignored the idea in one prototype version of the car, much to the dismay of Muskand von Holzhausen. “This prototype had the handles pivot instead of poppingout,” von Holzhausen said. “I was upset about it, and Elon said, ‘Why the fuck isthis different? We’re not doing this.’”To crank up the pace of the Model S design, there were engineers working allday and then others who would show up at 9 P.M. and work through the night.Both groups huddled inside of the 3,000-square-foot tent placed on the SpaceXfactory floor. Their workspace looked like a reception area at an outdoorwedding. “The SpaceX guys were amazingly respectful and didn’t peek or askquestions,” said Ali Javidan, one of the main engineers. As von Holzhausendelivered his specifications, the engineers built the prototype body of the car.Every Friday afternoon, they brought what they had made into a courtyardbehind the factory where Musk would look it over and provide feedback. To runtests on the body, the car would be loaded up with ballast to represent fivepeople and then do loops around the factory until it overheated or broke down.The more von Holzhausen learned about Tesla’s financial struggles, the morehe wanted the public to see the Model S. “Things were so precarious, and Ididn’t want to miss our opportunity to get this thing finished and show it to theworld,” he said. That moment came in March 2009, when, just six months aftervon Holzhausen had arrived, Tesla unveiled the Model S at a press event held atSpaceX.Amid rocket engines and hunks of aluminum, Tesla showcased a gray ModelS sedan. From a distance, the display model looked glamorous and refined. Themedia reports from the day described the car as the love child of an AstonMartin and a Maserati. In reality, the sedan barely held together. It still had thebase structure of a Mercedes CLS, although no one in the press knew that, andsome of the body panels and the hood were stuck to the frame with magnets.“They could just slide the hood right off,” said Bruce Leak, a Tesla ownerinvited to attend the event. “It wasn’t really attached. They would put it back onand try and align it to get the fit and finish right, but then someone would pushon it, and it would move again. It was one of those Wizard of Oz, man behindthe curtain moments.” A couple of the Tesla engineers practiced test-driving thecar for a couple of days leading up to the event to make sure that they knew justhow long the car would go before it overheated. While not perfect, the displayaccomplished exactly what Musk had intended. It reminded people that Teslahad a credible plan to make electric cars more mainstream and that its cars werefar more ambitious than what big-time automakers like GM and Nissan seemedto have in mind both from a design and a range perspective.The messy reality behind the display was that the odds of Tesla advancing theModel S from a prop to a sellable car were infinitesimal. The company had thetechnical know-how and the will for the job. It just didn’t have much money or afactory that could crank out cars by the thousands. Building an entire car wouldrequire blanking machines that take sheets of aluminum and chop them up intothe appropriate size for doors, hoods, and body panels. Next up would be themassive stamping machines and metal dies used to take the aluminum and bendit into precise shapes. Then there would be dozens of robots that would aid inassembling the cars, computer-controlled milling machines for precisemetalwork, painting equipment, and a bevy of other machines for running tests.It was an investment that would run into the hundreds of millions of dollars.Musk would also need to hire thousands of workers.As with SpaceX, Musk preferred to build as much of Tesla’s vehicles in-houseas possible, but the high costs were limiting just how much Tesla could take on.“The original plan was that we would do final assembly,” said DiarmuidO’Connell, the vice president of business development at Tesla. Partners wouldstamp out the body parts, do the welding and handle the painting, and shipeverything to Tesla, where workers would turn the parts into a whole car. Teslaproposed to build a factory to handle this type of work first in Albuquerque,New Mexico, and then later in San Jose, California, and then pulled back onthese proposals, much to the dismay of city officials in both locales. The publichemming and hawing around picking the factory site did little to inspireconfidence in Tesla’s ability to knock out a second car and generated the sametype of negative headlines that had surrounded the Roadster’s protracteddelivery.O’Connell had joined Tesla in 2006 to help solve some of the factory andfinancing issues. He grew up near Boston in a middle-class Irish family and wenton to earn a bachelor’s degree from Dartmouth College. After that, O’Connellattended the University of Virginia to get a master’s degree in foreign policy andthen Northwestern, where he got an MBA from the Kellogg School ofManagement. He had fancied himself a scholar of the Soviet Union and itsforeign and economic policy and had studied these areas at UVa. “But then, in1988 and 1989, they’re starting to close down the Soviet Union, and, at the veryleast, I had a brand problem,” O’Connell said. “It started looking to me like Iwas heading to a career in academia or intelligence.” It was then thatO’Connell’s career took a detour into the business world, where he became amanagement consultant working for McCann Erickson Worldwide, Young &Rubicam, and Accenture, advising companies like Coca-Cola and AT&T.O’Connell’s career path changed more drastically in 2001 when the planes hitthe twin towers in New York. In the wake of the terrorist attacks, O’Connell, likemany people, decided to serve the United States in any capacity that he could. Inhis late thirties, he had missed the window to be a soldier and instead focused hisattention on trying to get into national security work. O’Connell went fromoffice to office in Washington, D.C., looking for a job and had little luck untilLincoln Bloomfield, the assistant secretary of state for political-military affairs,heard him out. Bloomfield needed someone who could help prioritize missionsin the Middle East and make sure the right people were working on the rightthings, and he figured that O’Connell’s management consulting experience madehim a nice fit for the job. O’Connell became Bloomfield’s chief of staff and dealtwith a wide range of charged situations, from trade negotiations to setting up anembassy in Baghdad. After gaining security clearance, O’Connell also hadaccess to a daily report that collected information from intelligence and militarypersonnel on the status of operations in Iraq and Afghanistan. “Every morning atsix A.M., the first thing to hit my desk was this overnight report that includedinformation on who got killed and what killed them,” O’Connell said. “I keptthinking, This is insane. Why are we in this place? It was not just Iraq but thewhole picture. Why were we so invested in that part of the world?” Theunsurprising answer that O’Connell came up with was oil.The more O’Connell dug into the United States’ dependence on foreign oil,the more frustrated and despondent he became. “My clients were basically thecombat commanders—people in charge of Latin America and CentralCommand,” he said. “As I talked with them and studied and researched, Irealized that even in peacetime, so many of our assets were employed to supportthe economic pipeline around oil.” O’Connell decided that the rational thing todo for his country and for his newborn son was to alter this equation. He lookedat the wind industry and the solar industry and the traditional automakers butcame away unconvinced that what they were doing could have a radical enoughimpact on the status quo. Then, while reading Businessweek, he stumbled on anarticle about a startup called Tesla Motors and went to the company’s website,which described Tesla as a place “where we are doing things, not talking aboutthings.” “I sent an e-mail telling them I had come from the national security areaand was really passionate about reducing our dependence on oil and figured itwas just a dead-letter type of thing,” O’Connell said. “I got an e-mail back thenext day.”Musk hired O’Connell and quickly dispatched him to Washington, D.C., tostart poking around on what types of tax credits and rebates Tesla might be ableto drum up around its electric vehicles. At the same time, O’Connell drafted anapplication for a Department of Energy stimulus package.* “All I knew is thatwe were going to need a shitload of money to build this company,” O’Connellsaid. “My view was that we needed to explore everything.” Tesla had beenlooking for between $100 million and $200 million, grossly underestimatingwhat it would take to build the Model S. “We were naïve and learning our way inthe business,” O’Connell said.It January 2009, Tesla took over Porsche’s usual spot at the Detroit auto show,getting the space cheap because so many other car companies had bailed out onthe event. Fisker had a luxurious booth across the hallway with wood flooringand pretty blond booth babes draped over its car. Tesla had the Roadster, itselectric powertrain, and no frills.The technology that Tesla’s engineers displayed proved good enough to attractthe attention of the big boys. Not long after the show, Daimler voiced someinterest in seeing what an electric Mercedes A Class car might look and feel like.Daimler executives said they would visit Tesla in about a month to discuss thisproposition in detail, and the Tesla engineers decided to blow them away byproducing two prototype vehicles before the visit. When the Daimler executivessaw what Tesla had done, they ordered four thousand of Tesla’s battery packs fora fleet of test vehicles in Germany. The Tesla team pulled off the same kind offeats for Toyota and won its business, too.In May 2009, things started to take off for Tesla. The Model S had beenunveiled, and Daimler followed that by acquiring a 10 percent stake in Tesla for$50 million. The companies also formed a strategic partnership to have Teslaprovide the battery packs for one thousand of Daimler’s Smart cars. “Thatmoney was important and went a long way back then,” said O’Connell. “It wasalso a validation. Here is the company that invented the internal combustionengine, and they are investing in us. It was a seminal moment, and I am sure itgave the guys over at the DOE the feeling that we were real. It’s not just ourscientists saying this stuff is good. It’s Mercedes freaking Benz.”Sure enough, in January 2010, the Department of Energy struck a $465million loan agreement with Tesla.* The money was far more than Tesla hadever expected to get from the government. But it still represented just a fractionof the $1 billion plus that most carmakers needed to bring a new vehicle tomarket. So, while Musk and O’Connell were thrilled to get the money, they stillwondered if Tesla would be able to live up to the bargain. Tesla would need onemore windfall or, perhaps, to steal a car factory. And in May 2010, that’s more orless what it did.General Motors and Toyota had teamed up in 1984 to build New UnitedMotor Manufacturing Inc., or NUMMI, on the site of a former GM assemblyplant in Fremont, California, a city on the outskirts of Silicon Valley. Thecompanies hoped the joint facility would combine the best of American andJapanese automaking skills and result in higher-quality, cheaper cars. Thefactory went on to pump out millions of vehicles like the Chevy Nova andToyota Corolla. Then the recession hit, and GM found itself trying to climb outof bankruptcy. It decided to abandon the plant in 2009, and Toyota followedright after, saying it would close down the whole facility, leaving five thousandpeople without jobs.All of a sudden, Tesla had the chance to buy a 5.3-million-square-foot plant inits backyard. Just one month after the last Toyota Corolla went off themanufacturing line in April 2010, Tesla and Toyota announced a partnership andtransfer of the factory. Tesla agreed to pay $42 million for a large portion of thefactory (once worth $1 billion), while Toyota invested $50 million in Tesla for a2.5 percent stake in the company. Tesla had basically secured a factory, includingthe massive metal-stamping machines and other equipment, for free.*The string of fortunate turns for Tesla left Musk feeling good. Just after thefactory deal closed in the summer of 2010, Tesla started the process of filing foran initial public offering. The company obviously needed as much capital as itcould get to bring the Model S to market and push forward with its othertechnology projects. Tesla hoped to raise about $200 million.For Musk, going public represented something of a Faustian bargain. Eversince the Zip2 and PayPal days, Musk has done everything in his power tomaintain absolute control over his companies. Even if he remained the largestshareholder in Tesla, the company would be subjected to the capricious nature ofthe public markets. Musk, the ultimate long-term thinker, would face constantsecond-guessing from investors looking for short-term returns. Tesla would alsobe subject to public scrutiny, as it would be forced to open its books for publicconsumption. This was bad because Musk prefers to operate in secrecy andbecause Tesla’s financial situation looked awful. The company had one product(the Roadster), had huge development costs, and had bordered on bankruptcymonths earlier. The car blog Jalopnik greeted the Tesla IPO as a Hail Mary ratherthan a sound fiscal move. “For lack of a better phrase, Tesla is a money pit,” theblog wrote. “Since the company’s founding in 2003, it’s managed to incur over$290 million in losses on just $147.6 million in revenue.” Told by a source thatTesla hoped to sell 20,000 units of the Model S per year at $58,000 a pop,Jalopnik scoffed. “Even considering the supposed pent-up demand amongenvironmentalists for a car like the Model S, those are ambitious goals for asmall company planning to launch a niche luxury product into a soft market.Frankly, we’re skeptical. We’ve seen how brutal and unforgiving the market canbe, and other automakers aren’t simply going to roll over and surrender thatvolume to Tesla.” Other pundits concurred with this assessment.Tesla went public on June 29, 2010, nonetheless. It raised $226 million, withthe company’s shares shooting up 41 percent that day. Investors looked pastTesla’s $55.7 million loss in 2009 and the more than $300 million the companyhad spent in seven years. The IPO stood as the first for an American carmakersince Ford went public in 1956. Competitors continued to treat Tesla like anannoying, ankle-biting dachshund. Nissan’s CEO, Carlos Ghosn, used the eventto remind people that Tesla was but a pipsqueak and that his company had plansto pump out up to 500,000 electric cars by 2012.Flush with funds, Musk began expanding some of the engineering teams andformalizing the development work around the Model S. Tesla’s main officesmoved from San Mateo to a larger building in Palo Alto, and von Holzhausenexpanded the design team in Los Angeles. Javidan hopped between projects,helping develop technology for the electrified Mercedes-Benz, an electric ToyotaRav4, and prototypes of the Model S. The Tesla team worked fast inside of a tinylab with about 45 people knocking out 35 Rav4 test vehicles at the rate of abouttwo cars per week. The alpha version of the Model S, including newly stampedbody parts from the Fremont factory, a revamped battery pack, and revampedpower electronics, came to life in the basement of the Palo Alto office. “The firstprototype was finished at about two A.M.,” Javidan said. “We were so excitedthat we drove it around without glass, any interior, or a hood.”A day or two later, Musk came to check out the vehicle. He jumped into thecar and drove it to the opposite end of the basement, where he could spend sometime alone with it. He got out and walked around the vehicle, and then theengineers came over to hear his take on the machine. This process would berepeated many times in the months to come. “He would generally be positive butconstructive,” Javidan said. “We would try and get him rides whenever wecould, and he might ask for the steering to be tighter or something like thatbefore running off to another meeting.”About a dozen of the alpha cars were produced. A couple went to supplierslike Bosch to begin work on the braking systems, while others were used forvarious tests and design tweaks. Tesla’s executives kept the vehicles rotating ona strict schedule, giving one team two weeks for cold-weather testing and thenshipping that alpha car to another team right away for powertrain tuning. “Theguys from Toyota and Daimler were blown away,” Javidan said. “They mighthave two hundred alpha cars and several hundred to a thousand beta cars. Wewere doing everything from crash tests to the interior design with about fifteencars. That was amazing to them.”Tesla employees developed similar techniques to their counterparts at SpaceXfor dealing with Musk’s high demands. The savvy engineers knew better than togo into a meeting and deliver bad news without some sort of alternative plan atthe ready. “One of the scariest meetings was when we needed to ask Elon for anextra two weeks and more money to build out another version of the Model S,”Javidan said. “We put together a plan, stating how long things would take andwhat they would cost. We told him that if he wanted the car in thirty days itwould require hiring some new people, and we presented him with a stack ofresumes. You don’t tell Elon you can’t do something. That will get you kickedout of the room. You need everything lined up. After we presented the plan, hesaid, ‘Okay, thanks.’ Everyone was like, ‘Holy shit, he didn’t fire you.’”There were times when Musk would overwhelm the Tesla engineers with hisrequests. He took a Model S prototype home for a weekend and came back onthe Monday asking for around eighty changes. Since Musk never writes anythingdown, he held all the alterations in his head and would run down the checklistweek by week to see what the engineers had fixed. The same engineering rulesas those at SpaceX applied. You did what Musk asked or were prepared toburrow down into the properties of materials to explain why something could notbe done. “He always said, ‘Take it down to the physics,’” Javidan said.As the development of the Model S neared completion in 2012, Musk refinedhis requests and dissection style. He went over the Model S with vonHolzhausen every Friday at Tesla’s design studio in Los Angeles. VonHolzhausen and his small team had moved out of the corner in the SpaceXfactory and gotten their own hangar-shaped facility near the rear of the SpaceXcomplex.* The building had a few offices and then one large, wide-open areawhere various mock-ups of vehicles and parts awaited inspection. During a visitI made in 2012, there was one complete Model S, a skeletal version of the ModelX—an as yet to be released SUV—and a selection of tires and hubcaps lined upagainst the wall. Musk sank into the Model S driver seat and von Holzhausenclimbed into the passenger seat. Musk’s eyes darted around for a few momentsand then settled onto the sun visor. It was beige and a visible seam ran aroundthe edge and pushed the fabric out. “It’s fish-lipped,” Musk said. The screwsattaching the visor to the car were visible as well, and Musk insisted that everytime he saw them it felt like tiny daggers were stabbing him in the eyes. Thewhole situation was unacceptable. “We have to decide what is the best sun visorin the world and then do better,” Musk said. A couple of assistants taking notesoutside of the car jotted this down.This process played out again with the Model X. This was to be Tesla’smerger of an SUV and a minivan built off the Model S foundation. VonHolzhausen had four different versions of the vehicle’s center console resting onthe floor, so that they could be slotted in one by one and viewed by Musk. Thepair spent most of their time, however, agonizing over the middle row of seats.Each one had an independent base so that each passenger could adjust his seatrather than moving the whole row collectively. Musk loved the freedom thisgave the passenger but grew concerned after seeing all three seats in differentpositions. “The problem is that they will never be aligned and might look amess,” Musk said. “We have to make sure they are not too hodgy podgy.”The idea of Musk as a design expert has long struck me as bizarre. He’s aphysicist at heart and an engineer by demeanor. So much of who Musk is saysthat he should fall into that Silicon Valley stereotype of the schlubby nerd whowould only know good design if he read about it in a textbook. The truth is thatthere might be some of that going on with Musk, and he’s turned it into anadvantage. He’s very visual and can store things that others have deemed to lookgood away in his brain for recall at any time. This process has helped Muskdevelop a good eye, which he’s combined with his own sensibilities, while alsorefining his ability to put what he wants into words. The result is a confident,assertive perspective that does resonate with the tastes of consumers. Like SteveJobs before him, Musk is able to think up things that consumers did not evenknow they wanted—the door handles, the giant touchscreen—and to envision ashared point of view for all of Tesla’s products and services. “Elon holds Teslaup as a product company,” von Holzhausen said. “He’s passionate that you haveto get the product right. I have to deliver for him and make sure it’s beautiful andattractive.”With the Model X, Musk again turned to his role as a dad to shape some of theflashiest design elements of the vehicle. He and von Holzhausen were walkingaround the floor of an auto show in Los Angeles, and they both complainedabout the awkwardness of getting to the middle and back row seats in an SUV.Parents who have felt their backs wrench while trying to angle a child and carseat into a vehicle know this reality all too well, as does any decent-sized humanwho has tried to wedge into a third row seat. “Even on a minivan, which issupposed to have more room, almost one-third of the entry space is covered bythe sliding door,” von Holzhausen said. “If you could open up the car in a waythat is unique and special, that could be a real game changer. We took that kernelof an idea back and worked up forty or fifty design concepts to solve theproblem, and I think we ended up with one of the most radical ones.” The ModelX has what Musk coined as “falcon-wing doors.” They’re hinged versions of thegull-wing doors found on some high-end cars like the DeLorean. The doors goup and then flop over in a constrained enough way that the Model X won’t rubup against a car parked close to it or hit the ceiling in a garage. The end result isthat a parent can plop a child in the second-row passenger seat without needingto bend over or twist at all.When Tesla’s engineers first heard about the falcon-wing doors, they cringed.Here was Musk with another crazy ask. “Everyone tried to come up with anexcuse as to why we couldn’t do it,” Javidan said. “You can’t put it in the garage.It won’t work with things like skis. Then, Elon took a demo model to his houseand showed us that the doors opened. Everyone is mumbling, ‘Yeah, in a fifteen-million-dollar house, the doors will open just fine.’” Like the controversial doorhandles on the Model S, the Model X’s doors have become one of its moststriking features and the thing consumers talk about the most. “I was one of thefirst people to test it out with a kid’s car seat,” Javidan said. “We have a minivan,and you have to be a contortionist to get the seat into the middle row. Comparedto that, the Model X was so easy. If it’s a gimmick, it’s a gimmick that works.”During my 2012 visit to the design studio, Tesla had a number of competitors’vehicles in the parking lot nearby, and Musk made sure to demonstrate thelimitations of their seating compared to the Model X. He tried with honest effortto sit in the third row of an Acura SUV, but, even though the car claimed to haveroom for seven, Musk’s knees were pressed up to his chin, and he never really fitinto the seat. “That’s like a midget cave,” he said. “Anyone can make a car bigon the outside. The trick is to make it big on the inside.” Musk went from onerival’s car to the next, illuminating the vehicles’ flaws for me and vonHolzhausen. “It’s good to get a sense for just how bad the other cars are,” hesaid.When these statements fly out of Musk’s mouth, it’s momentarily shocking.Here’s a guy who needed nine years to produce about three thousand carsridiculing automakers that build millions of vehicles every year. In that context,his ribbing comes off as absurd.Musk, though, approaches everything from a Platonic perspective. As he seesit, all of the design and technology choices should be directed toward the goal ofmaking a car as close to perfect as possible. To the extent that rival automakershaven’t, that’s what Musk is judging. It’s almost a binary experience for him.Either you’re trying to make something spectacular with no compromises oryou’re not. And if you’re not, Musk considers you a failure. This position canlook unreasonable or foolish to outsiders, but the philosophy works for Muskand constantly pushes him and those around him to their limits.On June 22, 2012, Tesla invited all of its employees, some select customers,and the press to its factory in Fremont to watch as the first Model S sedans weretaken home. Depending on which of the many promised delivery dates you pick,the Model S was anywhere from eighteen months to two-plus years late. Someof the delays were a result of Musk’s requests for exotic technologies thatneeded to be invented. Other delays were simply a function of this still quiteyoung automaker learning how to produce an immaculate luxury vehicle andneeding to go through the trial and error tied to becoming a more mature, morerefined company.The outsiders were blown away by their first glimpse of the Tesla factory.Musk had T-E-S-L-A painted in enormous black letters on the side of thebuilding so that people driving by on the freeway, or flying above for that matter,were made well aware of the company’s presence. The inside of the factory, oncedressed in the dark, dingy tones of General Motors and Toyota, had taken on theMusk aesthetic. The floors received a white epoxy, the walls and beams werepainted white, the thirty-foot tall stamping machines were white, and then muchof the other machinery, like the teams of the robots, had been painted red,making the place look like an industrial version of Santa Claus’s workshop. Justas he did at SpaceX, Musk placed the desks of his engineers right on the factoryfloor, where they worked in an area cordoned off by rudimentary cubicledividers. Musk had a desk in this area as well.*The Model S launch event took place in a section of the factory where theyfinish off the cars. There’s a part of the floor with various grooves and bumpsthat the cars pass over, as technicians listen for any rattles. There’s also achamber where water can be sprayed at high pressure onto the car to check forleaks. For the very last inspection, the Model S cruises onto a raised platformmade out of bamboo, which, when coupled with lots of LED lighting, is meantto provide an abundant amount of contrast so that people can spot flaws on thebody. For the few first months that the Model S came off the line, Musk went tothis bamboo stage to inspect every vehicle. “He was down on all fours lookingup under the wheel well,” said Steve Jurvetson, the investor and Tesla boardmember.Hundreds of people had gathered around this stage to watch as the first dozenor so cars were presented to their owners. Many of the employees were factoryworkers who had once been part of the autoworkers’ union, lost their jobs whenthe NUMMI plant closed, and were now back at work again, making the car ofthe future. They waved American flags and wore red, white, and blue visors. Ahandful of the workers cried as the Model S sedans were lined up on the stage.Even Musk’s most cynical critics would have softened for a moment whilewatching the proceedings. Say what you will about Tesla receiving governmentmoney or hyping up the promise of the electric car, it was trying to do somethingbig and different, and people were getting hired by the thousands as a result.With machines humming in the background, Musk gave a brief speech and thenhanded the owners their keys. They drove off the bamboo platform and out thefactory doors, while the Tesla employees provided a standing ovation.Just four weeks earlier, SpaceX had flown cargo to the International SpaceStation and had its capsule returned to Earth—firsts all around for a privatecompany. That feat coupled with the launch of the Model S led to a rapidtransformation in the way the world outside of Silicon Valley perceived Musk.The guy who was always promising, promising, promising was doing—anddoing spectacular things. “I may have been optimistic with respect to the timingon some of these things, but I didn’t over-promise on the outcome,” Musk toldme during an interview after the Model S launch. “I have done everything I saidI was going to do.”Musk did not have Riley around to celebrate with and share in this run ofgood fortune. They had divorced, and Musk had begun to think about datingagain, if he could find the time. Even with this turmoil in his personal life,however, Musk had reached a point of calm that he had not felt in many years.“My main emotion is that there is a bit of weight off my shoulders,” he said atthe time. Musk took his boys to Maui to meet up with Kimbal and otherrelatives, marking his first real vacation in a number of years.It was right after this holiday that Musk let me have the first substantialglimpse into his life. Skin still peeling off his sunburnt arms, Musk met with meat the Tesla and SpaceX headquarters, at the Tesla design studio, and at aBeverley Hills screening of a documentary he had helped sponsor. The film,Baseball in the Time of Cholera, was good but grim and explored a choleraoutbreak in Haiti. It turned out that Musk had visited Haiti the previousChristmas, filling his jet with toys and MacBook Airs for an orphanage. BrynMooser, the codirector of the film, told me that during a barbecue Musk hadtaught the kids how to fire off model rockets and then later went to visit a villagedeeper in the jungle by traveling in a dugout canoe. After the screening, Muskand I hung out on the street for a bit away from the crowd. I noted aloud thateveryone wants to make him out as the Tony Stark character but that he didn’treally exude that “playboy drinking scotch while zooming through Afghanistanin an army convoy” vibe. He fired back, pointing to the Haitian canoe ride. “Igot wasted, too, on some drink they call the Zombie,” Musk said. He smiled andthen invited me to grab some drinks across the street at Mr. Chow to celebratethe movie. All seemed to be going well for Musk, and he savored the moment.This restful period did not last long and soon enough Tesla’s battle for survivalresumed. The company could only produce about ten sedans per week at theoutset and had thousands of back orders that it needed to fulfill. Short sellers,those investors who bet a company’s share price will fall, had taken hugepositions in Tesla, making it the most shorted stock out of one hundred of thelargest companies listed on the NASDAQ exchange. The naysayers expectednumerous Model S flaws to crop up and undermine the enthusiasm for the car, tothe point that people started canceling their orders in bulk. There were also hugedoubts that Tesla could ramp up production in a meaningful way and do soprofitably. In October 2012, the presidential hopeful Mitt Romney dubbed Tesla“a loser,” while slagging off a couple of other government-backed greentechnology companies (the solar panel maker Solyndra and Fisker) during adebate with Barack Obama.14While the doubters placed huge wagers on Tesla’s impending failure, Musk’sbluster mode engaged. He began talking about Tesla’s goals to become the mostprofitable major automobile maker in the world, with better margins than BMW.Then, in September 2012, he unveiled something that shocked both Tesla criticsand proponents alike. Tesla had secretly been building the first leg of a networkof charging stations. The company disclosed the location of six stations inCalifornia, Nevada, and Arizona and promised that hundreds more would be onthe way. Tesla intended to build a global charging network that would let ModelS owners making long drives pull off the highway and recharge very quickly.And they would be able to do so for free. In fact, Musk insisted that Teslaowners would soon be able to travel across the United States without spending apenny on fuel. Model S drivers would have no trouble finding these stations, notonly because the cars’ onboard computers would guide them to the nearest onebut because Musk and von Holzhausen had designed giant red and whitemonoliths to herald the appearance of the stations.The Supercharging stations, as Tesla called them, represented a hugeinvestment for the strapped company. An argument could easily be made thatspending money on this sort of thing at such a precarious moment in the ModelS and Tesla’s history was somewhere between daft and batshit crazy. SurelyMusk did not have the gall to try to revamp the very idea of the automobile andbuild an energy network at the same time with a budget equivalent to what Fordand ExxonMobil spend on their annual holiday parties. But that was the exactplan. Musk, Straubel, and others inside Tesla had mapped out this all-or-nothingplay long ago and built certain features into the Model S with the Superchargersin mind.*While the arrival of the Model S and the charging network garnered Tesla aton of headlines, it remained unclear if the positive press and good vibes wouldlast. Serious trade-offs had been made as Tesla rushed to get the Model S tomarket. The car had some spectacular, novel features. But everyone inside of thecompany knew that as far as luxury sedans went, the Model S did not match upfeature to feature with cars from BMW and Mercedes-Benz. The first fewthousand Model S cars, for example, would ship without the parking sensors andradar-assisted cruise control common on other high-end cars. “It was either hirea team of fifty people right away to make one of these things happen orimplement things as best and as fast as you could,” Javidan said.The subpar fit and finish also proved hard to explain. The early adopters couldtolerate a windshield wiper going haywire for a couple of days, but they wantedto see seats and visors that met the $100,000 price tag. While Tesla did its best tosource the highest-quality materials, it struggled at times to convince the topsuppliers to take the company seriously.15 “People were very suspect that wewould deliver one thousand Model Ss,” said von Holzhausen. “It was frustratingbecause we had the drive internally to make the car perfect but could not get thesame commitment externally. With something like the visor, we ended up havingto go to a third-rate supplier and then work on fixing the situation after the carhad already started shipping.” The cosmetic issues, though, were minorcompared to a tumultuous set of internal circumstances, revealed in detail herefor the first time, that threatened to bankrupt the company once again.Musk had hired George Blankenship, a former Apple executive, to run itsstores and service-center operations. At Apple, Blankenship worked just acouple of doors down from Steve Jobs and received credit for building much ofthe Apple Store strategy. When Tesla first hired Blankenship, the press andpublic were atwitter, anticipating that’d he do something spectacular and at oddswith the traditions of the automotive industry.Blankenship did some of that. He expanded Tesla’s number of storesthroughout the world and imbued them with that Apple Store vibe. Along withshowcasing the Model S, the Tesla stores sold hoodies and hats and had areas inthe back where kids would find crayons and Tesla coloring books. Blankenshipgave me a tour of the Tesla store on Santana Row, the glitzy shopping center inSan Jose. He came off as a warm, grandfatherly sort who saw Tesla as his chanceto make a difference. “The typical dealer wants to sell you a car on the spot toclear inventory off his lot,” Blankenship said. “The goal here is to develop arelationship with Tesla and electric vehicles.” Tesla, he said, wanted to turn theModel S into more than a car. Ideally it would be an object of desire just like theiPod and iPhone. Blankenship noted that Tesla had more than ten thousandreservations for the Model S at the time, the vast majority of which had arrivedwithout the customers test-driving the car. A lot of this early interest resultedfrom the aura surrounding Musk, who Blankenship said came off as similar toJobs but with a toned-down control-freak vibe. “This is the first place I haveworked that is going to change the world,” Blankenship said, taking a jab at thesometimes trivial nature of Apple’s gadgets.While Musk and Blankenship got along at first, their relationship fell apartduring the latter stages of 2012. Tesla did have a large number of reservations inwhich people put down $5,000 for the right to buy a Model S and get in thepurchase queue. But the company had struggled to turn these reservations intoactual sales. The reasons behind this problem remain unclear. It may have beenthat the complaints about the interior and the early kinks mentioned on the Teslaforums and message boards were causing concerns. Tesla also lacked financingoptions to soften the blow of buying a $100,000 car, while uncertaintysurrounded the resale market for the Model S. You might end up with the car ofthe future or you might spend six figures on a dud with a battery pack that losesits capacity, and with no secondary buyer. Tesla’s service centers at the timewere also terrible. The early cars were unreliable and customers were being sentin droves to centers unprepared to handle the volume. Many prospective Teslaowners likely wanted to hang out on the sidelines for a bit longer to make surethat the company would remain viable. As Musk put it, “The word of mouth onthe car sucked.”By the middle of February 2013, Tesla had fallen into a crisis state. If it couldnot convert its reservations to purchases quickly, its factory would sit idle,costing the company vast amounts of money. And if anyone caught wind of thefactory slowdown, Tesla’s shares would likely plummet, prospective ownerswould become even more cautious, and the short sellers would win. The severityof this problem had been hidden from Musk, but once he learned about it, heacted in his signature all-or-nothing fashion. Musk pulled people from recruiting,the design studio, engineering, finance, and wherever else he could find themand ordered them to get on the phone, call people with reservations, and closedeals. “If we don’t deliver these cars, we are fucked,” Musk told the employees.“So, I don’t care what job you were doing. Your new job is delivering cars.” Heplaced Jerome Guillen, a former Daimler executive, in charge of fixing theservice issues. Musk fired senior leaders whom he deemed subpar performersand promoted a flood of junior people who had been doing above-average work.He also made an announcement personally guaranteeing the resale price of theModel S. Customers would be able to resell their cars for the average going rateof similar luxury sedans with Musk putting his billions behind this pledge. Andthen Musk tried to orchestrate the ultimate fail-safe for Tesla just in case hismaneuvers did not work.During the first week of April, Musk reached out to his friend Larry Page atGoogle. According to people familiar with their discussion, Musk voiced hisconcerns about Tesla’s ability to survive the next few weeks. Not only werecustomers failing to convert their reservations to orders at the rate Musk hoped,but existing customers had also started to defer their orders as they heard aboutupcoming features and new color choices. The situation got so bad that Tesla hadto shut down its factory. Publicly, Tesla said it needed to conduct maintenance onthe factory, which was technically true, although the company would havesoldiered on had the orders been closing as expected. Musk explained all of thisto Page and then struck a handshake deal for Google to acquire Tesla.While Musk did not want to sell, the deal seemed like the only viable coursefor Tesla’s future. Musk’s biggest fear about an acquisition was that the newowner would not see Tesla’s goals through to their conclusion. He wanted tomake sure that the company would end up producing a mass-market electricvehicle. Musk proposed terms under which he would remain in control of Teslafor eight years or until it started pumping out a mass-market car. Musk alsoasked for access to $5 billion in capital for factory expansions. Some of Google’slawyers were put off by these demands, but Musk and Page continued to talkabout the deal. Given Tesla’s value at the time, it was thought that Google wouldneed to pay about $6 billion for the company.As Musk, Page, and Google’s lawyers debated the parameters of anacquisition, a miracle happened. The five hundred or so people whom Musk hadturned into car salesmen quickly sold a huge volume of cars. Tesla, which onlyhad a couple weeks of cash left in the bank, moved enough cars in the span ofabout fourteen days to end up with a blowout first fiscal quarter. Tesla stunnedWall Street on May 8, 2013, by posting its first-ever profit as a public company—$11 million—on $562 million in sales. It delivered 4,900 Model S sedansduring the period. This announcement sent Tesla’s shares soaring from about $30a share to $130 per share in July. Just a couple of weeks after revealing the first-quarter results, Tesla paid off its $465 million loan from the government earlyand with interest. Tesla suddenly appeared to have vast cash reserves at itsdisposal, and the short sellers were forced to take massive losses. The solidperformance of the stock increased consumers’ confidence, creating a virtuouscircle for Tesla. With cars selling and Tesla’s value rising, the deal with Googlewas no longer necessary, and Tesla had become too expensive to buy. The talkswith Google ended.*What transpired next was the Summer of Musk. Musk put his public relationsstaff on high alert, telling them that he wanted to try to have one Teslaannouncement per week. The company never quite lived up to that pace, but itdid issue statement after statement. Musk held a series of press conferences thataddressed financing for the Model S, the construction of more charging stations,and the opening of more retail stores. During one announcement, Musk notedthat Tesla’s charging stations were solar-powered and had batteries on-site tostore extra juice. “I was joking that even if there’s some zombie apocalypse,you’ll still be able to travel throughout the country using the Tesla Superchargersystem,” Musk said, setting the bar very high for CEOs at other automakers. Butthe biggest event by far was held in Los Angeles, where Tesla unveiled anothersecret feature of the Model S.In June 2013, Tesla cleared the prototype vehicles out of its Los Angelesdesign studio and invited Tesla owners and the media for a flashy evening soiree.Hundreds of people showed up, driving their pricey Model S sedans through thegrungy streets of Hawthorne and parking in between the design studio and theSpaceX factory. The studio had been converted into a lounge. The lighting wasdim, and the floor had been covered in AstroTurf and tiered to make plateauswhere people could mingle or plop down on couches. Women in tight blackdresses cruised through the crowd, serving drinks. Daft Punk’s “Get Lucky”played on the sound system. A stage had been built at the front of the room, butbefore Musk ascended it he mingled with the masses. It was clear that he hadbecome a rock star for Tesla owners—every bit the equivalent of Steve Jobs forthe Apple faithful. People surrounded him and asked to take pictures.Meanwhile, Straubel stood off to the side, often totally alone.After people had a couple of drinks, Musk fought through the crowd to thefront of the room, where old TV commercials projected onto a screen above thestage showed families stopping by Esso and Chevron stations. The kids were sohappy to see the Esso tiger mascot. “Gas is a weird thing to love,” Musk said.“Honestly.” That’s when he brought a Model S up onstage. A hole opened up inthe floor beneath the car. It had been possible all along, Musk said, to replace thebattery pack underneath the Model S in a matter of seconds—the company justhadn’t told anyone about this. Tesla would now start adding battery swapping atits charging stations as a quicker option to recharging. Someone could drive rightover a pit where a robot would take off the car’s battery pack and install a newone in ninety seconds, at a cost equivalent to filling up with a tank of gas. “Theonly decision that you have to make when you come to one of our Tesla stationsis do you prefer faster or free,” Musk said.*In the months that followed, a couple of events threatened to derail theSummer of Musk. The New York Times penned a withering review of the car andits charging stations, and a couple of the Model S sedans caught fire after beinginvolved in collisions. Disobeying conventional public relations wisdom, Muskwent after the reporter, using data pulled from the car to undermine thereviewer’s claims. Musk penned the feisty rebuttal himself, while on vacation inAspen with Kimbal, and friend and Tesla board member Antonio Gracias. “Atsome other company, it would be a public relations group putting something likethis together,” Gracias said. “Elon felt like it was the most important problemfacing Tesla at the time and that’s always what he deals with and how heprioritizes. It could kill the car and represented an existential threat against thebusiness. Have there been moments where his unconventional style in thesetypes of situations has made me cringe? Yes. But I trust that it will work out inthe end.” Musk applied a similar approach to dealing with the fires by declaringthe Model S the safest car in America in a press release and adding a titaniumunderbody shield and aluminum plates to the vehicle to deflect and destroydebris and keep the battery pack safe.16The fires, the occasional bad review—none of this had any effect on Tesla’ssales or share price. Musk’s star shone brighter and brighter as Tesla’s marketvalue ballooned to about half that of GM and Ford.Tesla held another press event in October 2014 that cemented Musk’s place asthe new titan of the auto industry. Musk unveiled a supercharged version of theModel S with two motors—one in the front and one in the back. It could go zeroto 60 in 3.2 seconds. The company had turned a sedan into a supercar. “It’s liketaking off from a carrier deck,” Musk said. “It’s just bananas.” Musk alsounveiled a new suite of software for the Model S that gave it autopilot functions.The car had radar to detect objects and warn of possible collisions and couldguide itself via GPS. “Later, you will be able to summon the car,” Musk said. “Itwill come to wherever you are. There’s also something else I would like to do.Many of our engineers will be hearing this in real time. I would like the chargeconnector to plug itself into the car, sort of like an articulating snake. I think wewill probably do something like that.”Thousands of people waited in line for hours to see Musk demonstrate thistechnology. Musk cracked jokes during the presentation and played off thecrowd’s enthusiasm. The man who had been awkward in front of media duringthe PayPal years had developed a unique, slick stagecraft. A woman standingnext to me in the crowd went weak in the knees when Musk first took the stage.A man to my other side said he wanted a Model X and had just offered $15,000to a friend to move up on the reservation list, so that he could end up with modelNo. 700. The enthusiasm coupled with Musk’s ability to generate attention wasemblematic of just how far the little automaker and its eccentric CEO had come.Rival car companies would kill to receive such interest and had basically beenleft dumbfounded as Tesla snuck up on them and delivered more than they hadever imagined possible.As the Model S fever gripped Silicon Valley, I visited Ford’s small researchand development lab in Palo Alto. The head of the lab at the time was aponytailed, sandal-wearing engineer named T. J. Giuli, who felt very jealous ofTesla. Inside of every Ford were dozens of computing systems made by differentcompanies that all had to speak to each other and work as one. It was a mess ofcomplexity that had evolved over time, and simplifying the situation wouldprove near impossible at this point, especially for a company like Ford, whichneeded to pump out hundreds of thousands of cars per year and could not affordto stop and reboot. Tesla, by contrast, got to start from scratch and make its ownsoftware the focus of the Model S. Giuli would have loved the same opportunity.“Software is in many ways the heart of the new vehicle experience,” he said.“From the powertrain to the warning chimes in the car, you’re using software tocreate an expressive and pleasing environment. The level of integration that thesoftware has into the rest of the Model S is really impressive. Tesla is abenchmark for what we do here.” Not long after this chat, Giuli left Ford tobecome an engineer at a stealth startup.There was little the mainstream auto industry could do to slow Tesla down.But that didn’t stop executives from trying to be difficult whenever possible.Tesla, for example, wanted to call its third-generation car the Model E, so that itslineup of vehicles would be the Model S, E, and X—another playful Musk gag.But Ford’s then CEO, Alan Mulally, blocked Tesla from using Model E, with thethreat of a lawsuit. “So I call up Mulally and I was like, ‘Alan, are you justfucking with us or are you really going to do a Model E?’” Musk said. “And I’mnot sure which is worse. You know? Like it would actually make more sense ifthey’re just fucking with us because if they actually come out with a Model E atthis point, and we’ve got the Model S and the X and Ford comes out with theModel E, it’s going to look ridiculous. So even though Ford did the Model T ahundred years ago, nobody thinks of ‘Model’ as being a Ford thing anymore. Soit would just feel like they stole it. Like why did you go steal Tesla’s E? Likeyou’re some sort of fascist army marching across the alphabet, some sort ofSesame Street robber. And he was like, ‘No, no, we’re definitely going to use it.’And I was like, ‘Oh, I don’t think that’s such a good idea because people aregoing to be confused because it’s not going to make sense. People aren’t used toFord having Model something these days. It’s usually called like the FordFusion.’ And he was like, no, his guys really want to use that. That’s terrible.”After that, Tesla registered the trademark for Model Y as another joke. “In fact,Ford called us up deadpan and said, ‘We see you’ve registered Model Y. Is thatwhat you’re going to use instead of the Model E?’” Musk said. “I’m like, ‘No,it’s a joke. S-E-X-Y. What does that spell?’ But trademark law is a dry professionit turns out.”*What Musk had done that the rival automakers missed or didn’t have themeans to combat was turn Tesla into a lifestyle. It did not just sell someone a car.It sold them an image, a feeling they were tapping into the future, a relationship.Apple did the same thing decades ago with the Mac and then again with the iPodand iPhone. Even those who were not religious about their affiliation to Applewere sucked into its universe once they bought the hardware and downloadedsoftware like iTunes.This sort of relationship is hard to pull off if you don’t control as much of thelifestyle as possible. PC makers that farmed their software out to Microsoft, theirchips to Intel, and their design to Asia could never make machines as beautifuland as complete as Apple’s. They also could not respond in time as Apple tookthis expertise to new areas and hooked people on its applications.You can see Musk’s embrace of the car as lifestyle in Tesla’s abandonment ofmodel years. Tesla does not designate cars as being 2014s or 2015s, and it alsodoesn’t have “all the 2014s in stock must go, go, go and make room for the newcars” sales. It produces the best Model S it can at the time, and that’s what thecustomer receives. This means that Tesla does not develop and hold on to abunch of new features over the course of the year and then unleash them in anew model all at once. It adds features one by one to the manufacturing linewhen they’re ready. Some customers may be frustrated to miss out on a featurehere and there. Tesla, however, manages to deliver most of the upgrades assoftware updates that everyone gets, providing current Model S owners withpleasant surprises.For the Model S owner, the all-electric lifestyle translates into a less hassledexistence. Instead of going to the gas station, you just plug the car in at night, arhythm familiar to anyone with a smartphone. The car will start charging rightaway or the owner can tap into the Model S’s software and schedule charging totake place late at night, when the cheapest electricity rates are available. Teslaowners not only dodge gas stations; they mostly get to skip out on visits tomechanics. A traditional vehicle needs oil and transmission fluid changes to dealwith all the friction and wear and tear produced by its thousands of movingparts. The simpler electric car design eliminates this type of maintenance. Boththe Roadster and the Model S also take advantage of what’s known asregenerative braking, which extends the life of the brakes. During stop-and-gosituations, the Tesla will brake by kicking the motor into reverse via softwareand slowing down the wheels instead of using brake pads and friction to clampthem down. The Tesla motor generates electricity during this process and funnelsit back to the batteries, which is why electric cars get better mileage in citytraffic. Tesla still recommends that owners bring in the Model S once a year for acheckup but that’s mostly to give the vehicle a once-over and make sure thatnone of the components seems to be wearing down prematurely.Even Tesla’s approach to maintenance is philosophically different from that ofthe traditional automotive industry. Most car dealers make the majority of theirprofits from servicing cars. They treat vehicles like a subscription service,expecting people to visit their service centers multiple times a year for manyyears. This is the main reason dealerships have fought to block Tesla fromselling its cars directly to consumers.* “The ultimate goal is to never have tobring your car back in after you buy it,” said Javidan. The dealers charge morethan independent mechanics but give people the peace of mind that their car isbeing worked on by a specialist for a particular make of vehicle. Tesla makes itsprofits off the initial sale of the car and then from some optional softwareservices. “I got the number ten Model S,” said Konstantin Othmer,17 the SiliconValley software whiz and entrepreneur. “It was an awesome car, but it had justabout every issue you might have read about in the forums. They would fix allthese things and decided to trailer the car back to the shop so that they didn’t addany miles to it. Then I went in for a one-year service, and they spruced upeverything so that the car was better than new. It was surrounded by velvet ropesin the service center. It was just beautiful.”Tesla’s model isn’t just about being an affront to the way carmakers anddealers do business. It’s a more subtle play on how electric cars represent a newway to think of automobiles. All car companies will soon follow Tesla’s lead andoffer some form of over-the-air updates to their vehicles. The practicality andscope of their updates will be limited, however. “You just can’t do an over-the-air sparkplug change or replacement of the timing belt,” said Javidan. “With agas car, you have to get under the hood at some point and that forces you back tothe dealership anyway. There’s no real incentive for Mercedes to say, ‘You don’tneed to bring the car in,’ because it’s not true.” Tesla also has the edge of havingdesigned so many of the key components for its cars in-house, including thesoftware running throughout the vehicle. “If Daimler wants to change the way agauge looks, it has to contact a supplier half a world away and then wait for aseries of approvals,” Javidan said. “It would take them a year to change the waythe ‘P’ on the instrument panel looks. At Tesla, if Elon decides he wants apicture of a bunny rabbit on every gauge for Easter, he can have that done in acouple of hours.”*As Tesla turned into a star of modern American industry, its closest rivalswere obliterated. Fisker Automotive filed for bankruptcy and was bought by aChinese auto parts company in 2014. One of its main investors was Ray Lane, aventure capitalist at Kleiner Perkins Caufield & Byers. Lane had cost KleinerPerkins a chance to invest in Tesla and then backed Fisker—a disastrous movethat tarnished the firm’s brand and Lane’s reputation. Better Place was anotherstartup that enjoyed more hype than Fisker and Tesla put together and raisedclose to $1 billion to build electric cars and battery-swapping stations.18 Thecompany never produced much of anything and declared bankruptcy in 2013.The guys like Straubel who had been at Tesla since the beginning are quick toremind people that the chance to build an awesome electric car had been there allalong. “It’s not really like there was a rush to this idea, and we got there first,”Straubel said. “It is frequently forgotten in hindsight that people thought this wasthe shittiest business opportunity on the planet. The venture capitalists were allrunning for the hills.” What separated Tesla from the competition was thewillingness to charge after its vision without compromise, a completecommitment to execute to Musk’s standards.11THE UNIFIED FIELD THEORY OF ELONMUSKTHE RIVE BROTHERS USED TO BE LIKE A TECHNOLOGY GANG. Inthe late 1990s, they would jump on skateboards and zip around the streets ofSanta Cruz, knocking on the doors of businesses and asking if they needed anyhelp managing their computing systems. The young men, who had all grown upin South Africa with their cousin Elon Musk, soon decided there must be aneasier way to hawk their technology smarts than going door-to-door. They wrotesome software that allowed them to take control of their clients’ systems fromafar and to automate many of the standard tasks that companies required, such asinstalling updates for applications. The software became the basis of a newcompany called Everdream, and the brothers promoted their technology in somecompelling ways. Billboards went up around Silicon Valley in which LyndonRive, a buff underwater hockey player,* stood naked with his pants around hisankles, while holding a computer in front of his crotch. Up above his photo, thetagline for the ad read, “Don’t get caught with your systems down.”By 2004, Lyndon and his brothers, Peter and Russ, wanted a new challenge—something that not only made them money but, as Lyndon put it, “something thatmade us feel good every single day.” Near the end of the summer that year,Lyndon rented an RV and set out with Musk for the Black Rock desert and themadness of Burning Man. The men used to go on adventures all the time whenthey were kids and looked forward to the long drive as a way to catch up andbrainstorm about their businesses. Musk knew that Lyndon and his brothers wereangling for something big. While driving, Musk turned to Lyndon and suggestedthat he look into the solar energy market. Musk had studied it a bit and thoughtthere were some opportunities that others had missed. “He said it was a goodplace to get into,” Lyndon recalled.After arriving at Burning Man, Musk, a regular at the event, and his familywent through their standard routines. They set up camp and prepped their art carfor a drive. This year, they had cut the roof off a small car, elevated the steeringwheel, shifted it to the right so that it was placed near the middle of the vehicle,and replaced the seats with a couch. Musk took a lot of pleasure in driving thefunky creation.19 “Elon likes to see the rawness of people there,” said Bill Lee,his longtime friend. “It’s his version of camping. He wants to go and drive theart cars and see installations and the great light shows. He dances a lot.” Muskput on a display of strength and determination at the event as well. There was awooden pole perhaps thirty feet high with a dancing platform at the top. Dozensof people tried and failed to climb it, and then Musk gave it a go. “His techniquewas very awkward, and he should not have succeeded,” said Lyndon. “But hehugged it and just inched up and inched up until he reached the top.”Musk and the Rives left Burning Man enthused. The Rives decided to becomeexperts on the solar industry and find the opportunity in the market. They spenttwo years studying solar technology and the dynamics of the business, readingresearch reports, interviewing people, and attending conferences along the way.It was during the Solar Power International conference that the Rive brothersreally hit on what their business model might be. Only about two thousand*people showed up for the event, and they all fit into a couple of hotel conferencerooms for presentations and panels. During one open discussion session,representatives from a handful of the world’s largest solar installers were sittingonstage, and the moderator asked what they were doing to make solar panelsmore affordable for consumers. “They all gave the same answer,” Lyndon said.“They said, ‘We’re waiting for the cost of the panels to drop.’ None of themwere taking ownership of the problem.”At the time, it was not easy for consumers to get solar panels on their houses.You had to be very proactive, acquiring the panels and finding someone else toinstall them. The consumer paid up front and had to make an educated guess asto whether or not his or her house even got enough sunshine to make the ordealworthwhile. On top of all this, people were reluctant to buy panels, knowing thatthe next year’s models would be more efficient.The Rives decided to make buying into the solar proposition much simplerand formed a company called SolarCity in 2006. Unlike other companies, theywould not manufacture their own solar panels. Instead they would buy them andthen do just about everything else in-house. They built software for analyzing acustomer’s current energy bill and the position of their house and the amount ofsunlight it typically received to determine if solar made sense for the property.They built up their own teams to install the solar panels. And they created afinancing system in which the customer did not need to pay anything up front forthe panels. The consumer leased the panels over a number of years at a fixedmonthly rate. Consumers got a lower bill overall, they were no longer subject tothe constantly rising rates of typical utilities, and, if they sold their house, theycould pass the contract to the new owner. At the end of the lease, the homeownercould also upgrade to new, more efficient panels. Musk had helped his cousinscome up with this structure and become the company’s chairman and its largestshareholder, owning about a third of SolarCity.Six years later, SolarCity had become the largest installer of solar panels in thecountry. The company had lived up to its initial goals and made installing thepanels painless. Rivals were rushing to mimic its business model. SolarCity hadbenefited along the way from a collapse in the price of solar panels, whichoccurred after Chinese panel manufacturers flooded the market with product. Ithad also expanded its business from consumers to businesses with companieslike Intel, Walgreens, and Wal-Mart signing up for large installations. In 2012,SolarCity went public and its shares soared higher in the months that followed.By 2014, SolarCity was valued at close to $7 billion.During the entire period of SolarCity’s growth, Silicon Valley had dumpedhuge amounts of money into green technology companies with mostly disastrousresults. There were the automotive flubs like Fisker and Better Place, andSolyndra, the solar cell maker that conservatives loved to hold up as a cautionarytale of government spending and cronyism run amok. Some of the most famousventure capitalists in history, like John Doerr and Vinod Khosla, were rippedapart by the local and national press for their failed green investments. The storywas almost always the same. People had thrown money at green technologybecause it seemed like the right thing to do, not because it made business sense.From new kinds of energy storage systems to electric cars and solar panels, thetechnology never quite lived up to its billing and required too much governmentfunding and too many incentives to create a viable market. Much of thiscriticism was fair. It’s just that there was this Elon Musk guy hanging aroundwho seemed to have figured something out that everyone else had missed. “Wehad a blanket rule against investing in clean-tech companies for about a decade,”said Peter Thiel, the PayPal cofounder and venture capitalist at Founders Fund.“On the macro level, we were right because clean tech as a sector was quite bad.But on the micro level, it looks like Elon has the two most successful clean-techcompanies in the U.S. We would rather explain his success as being a fluke.There’s the whole Iron Man thing in which he’s presented as a cartoonishbusinessman—this very unusual animal at the zoo. But there is now a degree towhich you have to ask whether his success is an indictment on the rest of us whohave been working on much more incremental things. To the extent that theworld still doubts Elon, I think it’s a reflection on the insanity of the world andnot on the supposed insanity of Elon.”SolarCity, like the rest of Musk’s ventures, did not represent a businessopportunity so much as it represented a worldview. Musk had decided long ago—in his very rational manner—that solar made sense. Enough solar energy hitsthe Earth’s surface in about an hour to equal a year’s worth of worldwide energyconsumption from all sources put together.20 Improvements in the efficiency ofsolar panels have been happening at a steady clip. If solar is destined to bemankind’s preferred energy source in the future, then this future ought to bebrought about as quickly as possible.Starting in 2014, SolarCity began to make the full extent of its ambitions moreobvious. First, the company began selling energy storage systems. These unitswere built through a partnership with Tesla Motors. Battery packs weremanufactured at the Tesla factory and stacked inside refrigerator-sized metalcases. Businesses and consumers could purchase these storage systems toaugment their solar panel arrays. Once they were charged up, the battery unitscould be used to help large customers get through the night or during unexpectedoutages. Customers could also pull from the batteries instead of the grid duringpeak energy use periods, when utilities tend to tack on extra charges. WhileSolarCity rolled the storage units out in a modest, experimental fashion, thecompany expects most of its customers to buy the systems in the years ahead tosmooth out the solar experience and help people and businesses leave theelectrical grid altogether.Then, in June 2014, SolarCity acquired a solar cell maker called Silevo for$200 million. This deal marked a huge shift in strategy. SolarCity would nolonger buy its solar panels. It would make them at a factory in New York State.Silevo’s cells were said to be 18.5 percent efficient at turning light into energy,compared to 14.5 percent for most cells, and the expectations were that thecompany could reach 24 percent efficiency with the right manufacturingtechniques. Buying, rather than manufacturing, solar panels had been one ofSolarCity’s great advantages. It could capitalize on the glut in the solar cellmarket and avoid the large capital expenditures tied to building and runningfactories. With 110,000 customers, however, SolarCity had started to consume somany solar panels that it needed to ensure a consistent supply and price. “We arecurrently installing more solar than most of the companies are manufacturing,”said Peter Rive, the cofounder and chief technology officer at SolarCity. “If wedo the manufacturing ourselves and take advantage of some different technology,our costs will be lower—and this business has always been about lowering thecosts.”After adding the leases, the storage units, and the solar cell manufacturingtogether, it became clear to close observers of SolarCity that the company hadmorphed into something resembling a utility. It had built out a network of solarsystems all under its control and managed by the company’s software. By theend of 2015, SolarCity expects to have installed 2 gigawatts’ worth of solarpanels, producing 2.8 terawatt-hours of electricity per year. “This would put uson a path to fulfill our goal to become one of the largest suppliers of electricityin the United States,” the company said after announcing these figures in aquarterly earnings statement. The reality is that SolarCity accounts for a tinyfraction of the United States’ annual energy consumption and has a long way togo to become a major supplier of electricity in the country. There can, however,be little doubt that Musk intends for the company to be a dominant force in thesolar industry and in the energy industry overall.What’s more, SolarCity is a key part of what can be thought of as the unifiedfield theory of Musk. Each one of his businesses is interconnected in the shortterm and the long term. Tesla makes battery packs that SolarCity can then sell toend customers. SolarCity supplies Tesla’s charging stations with solar panels,helping Tesla to provide free recharging to its drivers. Newly minted Model Sowners regularly opt to begin living the Musk Lifestyle and outfit their homeswith solar panels. Tesla and SpaceX help each other as well. They exchangeknowledge around materials, manufacturing techniques, and the intricacies ofoperating factories that build so much stuff from the ground up.For most of their histories, SolarCity, Tesla, and SpaceX have been the clearunderdogs in their respective markets and gone to war against deep-pocketed,entrenched competitors. The solar, automotive, and aerospace industries remainlarded down by regulation and bureaucracy, which favors incumbents. To peoplein these industries Musk came off as a wide-eyed technologist who could beeasily dismissed and ridiculed and who, as a competitor, fell somewhere on thespectrum between annoying and full of shit. The incumbents did their usualthing using their connections in Washington to make life as miserable as possibleon all three of Musk’s companies, and they were pretty good at it.As of 2012, Musk Co. turned into a real threat, and it became harder to go atSolarCity, Tesla, or SpaceX as individual companies. Musk’s star power hadsurged and washed over all three ventures at the same time. When Tesla’s sharesjumped, quite often SolarCity’s did, too. Similar optimistic feelings accompaniedsuccessful SpaceX launches. They proved Musk knew how to accomplish themost difficult of things, and investors seemed to buy in more to the risks Musktook with his other enterprises. The executives and lobbyists of aerospace,energy, and automotive companies were suddenly going up against a rising starof big business—an industrialist celebrity. Some of Musk’s opponents started tofear being on the wrong side of history or at least the wrong side of his glow.Others began playing really dirty.Musk has spent years buttering up the Democrats. He’s visited the WhiteHouse several times and has the ear of President Obama. Musk, however, is nota blind loyalist. He first and foremost backs the beliefs behind Musk Co. andthen uses any pragmatic means at his disposal to advance his cause. Musk playsthe part of the ruthless industrialist with a fierce capitalist streak better than mostRepublicans and has the credentials to back it up and earn support. Thepoliticians in states like Alabama looking to protect some factory jobs forLockheed or in New Jersey trying to help out the automobile dealership lobbynow have to contend with a guy who has an employment and manufacturingempire spread across the entire United States. As of this writing, SpaceX had afactory in Los Angeles, a rocket test facility in central Texas, and had just startedconstruction on a spaceport in South Texas. (SpaceX does a lot of business atexisting launch sites in California and Florida, as well.) Tesla had its car factoryin Silicon Valley, the design center in Los Angeles, and had started constructionon a battery factory in Nevada. (Politicians from Nevada, Texas, California, NewMexico, and Arizona threw themselves at Musk over the battery factory, withNevada ultimately winning the business by offering Tesla $1.4 billion inincentives. This event confirmed not only Musk’s soaring celebrity but also hisunmatched ability to raise funds.) SolarCity has created thousands of white-andblue-collar clean-tech jobs, and it will create manufacturing jobs at the solarpanel factory that’s being built in Buffalo, New York. All together, Musk Co.employed about fifteen thousand people at the end of 2014. Far from stoppingthere, the plan for Musk Co. calls for tens of thousands of more jobs to becreated on the back of ever more ambitious products.Tesla’s primary focus throughout 2015 will be bringing the Model X tomarket. Musk expects the SUV to sell at least as well as the Model S and wantsTesla’s factories to be capable of making 100,000 cars per year by the end of2015 to keep up with demand for both vehicles. The major downsideaccompanying the Model X is its price. The SUV will start at the same loftyprices as the Model S, which limits the potential customer base. The hope,though, is that the Model X turns into the luxury vehicle of choice for familiesand solidifies the Tesla brand’s connection with women. Musk has pledged thatthe Supercharger network, service centers, and the battery-swap stations will bebuilt out even more in 2015 to greet the arrival of the new vehicle. Beyond theModel X, Tesla has started work on the second version of the Roadster, talkedabout making a truck, and, in all seriousness, has begun modeling a type ofsubmarine car that could transition from road to water. Musk paid $1 million forthe Lotus Esprit that Roger Moore drove underwater in The Spy Who Loved Meand wants to prove that such a vehicle can be done. “Maybe we’ll make two orthree, but it wouldn’t be more than that,” Musk told the Independent newspaper.“I think the market for submarine cars is quite small.”At the opposite end of the sales spectrum, or so Musk hopes, will be Tesla’sthird-generation car, or the Model 3. Due out in 2017, this four-door car wouldcome in around $35,000 and be the real measure of Tesla’s impact on the world.The company hopes to sell hundreds of thousands of the Model 3 and makeelectric cars truly mainstream. For comparison, BMW sells about 300,000 Minisand 500,000 of its BMW 3 Series vehicles per year. Tesla would look to matchthose figures. “I think Tesla is going to make a lot of cars,” Musk said. “If wecontinue on the current growth rate, I think Tesla will be one of the mostvaluable companies in the world.”Tesla already consumes a huge portion of the world’s lithium ion batterysupply and will need far more batteries to produce the Model 3. This is why, in2014, Musk announced plans to build what he dubbed the Gigafactory, or theworld’s largest lithium ion manufacturing facility. Each Gigafactory will employabout 6,500 people and help Tesla meet a variety of goals. It should first allowTesla to keep up with the battery demand created by its cars and the storage unitssold by SolarCity. Tesla also expects to be able to lower the costs of its batterieswhile improving their energy density. It will build the Gigafactory in conjunctionwith longtime battery partner Panasonic, but it will be Tesla that is running thefactory and fine-tuning its operations. According to Straubel, the battery packscoming out of the Gigafactory should be dramatically cheaper and better than theones built today, allowing Tesla not only to hit the $35,000 price target for theModel 3 but also to pave the way for electric vehicles with 500-plus miles ofrange.If Tesla actually can deliver an affordable car with 500 miles of range, it willhave built what many people in the auto industry insisted for years wasimpossible. To do that while also constructing a worldwide network of freecharging stations, revamping the way cars are sold, and revolutionizingautomotive technology would be an exceptional feat in the history of capitalism.In early 2014, Tesla raised $2 billion by selling bonds. Tesla’s ability to raisemoney from eager investors was a newfound luxury. Tesla had bordered onbankruptcy for much of its existence and been one major technical gaffe fromobsolescence at all times. The money coupled with Tesla’s still-rising share priceand strong sales has put the company in a position to open lots of new stores andservice centers while advancing its manufacturing capabilities. “We don’tnecessarily need all of the money for the Gigafactory right now, but I decided toraise it in advance because you never know when there will be some bloodymeltdown,” Musk said. “There could be external factors or there could be someunexpected recall and then suddenly we need to raise money on top of dealingwith that. I feel a bit like my grandmother. She lived through the GreatDepression and some real hard times. Once you’ve been through that, it stayswith you for a long time. I’m not sure it ever leaves really. So, I do feel joy now,but there’s still that nagging feeling that it might all go away. Even later in lifewhen my grandmother knew there was really no possibility of her going hungry,she always had this thing about food. With Tesla, I decided to raise a hugeamount of money just in case something terrible happens.”Musk felt optimistic enough about Tesla’s future to talk to me about some ofhis more whimsical plans. He hopes to redesign the Tesla headquarters in PaloAlto, a change employees would welcome. The building, with its tiny, 1980s-eralobby and a kitchen that can barely handle a few people making cereal21 at thesame time, has none of the perks of a typical Silicon Valley darling. “I think ourTesla headquarters looks like crap,” Musk said. “We’re going to spruce thingsup. Not to sort of the Google level. You have to be like making money hand overfist in order to be able to spend money the way that Google does. But we’regoing to make our headquarters much nicer and put in a restaurant.” Naturally,Musk had ideas for some mechanical enhancements as well. “Everybody aroundhere has slides in their lobbies,” he said. “I’m actually wondering about puttingin a roller coaster—like a functional roller coaster at the factory in Fremont.You’d get in, and it would take you around factory but also up and down. Whoelse has a roller coaster? I’m thinking about doing that with SpaceX, too. Thatone might be even bigger since SpaceX has like ten buildings now. It wouldprobably be really expensive, but I like the idea of it.”What’s fascinating is that Musk remains willing to lose it all. He doesn’t wantto build just one Gigafactory but several. And he needs these facilities to be builtquickly and flawlessly, so that they’re cranking out massive quantities ofbatteries right as the Model 3 arrives. If need be, Musk will build a secondGigafactory to compete with the Nevada site and place his own employees incompetition with each other in a race to make the batteries first. “We’re notreally trying to sort of yank anyone’s chain here,” Musk said. “It’s just like thisthing needs to be completed on time. If we suddenly find that we’re leveling theground and laying the foundation and we’re on a bloody Indian burial ground,then fuck. We can’t say, ‘Oh shit. Let’s go back to the other place that we werethinking about and get a six-month reset.’ Six months for this factory is a hugedeal. Do the basic math and it’s more than a billion dollars a month in lostrevenue,* assuming we use it to capacity. From a different standpoint, if wespend all the money to prepare the car factory in Fremont to triple the volumefrom 150,000 per year to 450,000 or 500,000 cars and hire and train all thepeople, and we’re just sitting there waiting for the factory to come on line, we’dbe burning money like it was going out of fashion. I think that could kill thecompany.“A six-month offset would be like, like Gallipoli. You have to make sure youcharge right after the bombardment. Don’t fucking sit around for two hours sothat the Turks can go back in the trenches. Timing is important. We have to doeverything we can to minimize the timing risk.”What Musk struggles to fathom is why other automakers with deeper pocketsaren’t making similar moves. At a minimum, Tesla seems to have influencedconsumers and the auto industry enough for there to be an expected surge indemand for electric vehicles. “I think we have moved the needle for almostevery car company,” Musk said. “Just the twenty-two thousand cars we sold in2013 had a highly leveraged effect in pushing the industry toward sustainabletechnology.” It’s true that the supply for lithium ion batteries is alreadyconstrained, and Tesla looks like the only company addressing the problem in ameaningful way.“The competitors are all sort of pooh-poohing the Gigafactory,” Musk said.“They think it’s a stupid idea, that the battery supplier should just go buildsomething like that. But I know all the suppliers, and I can tell you that theydon’t like the idea of spending several billion dollars on a battery factory. You’vegot a chicken-and-egg problem where the car companies are not going to committo a giant volume because they’re not sure you can sell enough electric cars. So,I know we can’t get enough lithium ion batteries unless we build this bloodyfactory, and I know no one else is building this thing.”There’s the potential that Tesla is setting itself up to capitalize on a situationlike the one Apple found itself in when it first introduced the iPhone. Apple’srivals spent the initial year after the iPhone’s release dismissing the product.Once it became clear Apple had a hit, the competitors had to catch up. Even withthe device right in their hands, it took companies like HTC and Samsung yearsto produce anything comparable. Other once-great companies like Nokia andBlackBerry didn’t withstand the shock. If, and it’s a big if, Tesla’s Model 3turned into a massive hit—the thing that everyone with enough money wantedbecause buying something else would just be paying for the past—then the rivalautomakers would be in a terrible bind. Most of the car companies dabbling inelectric vehicles continue to buy bulky, off-the-shelf batteries rather thandeveloping their own technology. No matter how much they wanted to respondto the Model 3, the automakers would need years to come up with a realchallenger and even then they might not have a ready supply of batteries for theirvehicles.“I think it is going to be a bit like that,” Musk said. “When will the first non-Tesla Gigafactory get built? Probably no sooner than six years from now. Thebig car companies are so derivative. They want to see it work somewhere elsebefore they will approve the project and move forward. They’re probably morelike seven years away. But I hope I’m wrong.”Musk speaks about the cars, solar panels, and batteries with such passion thatit’s easy to forget they are more or less sideline projects. He believes in thetechnologies to the extent that he thinks they’re the right things to pursue for thebetterment of mankind. They’ve also brought him fame and fortune. Musk’sultimate goal, though, remains turning humans into an interplanetary species.This may sound silly to some, but there can be no doubt that this is Musk’sraison d’être. Musk has decided that man’s survival depends on setting upanother colony on another planet and that he should dedicate his life to makingthis happen.Musk is now quite rich on paper. He was worth about $10 billion at the timeof this writing. When he started SpaceX more than a decade ago, however, hehad far less capital at his disposal. He didn’t have the fuck-you money of a JeffBezos, who handed his space company Blue Origin a kingly pile of cash andasked it to make Bezos’s dreams come true. If Musk wanted to get to Mars, hewould have to earn it by building SpaceX into a real business. This all seems tohave worked in Musk’s favor. SpaceX has learned to make cheap and effectiverockets and to push the limits of aerospace technology.In the near term, SpaceX will begin testing its ability to take people intospace. It wants to perform a manned test flight by 2016 and to fly astronauts tothe International Space Station for NASA the next year. The company will alsolikely make a major move into building and selling satellites, which would markan expansion into one of the most lucrative parts of the aerospace business.Along with these efforts, SpaceX has been testing the Falcon Heavy—its giantrocket capable of flying the biggest payloads in the world—and its reusable-rocket technology. In early 2015, SpaceX almost managed to land the first stageof its rocket on a platform in the ocean. Once it succeeds, it will beginperforming tests on land.In 2014, SpaceX also began construction on its own spaceport in South Texas.It has acquired dozens of acres where it plans to construct a modern rocketlaunch facility unlike anything the world has seen. Musk wants to automate agreat deal of the launch process, so that the rockets can be refueled, stood up,and fired on their own with computers handling the safety procedures. SpaceXwants to fly rockets several times a month for its business, and having its ownspaceport should help speed up such capabilities. Getting to Mars will require aneven more impressive set of skills and technology.“We need to figure out how to launch multiple times a day,” Musk said. “Thething that’s important in the long run is establishing a self-sustaining base onMars. In order for that to work—in order to have a self-sustaining city on Mars—there would need to be millions of tons of equipment and probably millions ofpeople. So how many launches is that? Well, if you send up 100 people at a time,which is a lot to go on such a long journey, you’d need to do 10,000 flights to getto a million people. So 10,000 flights over what period of time? Given that youcan only really depart for Mars once every two years, that means you wouldneed like forty or fifty years.“And then I think for each flight that departs to Mars you want to sort oflaunch the spacecraft into orbit and then have it be in a parking orbit and refuelits tanks with propellant. Essentially, the spacecraft would use a bunch of itspropellant to get to orbit, but then you send up a tanker spacecraft to fill up thepropellant tanks of the spacecraft so that it can depart for Mars at high speed andcan do so and get there in three months instead of six months and with a largepayload. I don’t have a detailed plan for Mars but I know of something at leastthat would work, which is sort of this all-methane system with a big booster, aspacecraft, and a tanker potentially. I think SpaceX will have developed abooster and spaceship in the 2025 time frame capable of taking large quantitiesof people and cargo to Mars.“The thing that’s important is to reach an economic threshold around the costper person for a trip to Mars. If it costs $1 billion per person, there will be noMars colony. At around $1 million or $500,000 per person, I think it’s highlylikely that there will be a self-sustaining Martian colony. There will be enoughpeople interested who will sell their stuff on Earth and move. It’s not abouttourism. It’s like people coming to America back in the New World days. Youmove, get a job there, and make things work. If you solve the transport problem,it’s not that hard to make a pressurized transparent greenhouse to live in. But ifyou can’t get there in the first place, it doesn’t matter.“Eventually, you’d need to heat Mars up if you want it to be an Earthlikeplanet, and I don’t have a plan for that. That would take a long time in the best ofcircumstances. It would probably take, I don’t know, somewhere between acentury and a millennium. There’s zero chance of it being terraformed andEarthlike in my lifetime. Not zero, but 0.001 percent chance, and you wouldhave to take real drastic measures with Mars.”*Musk spent months pacing around his home in Los Angeles late at nightthinking about these plans for Mars and bouncing them off Riley, whom heremarried near the end of 2012.* “I mean, there aren’t that many people you cantalk to about this sort of thing,” Musk said. These chats included Muskdaydreaming aloud about becoming the first man to set foot on the Red Planet.“He definitely wants to be the first man on Mars,” Riley said. “I have beggedhim not to be.” Perhaps Musk enjoys teasing his wife or maybe he’s playing coy,but he denied this ambition during one of our late-night chats. “I would only beon the first trip to Mars if I was confident that SpaceX would be fine if I die,” hesaid. “I’d like to go, but I don’t have to go. The point is not about me visitingMars but about enabling large numbers of people to go to the planet.” Musk maynot even go into space. He does not plan to participate in SpaceX’s upcominghuman test flights. “I don’t think that would be wise,” he said. “It would be likethe head of Boeing being a test pilot for a new plane. It’s not the right thing forSpaceX or the future of space exploration. I might be on there if it’s been flyingfor three or four years. Honestly, if I never go to space, that will be okay. Thepoint is to maximize the probable life span of humanity.”It’s difficult to gauge just how seriously the average person takes Musk whenhe talks like this. A few years ago, most people would have lumped him into thecategory of people who hype up jet packs and robots and whatever else SiliconValley decided to fixate on for the moment. Then Musk filed away oneaccomplishment after another, transforming himself from big talker to one ofSilicon Valley’s most revered doers. Thiel has watched Musk go through thismaturation—from the driven but insecure CEO of PayPal to a confident CEOwho commands the respect of thousands. “I think there are ways he hasdramatically improved over time,” said Thiel. Most impressive to Thiel has beenMusk’s ability to find bright, ambitious people and lure them to his companies.“He has the most talented people in the aerospace industry working for him, andthe same case can be made for Tesla, where, if you’re a talented mechanicalengineer who likes building cars, then you’re going to Tesla because it’sprobably the only company in the U.S. where you can do interesting new things.Both companies were designed with this vision of motivating a critical mass oftalented people to work on inspiring things.” Thiel thinks Musk’s goal of gettinghumans to Mars should be taken seriously and believes it gives the public hope.Not everyone will identify with the mission but the fact that there’s someone outthere pushing exploration and our technical abilities to their limits is important.“The goal of sending a man to Mars is so much more inspiring than what otherpeople are trying to do in space,” Thiel said. “It’s this going-back-to-the-futureidea. There’s been this long wind-down of the space program, and people haveabandoned the optimistic visions of the future that we had in the early 1970s.SpaceX shows there is a way toward bringing back that future. There’s greatvalue in what Elon is doing.”The true believers came out in full force in August 2013 when Musk unveiledsomething called the Hyperloop. Billed as a new mode of transportation, thismachine was a large-scale pneumatic tube like the ones used to send mail aroundoffices. Musk proposed linking cities like Los Angeles and San Francisco via anelevated version of this kind of tube that would transport people and cars inpods. Similar ideas had been proposed before, but Musk’s creation had someunique elements. He called for the tube to run under low pressure and for thepods to float on a bed of air produced by skis at their base. Each pod would bethrust forward by an electromagnetic pulse, and motors placed throughout thetube would give the pods added boosts as needed. These mechanisms could keepthe pods going at 800 mph, allowing someone to travel from Los Angeles to SanFrancisco in about thirty minutes. The whole thing would, of course, be solar-powered and aimed at linking cities less than a thousand miles apart. “It makessense for things like L.A. to San Francisco, New York to D.C., New York toBoston,” Musk said at the time. “Over one thousand miles, the tube cost starts tobecome prohibitive, and you don’t want tubes every which way. You don’t wantto live in Tube Land.”Musk had been thinking about the Hyperloop for a number of months,describing it to friends in private. The first time he talked about it to anyoneoutside of his inner circle was during one of our interviews. Musk told me thatthe idea originated out of his hatred for California’s proposed high-speed railsystem. “The sixty-billion-dollar bullet train they’re proposing in Californiawould be the slowest bullet train in the world at the highest cost per mile,” Musksaid. “They’re going for records in all the wrong ways.” California’s high-speedrail is meant to allow people to go from Los Angeles to San Francisco in abouttwo and a half hours upon its completion in—wait for it—2029. It takes about anhour to fly between the cities today and five hours to drive, placing the trainright in the zone of mediocrity, which particularly gnawed at Musk. He insistedthe Hyperloop would cost about $6 billion to $10 billion, go faster than a plane,and let people drive their cars onto a pod and drive out into a new city.At the time, it seemed that Musk had dished out the Hyperloop proposal justto make the public and legislators rethink the high-speed train. He didn’t actuallyintend to build the thing. It was more that he wanted to show people that morecreative ideas were out there for things that might actually solve problems andpush the state forward. With any luck, the high-speed rail would be canceled.Musk said as much to me during a series of e-mails and phone calls leading up tothe announcement. “Down the road, I might fund or advise on a Hyperloopproject, but right now I can’t take my eye off the ball at either SpaceX or Tesla,”he wrote.Musk’s tune, however, started to change after he released the paper detailingthe Hyperloop. Bloomberg Businessweek had the first story on it, and themagazine’s Web server began melting down as people stormed the website toread about the invention. Twitter went nuts as well. About an hour after Muskreleased the information, he held a conference call to talk about the Hyperloop,and somewhere in between our numerous earlier chats and that moment, he’ddecided to build the thing, telling reporters that he would consider making atleast a prototype to prove that the technology could work. Some people had theirfun with all of this. “Billionaire unveils imaginary space train,” teasedValleywag. “We love Elon Musk’s nutso determination—there was certainly atime when electric cars and private space flight seemed silly, too. But what’ssillier is treating this as anything other than a very rich man’s wild imagination.”Unlike its early Tesla-bashing days, Valleywag was now the minority voice.People seemed mainly to believe Musk could do it. The depth to which peoplebelieved it, I think, surprised Musk and forced him to commit to the prototype.In a weird life-imitating-art moment, Musk really had become the closest thingthe world had to Tony Stark, and he could not let his adoring public down.Shortly after the release of the Hyperloop plans, Shervin Pishevar, an investorand friend of Musk’s, brought the detailed specifications for the technology withhim during a ninety-minute meeting with President Obama at the White House.“The president fell in love with the idea,” Pishevar said. The president’s staffstudied the documents and arranged a one-on-one with Musk and Obama inApril 2014. Since then, Pishevar, Kevin Brogan, and others, have formed acompany called Hyperloop Technologies Inc. with the hopes of building the firstleg of the Hyperloop between Los Angeles and Las Vegas. In theory, peoplewould be able to hop between the two cities in about ten minutes. Nevadasenator Harry Reid has been briefed on the idea as well, and efforts are underway to buy the land rights alongside Interstate 15 that would make the high-speed transport possible.For employees like Gwynne Shotwell and J. B. Straubel, working with Muskmeans helping develop these sorts of wonderful technologies in relativeobscurity. They’re the steady hands that will forever be expected to stay in theshadows. Shotwell has been a consistent presence at SpaceX almost since dayone, pushing the company forward and suppressing her ego to ensure that Muskgets all the attention he desires. If you’re Shotwell and truly believe in the causeof sending people to Mars, then the mission takes precedence over personaldesires. Straubel, likewise, has been the constant at Tesla—a go-between whomother employees could rely on to carry messages to Musk, and the guy whoknows everything about the cars. Despite his stature at the company, Straubelwas one of several longtime employees who confessed they were nervous tospeak with me on the record. Musk likes to be the guy talking on his companies’behalf and comes down hard on even his most loyal executives if they saysomething deemed to be out of line with Musk’s views or with what he wants thepublic to think. Straubel has dedicated himself to making electric cars and didn’twant some dumb reporter wrecking his life’s work. “I try really hard to backaway and put my ego aside,” Straubel said. “Elon is incredibly difficult to workfor, but it’s mostly because he’s so passionate. He can be impatient and say, ‘Goddamn it! This is what we have to do!’ and some people will get shell-shockedand catatonic. It seems like people can get afraid of him and paralyzed in a weirdway. I try to help everyone to understand what his goals and visions are, andthen I have a bunch of my own goals, too, and make sure we’re in synch. Then, Itry and go back and make sure the company is aligned. Ultimately, Elon is theboss. He has driven this thing with his blood, sweat, and tears. He has riskedmore than anyone else. I respect the hell out of what he has done. It just couldnot work without Elon. In my view, he has earned the right to be the front personfor this thing.”The rank-and-file employees tend to describe Musk in more mixed ways.They revere his drive and respect how demanding he can be. They also think hecan be hard to the point of mean and come off as capricious. The employeeswant to be close to Musk, but they also fear that he’ll suddenly change his mindabout something and that every interaction with him is an opportunity to befired. “Elon’s worst trait by far, in my opinion, is a complete lack of loyalty orhuman connection,” said one former employee. “Many of us worked tirelesslyfor him for years and were tossed to the curb like a piece of litter without asecond thought. Maybe it was calculated to keep the rest of the workforce ontheir toes and scared; maybe he was just able to detach from human connectionto a remarkable degree. What was clear is that people who worked for him werelike ammunition: used for a specific purpose until exhausted and discarded.”The communications departments of SpaceX and Tesla have witnessed thelatter forms of behavior more than any other group of employees. Musk hasburned through public relations staffers with comical efficiency. He tends to takeon a lot of the communications work himself, writing news releases andcontacting the press as he sees fit. Quite often, Musk does not let hiscommunications staff in on his agenda. Ahead of the Hyperloop announcement,for example, his representatives were sending me e-mails to find out the timeand date for the press conference. On other occasions, reporters have received analert about a teleconference with Musk just minutes before it started. This wasnot a function of the PR people being incompetent in getting word of the eventout. The truth was that Musk had only let them know about his plans a couple ofminutes in advance, and they were scrambling to catch up to his whims. WhenMusk does delegate work to the communications staff, they’re expected to jumpin without missing a beat and to execute at the highest level. Some of this staff,operating under this mix of pressure and surprise, only lasted between a fewweeks and a few months. A few others have hung on for a couple of years beforeburning out or being fired.The granddaddy example of Musk’s seemingly callous interoffice styleoccurred in early 2014 when he fired Mary Beth Brown. To describe her as aloyal executive assistant would be grossly inadequate. Brown often felt like anextension of Musk—the one being who crossed over into all of his worlds. Formore than a decade, she gave up her life for Musk, traipsing back and forthbetween Los Angeles and Silicon Valley every week, while working late into thenight and on weekends. Brown went to Musk and asked that she be compensatedon par with SpaceX’s top executives, since she was handling so much of Musk’sscheduling across two companies, doing public relations work and often makingbusiness decisions. Musk replied that Brown should take a couple of weeks off,and he would take on her duties and gauge how hard they were. When Brownreturned, Musk let her know that he didn’t need her anymore, and he askedShotwell’s assistant to begin scheduling his meetings. Brown, still loyal and hurt,didn’t want to discuss any of this with me. Musk said that she had become toocomfortable speaking on his behalf and that, frankly, she needed a life. Otherpeople grumbled that Brown and Riley clashed and that this was the root causeof Brown’s ouster.* (Brown declined to be interviewed for this book, despiteseveral requests.)Whatever the case, the optics of the situation were terrible. Tony Stark doesn’tfire Pepper Potts. He adores her and takes care of her for life. She’s the onlyperson he can really trust—the one who has been there through everything. ThatMusk was willing to let Brown go and in such an unceremonious fashion struckpeople inside SpaceX and Tesla as scandalous and as the ultimate confirmationof his cruel stoicism. The tale of Brown’s departure became part of the lorearound Musk’s lack of empathy. It got bundled up into the stories of Muskdressing employees down in legendary fashion with vicious barb after viciousbarb. People also linked this type of behavior to Musk’s other quirky traits. He’sbeen known to obsess over typos in e-mails to the point that he could not seepast the errors and read the actual content of the messages. Even in socialsettings, Musk might get up from the dinner table without a word of explanationto head outside and look at the stars, simply because he’s not willing to sufferfools or small talk. After adding up this behavior, dozens of people expressed tome their conclusion that Musk sits somewhere on the autism spectrum and thathe has trouble considering other people’s emotions and caring about their well-being.There’s a tendency, especially in Silicon Valley, to label people who are a bitdifferent or quirky as autistic or afflicted with Asperger’s syndrome. It’sarmchair psychology for conditions that can be inherently funky to diagnose oreven codify. To slap this label on Musk feels ill-informed and too easy.Musk acts differently with his closest friends and family than he does withemployees, even those who have worked alongside him for a long time. Amonghis inner circle, Musk is warm, funny, and deeply emotional.* He might notengage in the standard chitchat, asking a friend how his kids are doing, but hewould do everything in his considerable power to help that friend if his childwere sick or in trouble. He will protect those close to him at all costs and, whendeemed necessary, seek to destroy those who have wronged him or his friends.Musk’s behavior matches up much more closely with someone who isdescribed by neuropsychologists as profoundly gifted. These are people who inchildhood exhibit exceptional intellectual depth and max out IQ tests. It’s notuncommon for these children to look out into the world and find flaws—glitchesin the system—and construct logical paths in their minds to fix them. For Musk,the call to ensure that mankind is a multiplanetary species partly stems from alife richly influenced by science fiction and technology. Equally it’s a moralimperative that dates back to his childhood. In some form, this has forever beenhis mandate.Each facet of Musk’s life might be an attempt to soothe a type of existentialdepression that seems to gnaw at his every fiber. He sees man as self-limitingand in peril and wants to fix the situation. The people who suggest bad ideasduring meetings or make mistakes at work are getting in the way of all of thisand slowing Musk down. He does not dislike them as people. It’s more that hefeels pained by their mistakes, which have consigned man to peril that muchlonger. The perceived lack of emotion is a symptom of Musk sometimes feelinglike he’s the only one who really grasps the urgency of his mission. He’s lesssensitive and less tolerant than other people because the stakes are so high.Employees need to help solve the problems to the absolute best of their ability orthey need to get out of the way.Musk has been pretty up front about these tendencies. He’s implored people tounderstand that he’s not chasing momentary opportunities in the business world.He’s trying to solve problems that have been consuming him for decades. Duringour conversations, Musk went back to this very point over and over again,making sure to emphasize just how long he’d thought about electric cars andspace. The same patterns are visible in his actions as well. When Muskannounced in 2014 that Tesla would open-source all of its patents, analysts triedto decide whether this was a publicity stunt or if it hid an ulterior motive or acatch. But the decision was a straightforward one for Musk. He wants people tomake and buy electric cars. Man’s future, as he sees it, depends on this. If open-sourcing Tesla’s patents means other companies can build electric cars moreeasily, then that is good for mankind, and the ideas should be free. The cynic willscoff at this, and understandably so. Musk, however, has been programmed tobehave this way and tends to be sincere when explaining his thinking—almost toa fault.The people who get closest to Musk are the ones who learn to relate to thismode of thinking.22 They’re the ones who can identify with his vision yetchallenge him intellectually to complete it. When he asked me during one of ourdinners if I thought he was insane, it was a test of sorts. We had talked enoughthat he knew I was interested in what he was doing. He had started to trust meand open up but wanted to make sure—one final time—that I truly grasped theimportance of his quest. Many of his closest friends have passed much grander,more demanding tests. They’ve invested in his companies. They’ve defendedhim against critics. They helped him keep the wolves at bay during 2008.They’ve proven their loyalty and their commitment to his cause.People in the technology industry have tended to liken Musk’s drive and thescope of his ambition to that of Bill Gates and Steve Jobs. “Elon has that deepappreciation for technology, the no-holds-barred attitude of a visionary, and thatdetermination to go after long-term things that they both had,” said EdwardJung, a child prodigy who worked for Jobs and Gates and ended up asMicrosoft’s chief software architect. “And he has that consumer sensibility ofSteve along with the ability to hire good people outside of his own comfort areasthat’s more like Bill. You almost wish that Bill and Steve had a geneticallyengineered love child and, who knows, maybe we should genotype Elon to see ifthat’s what happened.” Steve Jurvetson, the venture capitalist who has investedin SpaceX, Tesla, and SolarCity, worked for Jobs, and knows Gates well, alsodescribed Musk as an upgraded mix of the two. “Like Jobs, Elon does nottolerate C or D players,” said Jurvetson. “But I’d say he’s nicer than Jobs and abit more refined than Bill Gates.”*But the more you know about Musk, the harder it becomes to place himamong his peers. Jobs is another CEO who ran two, large industry-changingcompanies—Apple and Pixar. But that’s where the practical similarities betweenthe two men end. Jobs dedicated far more of his energy to Apple than Pixar,unlike Musk, who has poured equal energy into both companies, while savingwhatever was left over for SolarCity. Jobs was also legendary for his attention todetail. No one, however, would suggest that his reach extended down as far asMusk’s into overseeing so much of the companies’ day-to-day operations.Musk’s approach has its limitations. He’s less artful with marketing and mediastrategy. Musk does not rehearse his presentations or polish speeches. He wingsmost of the announcements from Tesla and SpaceX. He’ll also fire off somemajor bit of news on a Friday afternoon when it’s likely to get lost as reportershead home for the weekend, simply because that’s when he finished writing thepress release or wanted to move on to something else. Jobs, by contrast, treatedevery presentation and media moment as precious. Musk simply does not havethe luxury to work that way. “I don’t have days to practice,” he said. “I’ve got togive impromptu talks, and the results may vary.”As for whether Musk is leading the technology industry to new heights likeGates and Jobs, the professional pundits remain mixed. One camp holds thatSolarCity, Tesla, and SpaceX offer little in the way of real hope for an industrythat could use some blockbuster innovations. For the other camp, Musk is thereal deal and the brightest shining star of what they see as a coming revolution intechnology.The economist Tyler Cowen—who has earned some measure of fame inrecent years for his insightful writings about the state of the technology industryand his ideas on where it may go—falls into that first camp. In The GreatStagnation, Cowen bemoaned the lack of big technological advances and arguedthat the American economy has slowed and wages have been depressed as aresult. “In a figurative sense, the American economy has enjoyed lots of low-hanging fruit since at least the seventeenth century, whether it be free land, lotsof immigrant labor, or powerful new technologies,” he wrote. “Yet during thelast forty years, that low-hanging fruit started disappearing, and we startedpretending it was still there. We have failed to recognize that we are at atechnological plateau and the trees are more bare than we would like to think.That’s it. That is what has gone wrong.”In his next book, Average Is Over, Cowen predicted an unromantic future inwhich a great divide had occurred between the Haves and the Have Nots. InCowen’s future, huge gains in artificial intelligence will lead to the eliminationof many of today’s high-employment lines of work. The people who thrive inthis environment will be very bright and able to complement the machines andteam effectively with them. As for the unemployed masses? Well, many of themwill eventually find jobs going to work for the Haves, who will employ teams ofnannies, housekeepers, and gardeners. If anything Musk is doing might alter thecourse of mankind toward a rosier future, Cowen can’t find it. Coming up withtrue breakthrough ideas is much harder today than in the past, according toCowen, because we’ve already mined the bulk of the big discoveries. During alunch in Virginia, Cowen described Musk not as a genius inventor but as anattention seeker, and not a terribly good one at that. “I don’t think a lot of peoplecare about getting to Mars,” he said. “And it seems like a very expensive way todrive whatever breakthroughs you might get from it. Then, you hear about theHyperloop. I don’t think he has any intention of doing it. You have to wonder ifit’s not meant just to be publicity for his companies. As for Tesla, it might work.But you’re still just pushing the problems back somewhere else. You still have togenerate power. It could be that he is challenging convention less than peoplethink.”These sentiments are not far off from those of Vaclav Smil, a professoremeritus at the University of Manitoba. Bill Gates has hailed Smil as animportant writer for his tomes on energy, the environment, and manufacturing.One of Smil’s latest works is Made in the USA, an exploration of America’s pastmanufacturing glories and its subsequent, dismal loss of industry. Anyone whothinks the United States is making a natural, clever shift away frommanufacturing and toward higher-paying information-worker jobs will want toread this book and have a gander at the long-term consequences of this change.Smil presents numerous examples of the ways in which the manufacturingindustry generates major innovations and creates a massive ecosystem of jobsand technical smarts around them. “For example, when some three decades agothe United States stopped making virtually all ‘commodity’ consumer electronicdevices and displays, it also lost its capacity to develop and mass-produceadvanced flat screens and batteries, two classes of products that arequintessential for portable computers and cell phones and whose large-scaleimports keep adding to the US trade deficit,” Smil wrote. A bit later in the book,Smil emphasized that the aerospace industry, in particular, has been a huge boonto the U.S. economy and one of its major exporters. “Maintaining the sector’scompetitiveness must be a key component of efforts to boost US exports, and theexports will have to be a large part of the sector’s sales because the world’slargest aerospace market of the next two decades will be in Asia, above all inChina and India, and American aircraft and aeroengine makers should benefitfrom this expansion.”Smil is consumed by the United States’ waning ability to compete with Chinaand yet does not perceive Musk or his companies as any sort of counter to thisslide. “As, among other things, a historian of technical advances I simply mustsee Tesla as nothing but an utterly derivative overhyped toy for showoffs,” Smilwrote to me. “The last thing a country with 50 million people on food stampsand 85 billion dollars deeper into debt every month needs is anything to do withspace, especially space with more joyrides for the super rich. And the loopproposal was nothing but bamboozling people who do not know anything aboutkindergarten physics with a very old, long publicized Gedankenexperiment inkinetics. . . . There are many inventive Americans, but in that lineup Muskwould be trailing far behind.”The comments were blunt and surprising given some of the things Smilcelebrated in his recent book. He spent a good deal of time showing the positiveimpact that Henry Ford’s vertical integration had on advancing the car industryand the American economy. He also wrote at length about the rise of“mechatronic machines,” or machines that rely on a lot of electronics andsoftware. “By 2010 the electronic controls for a typical sedan required morelines of software code than the instructions needed to operate the latest Boeingjetliner,” Smil wrote. “American manufacturing has turned modern cars intoremarkable mechatronic machines. The first decade of the twenty-first centuryalso brought innovations ranging from the deployment of new materials (carboncomposites in aviation, nanostructures) to wireless electronics.”There’s a tendency among critics to dismiss Musk as a frivolous dreamer thatstems first and foremost from a misunderstanding of what Musk is actuallydoing. People like Smil seem to catch an article or television show that hits onMusk’s quest to get to Mars and immediately lump him with the space tourismcrowd. Musk, though, hardly ever talks about tourism and has, since day one,built up SpaceX to compete at the industrial end of the space business. If Smilthinks Boeing selling planes is crucial to the American economy, then he shouldbe enthused about what SpaceX has managed to accomplish in the commerciallaunch market. SpaceX builds its products in the United States, has madedramatic advances in aerospace technology, and has made similar advances inmaterials and manufacturing techniques. It would not take much to argue thatSpaceX is America’s only hope of competing against China in the next couple ofdecades. As for mechatronic machines, SpaceX and Tesla have set the exampleof fusing together electronics, software, and metal that their rivals are nowstruggling to match. And all of Musk’s companies, including SolarCity, havemade dramatic use of vertical integration and turned in-house control ofcomponents into a real advantage.To get a sense of how powerful Musk’s work may end up being for theAmerican economy, have a think about the dominant mechatronic machine ofthe past several years: the smartphone. Pre-iPhone, the United States was thelaggard in the telecommunications industry. All of the exciting cell phones andmobile services were in Europe and Asia, while American consumers bumbledalong with dated equipment. When the iPhone arrived in 2007, it changedeverything. Apple’s device mimicked many of the functions of a computer andthen added new abilities with its apps, sensors, and location awareness. Googlecharged to market with its Android software and related handsets, and the UnitedStates suddenly emerged as the driving force in the mobile industry.Smartphones were revolutionary because of the ways they allowed hardware,software, and services to work in unison. This was a mix that favored the skillsof Silicon Valley. The rise of the smartphone led to a massive industrial boom inwhich Apple became the most valuable company in the country, and billions ofits clever devices were spread all over the world.Tony Fadell, the former Apple executive credited with bringing the iPod andiPhone to market, has characterized the smartphone as representative of a type ofsuper-cycle in which hardware and software have reached a critical point ofmaturity. Electronics are good and cheap, while software is more reliable andsophisticated. Their interplay is now resulting in science fiction–worthy ideas wewere promised long ago becoming a reality. Google has its self-driving cars andhas acquired dozens of robotics companies as it looks to merge code andmachine. Fadell’s company Nest has its intelligent thermostats and smokealarms. General Electric has jet engines packed full of sensors taught toproactively report possible anomalies to its human mechanics. And a host ofstartups have begun infusing medical devices with powerful software to helppeople monitor and analyze their bodies and diagnose conditions. Tiny satellitesare being put into orbit twenty at a time, and instead of being given a fixed taskfor their entire lifetimes, like their predecessors, they’re being reprogrammed onthe fly for a wide variety of business and scientific tasks. Zee Aero, a startup inMountain View, has a couple of former SpaceX staffers on hand and is workingon a secretive new type of transport. A flying car at last? Perhaps.For Fadell, Musk’s work sits at the highest end of this trend. “He could havejust made an electric car,” Fadell said. “But he did things like use motors toactuate the door handles. He’s bringing the consumer electronics and thesoftware together, and the other car companies are trying to figure out a way toget there. Whether it’s Tesla or SpaceX taking Ethernet cables and running theminside of rocket ships, you are talking about combining the old-world science ofmanufacturing with low-cost, consumer-grade technology. You put these thingstogether, and they morph into something we have never seen before. All of asudden there is a wholesale change,” he said. “It’s a step function.”To the extent that Silicon Valley has searched for an inheritor to Steve Jobs’srole as the dominant, guiding force of the technology industry, Musk hasemerged as the most likely candidate. He’s certainly the “it” guy of the moment.Startup founders, proven executives, and legends hold him up as the person theymost admire. The more mainstream Tesla can become, the more Musk’sreputation will rise. A hot-selling Model 3 would certify Musk as that rare beingable to rethink an industry, read consumers, and execute. From there, his morefanciful ideas start to seem inevitable. “Elon is one of the few people that I feelis more accomplished than I am,” said Craig Venter, the man who decoded thehuman genome and went on to create synthetic lifeforms. At some point hehopes to work with Musk on a type of DNA printer that could be sent to Mars. Itwould, in theory, allow humans to create medicines, food, and helpful microbesfor early settlers of the planet. “I think biological teleportation is what is going totruly enable the colonization of space,” he said. “Elon and I have been talkingabout how this might play out.”One of Musk’s most ardent admirers is also one of his best friends: LarryPage, the cofounder and CEO of Google. Page has ended up on Musk’s house-surfing schedule. “He’s kind of homeless, which I think is sort of funny,” Pagesaid. “He’ll e-mail and say, ‘I don’t know where to stay tonight. Can I comeover?’ I haven’t given him a key or anything yet.”Google has invested more than just about any other technology company intoMusk’s sort of moon-shot projects: self-driving cars, robots, and even a cashprize to get a machine onto the moon cheaply. The company, however, operatesunder a set of constraints and expectations that come with employing tens ofthousands of people and being analyzed constantly by investors. It’s with this inmind that Page sometimes feels a bit envious of Musk, who has managed tomake radical ideas the basis of his companies. “If you think about Silicon Valleyor corporate leaders in general, they’re not usually lacking in money,” Page said.“If you have all this money, which presumably you’re going to give away andcouldn’t even spend it all if you wanted to, why then are you devoting your timeto a company that’s not really doing anything good? That’s why I find Elon to bean inspiring example. He said, ‘Well, what should I really do in this world?Solve cars, global warming, and make humans multiplanetary.’ I mean those arepretty compelling goals, and now he has businesses to do that.”“This becomes a competitive advantage for him, too. Why would you want towork for a defense contractor when you can work for a guy who wants to go toMars and he’s going to move heaven and earth to make it happen? You canframe a problem in a way that’s really good for the business.”At one point, a quotation from Page made the rounds, saying that he wanted toleave all of his money to Musk. Page felt he was misquoted but stood by thesentiment. “I’m not leaving my money to him at the moment,” Page said. “ButElon makes a pretty compelling case for having a multiplanetary society justbecause, you know, otherwise we might all die, which seems like it would be sadfor all sorts of different reasons. I think it’s a very doable project, and it’s arelatively modest resource that we need to set up a permanent human settlementon Mars. I was just trying to make the point that that’s a really powerful idea.”As Page puts it, “Good ideas are always crazy until they’re not.” It’s aprinciple he’s tried to apply at Google. When Page and Sergey Brin beganwondering aloud about developing ways to search the text inside of books, all ofthe experts they consulted said it would be impossible to digitize every book.The Google cofounders decided to run the numbers and see if it was actuallyphysically possible to scan the books in a reasonable amount of time. Theyconcluded it was, and Google has since scanned millions of books. “I’ve learnedthat your intuition about things you don’t know that much about isn’t verygood,” Page said. “The way Elon talks about this is that you always need to startwith the first principles of a problem. What are the physics of it? How muchtime will it take? How much will it cost? How much cheaper can I make it?There’s this level of engineering and physics that you need to make judgmentsabout what’s possible and interesting. Elon is unusual in that he knows that, andhe also knows business and organization and leadership and governmentalissues.”Some of the conversations between Musk and Page take place at a secretapartment Google owns in downtown Palo Alto. It’s inside of one of the tallerbuildings in the area and offers views of the mountains surrounding the StanfordUniversity campus. Page and Brin will take private meetings at the apartmentand have their own chef on call to prepare food for guests. When Musk ispresent, the chats tend toward the absurd and fantastic. “I was there once, andElon was talking about building an electric jet plane that can take off and landvertically,” said George Zachary, the venture capitalist and friend of Musk’s.“Larry said the plane should be able to land on ski slopes, and Sergey said itneeded to be able to dock at a port in Manhattan. Then they started talking aboutbuilding a commuter plane that was always circling the Earth, and you’d hop upto it and get places incredibly fast. I thought everyone was kidding, but at theend I asked Elon, ‘Are you really going to do that?’ And he said, ‘Yes.’”“It’s kind of our recreation, I guess,” said Page.23 “It’s fun for the three of usto talk about kind of crazy things, and we find stuff that eventually turns out tobe real. We go through hundreds or thousands of possible things before arrivingat the ones that are most promising.”Page talked about Musk at times as if he were a one-of-a-kind, a force ofnature able to accomplish things in the business world that others would nevereven try. “We think of SpaceX and Tesla as being these tremendously riskythings, but I think Elon was going to make them work no matter what. He’swilling to suffer some personal cost, and I think that makes his odds actuallypretty good. If you knew him personally, you would look back to when hestarted the companies and say his odds of success would be more than ninetypercent. I mean we just have a single proof point now that you can be reallypassionate about something that other people think is crazy and you can reallysucceed. And you look at it with Elon and you say, ‘Well, maybe it’s not luck.He’s done it twice. It can’t be luck totally.’ I think that means it should berepeatable in some sense. At least it’s repeatable by him. Maybe we should gethim to do more things.”Page holds Musk up as a model he wishes others would emulate—a figurethat should be replicated during a time in which the businessmen and politicianshave fixated on short-term, inconsequential goals. “I don’t think we’re doing agood job as a society deciding what things are really important to do,” Page said.“I think like we’re just not educating people in this kind of general way. Youshould have a pretty broad engineering and scientific background. You shouldhave some leadership training and a bit of MBA training or knowledge of how torun things, organize stuff, and raise money. I don’t think most people are doingthat, and it’s a big problem. Engineers are usually trained in a very fixed area.When you’re able to think about all of these disciplines together, you kind ofthink differently and can dream of much crazier things and how they mightwork. I think that’s really an important thing for the world. That’s how we makeprogress.”The pressure of feeling the need to fix the world takes its toll on Musk’s body.There are times when you run into Musk and he looks utterly exhausted. He doesnot have bags under his eyes but rather deep, shadowy valleys. During the worstof times, following weeks of sleep deprivation, his eyes seem to have sunk backinto his skull. Musk’s weight moves up and down with the stress, and he’susually heavier when really overworked. It’s funny in a way that Musk spends somuch time talking about man’s survival but isn’t willing to address theconsequences of what his lifestyle does to his body. “Elon came to theconclusion early in his career that life is short,” Straubel said. “If you reallyembrace this, it leaves you with the obvious conclusion that you should beworking as hard as you can.”Suffering, though, has always been Musk’s thing. The kids at school torturedhim. His father played brutal mind games. Musk then abused himself by workinginhumane hours and forever pushing his businesses to the edge. The idea ofwork-life balance seems meaningless in this context. For Musk, it’s just life, andhis wife and kids try to fit into the show where they can. “I’m a pretty gooddad,” Musk said. “I have the kids for slightly more than half the week and spenda fair bit of time with them. I also take them with me when I go out of town.Recently, we went to the Monaco Grand Prix and were hanging out with theprince and princess of Monaco. It all seemed quite normal to the kids, and theywere blasé about it. They are growing up having a set of experiences that areextremely unusual, but you don’t realize experiences are unusual until you aremuch older. They’re just your experiences. They have good manners at meals.”It bothers Musk a bit that his kids won’t suffer like he did. He feels that thesuffering helped to make him who he is and gave him extra reserves of strengthand will. “They might have a little adversity at school, but these days schools areso protective,” he said. “If you call someone a name, you get sent home. When Iwas going to school, if they punched you and there was no blood, it was like,‘Whatever. Shake it off.’ Even if there was a little blood, but not a lot, it wasfine. What do I do? Create artificial adversity? How do you do that? The biggestbattle I have is restricting their video game time because they want to play all thetime. The rule is they have to read more than they play video games. They alsocan’t play completely stupid video games. There’s one game they downloadedrecently called Cookies or something. You literally tap a fucking cookie. It’s likea Psych 101 experiment. I made them delete the cookie game. They had to playFlappy Golf instead, which is like Flappy Bird, but at least there is some physicsinvolved.”Musk has talked about having more kids, and it’s on this subject that hedelivers some controversial philosophizing vis-à-vis the creator of Beavis andButt-head. “There’s this point that Mike Judge makes in Idiocracy, which is likesmart people, you know, should at least sustain their numbers,” Musk said.“Like, if it’s a negative Darwinian vector, then obviously that’s not a good thing.It should be at least neutral. But if each successive generation of smart peoplehas fewer kids, that’s probably bad, too. I mean, Europe, Japan, Russia, Chinaare all headed for demographic implosion. And the fact of the matter is thatbasically the wealthier—basically wealth, education, and being secular are allindicative of low birth rate. They all correlate with low birth rate. I’m not sayinglike only smart people should have kids. I’m just saying that smart people shouldhave kids as well. They should at least maintain—at least be a replacement rate.And the fact of the matter is that I notice that a lot of really smart women havezero or one kid. You’re like, ‘Wow, that’s probably not good.’”The next decade of Musk Co. should be quite something. Musk has givenhimself a chance to become one of the greatest businessmen and innovators ofall time. By 2025 Tesla could very well have a lineup of five or six cars and bethe dominant force in a booming electric car market. Playing off its currentgrowth rate, SolarCity will have had time to emerge as a massive utilitycompany and the leader in a solar market that had finally lived up to its promise.SpaceX? Well, it’s perhaps the most intriguing. According to Musk’scalculations, SpaceX should be conducting weekly flights to space, carryinghumans and cargo, and have put most of its competitors out of business. Itsrockets should be capable of doing a couple of laps around the moon and thenlanding with pinpoint accuracy back at the spaceport in Texas. And thepreparation for the first few dozen trips to Mars should be well under way.If all of this were taking place, Musk, then in his mid-fifties, likely would bethe richest man in the world and among its most powerful. He would be themajority shareholder in three public companies, and history would be preparingto smile broadly on what he had accomplished. During a time in which countriesand other businesses were paralyzed by indecision and inaction, Musk wouldhave mounted the most viable charge against global warming, while alsoproviding people with an escape plan—just in case. He would have brought asubstantial amount of crucial manufacturing back to the United States while alsoproviding an example for other entrepreneurs hoping to harness a new age ofwonderful machines. As Thiel said, Musk may well have gone so far as to givepeople hope and to have renewed their faith in what technology can do formankind.This future, of course, remains precarious. Huge technological issues confrontall three of Musk’s companies. He’s bet on the inventiveness of man and theability of solar, battery, and aerospace technology to follow predicted price andperformance curves. Even if these bets hit as he hopes, Tesla could face a weird,unexpected recall. SpaceX could have a rocket carrying humans blow up—anincident that could very well end the company on the spot. Dramatic risksaccompany just about everything Musk does.By the time our last dinner had come around, I had decided that thispropensity for risk had little to do with Musk being insane, as he had wonderedaloud several months earlier. No, Musk just seems to possess a level ofconviction that is so intense and exceptional as to be off-putting to some. As weshared some chips and guacamole and cocktails, I asked Musk directly just howmuch he was willing to put on the line. His response? Everything that otherpeople hold dear. “I would like to die on Mars,” he said. “Just not on impact.Ideally I’d like to go for a visit, come back for a while, and then go there whenI’m like seventy or something and then just stay there. If things turn out well,that would be the case. If my wife and I have a bunch of kids, she wouldprobably stay with them on Earth.”EPILOGUEELON MUSK IS A BODY THAT REMAINS VERY MUCH IN MOTION.By the time this book reaches your hands, it’s quite possible that Musk andSpaceX will have managed to land a rocket on a barge at sea or back on alaunchpad in Florida. Tesla Motors may have unveiled some of the specialfeatures of the Model X. Musk could have formally declared war on the artificialintelligence machines coming to life inside of Google’s data centers. Whoknows?What’s clear is that Musk’s desire to take on more keeps growing. Just as Iwas putting the finishing touches on this book, Musk unfurled a number of majorinitiatives. The most dramatic of which is a plan to surround the Earth withthousands of small communications satellites. Musk wants, in effect, to build aspace-based Internet in which the satellites would be close enough to the planetto beam down bandwidth at high speeds. Such a system would be useful for acouple of reasons: In areas too poor or too remote to have fiber-opticconnections, it would provide people with high-speed Internet for the first time.It could also function as an efficient backhaul network for businesses andconsumers.Musk, of course, also sees this space Internet as key to his long-termambitions around Mars. “It will be important for Mars to have a globalcommunications network,” he said. “I think this needs to be done, and I don’t seeanyone else doing it.” SpaceX will build these satellites at a new factory and willalso look to sell more satellites to commercial customers as it perfects thetechnology. To fund part of this unbelievably ambitious project, SpaceX secured$1 billion from Google and Fidelity. In a rare moment of restraint, Muskdeclined to provide an exact delivery date for his space Internet, which heforecasts will cost more than $10 billion to build. “People should not expect thisto be active sooner than five years,” he said. “But we see it as a long-termrevenue source for SpaceX to be able to fund a city on Mars.”Meanwhile, SolarCity has purchased a new research and development facilitynear the Tesla factory in Silicon Valley that’s intended to aid its manufacturingwork. The building it acquired was the old Solyndra manufacturing plant—another symbol of Musk’s ability to thrive in the green technology industry thathas destroyed so many other entrepreneurs. And Tesla continues to build itsGigafactory in Nevada at pace, while its network of charging stations has savedupward of four million gallons of gas. During a quarterly earningsannouncement, J. B. Straubel promised that Tesla would start producing batterysystems for home use in 2015 that would let people hop off the grid for periodsof time. Musk then one-upped Straubel, bragging that he thinks Tesla couldeventually be more valuable than Apple and could challenge it in the race to bethe first $1 trillion company. A handful of groups have also set to work buildingprototype Hyperloop systems in and around California. Oh, and Musk starred inan episode of The Simpsons titled “The Musk Who Fell to Earth,” in whichHomer became his inventive muse.The heady expansion plans and triumphant rhetoric from Musk were still notquite enough to hide all of Musk Co.’s flaws. Early 2015 marked the vociferousreturn of Musk’s detractors on Wall Street. Tesla’s sales in China were lacklusterby any measure, and some analysts renewed their doubts about how much long-term demand there would be for the Model S. Tesla’s shares slumped and, for thefirst time in a while, Musk sounded flustered trying to defend the company’sposition.The personal costs of Musk’s lifestyle were more severe. Musk announcedthat, once again, he would be divorcing Talulah Riley. According to Musk, Rileywanted a simpler, smaller life in England and had come to despise Los Angeles.“Tried to talk her out of it, but she insisted,” Musk told me. “It is possible thatshe will change her mind at some point, but not anytime soon.”After finishing my reporting and writing for this book, I had a chance to speakwith some of Musk’s confidantes and employees in a more relaxed manner andbounce various ideas off of them. I’m more convinced than ever that Musk is,and has always been, a man on a quest, and that his brand of quest is far morefantastic and consuming than anything most of us will ever experience. It seemsthat he’s become almost addicted to expanding his ambitions and can’t quite stophimself from announcing things like the Hyperloop and the space Internet. I’malso more convinced than ever that Musk is a deeply emotional person whosuffers and rejoices in an epic fashion. This side of him is likely obscured by thefact that he feels most deeply about his own humanity-altering quest and so hastrouble recognizing the strong emotions of those around him. This tends to makeMusk come off as aloof and hard. I would argue, however, that his brand ofempathy is unique. He seems to feel for the human species as a whole withoutalways wanting to consider the wants and needs of individuals. And it may wellbe the case that this is exactly the type of person it takes to make a freakingspace Internet real.APPENDIX 1THE TECHNOLOGY INDUSTRY LOVES MESSY FOUNDING TALES. Abit of backstabbing? A hearty helping of deceit? Perfect. And yet, the press hasnever really dug into the alleged intrigue surrounding Musk’s formation of Zip2,nor have reporters examined the very serious allegations of inconsistencies inMusk’s academic record.In April 2007, a physicist named John O’Reilly filed a lawsuit alleging thatMusk had stolen the idea for Zip2. According to the lawsuit, filed with theSuperior Court of California in Santa Clara, O’Reilly first met Musk in October1995. O’Reilly had started a company called Internet Merchant Channel, orIMC, which planned to let businesses create primitive, information-packedonline ads. A restaurant, for example, could build an ad that would display itsmenu and perhaps even turn-by-turn directions to its location. O’Reilly’s ideaswere mostly theoretical, but Zip2 did end up providing a very similar service.O’Reilly alleged that Musk had first heard about this type of technology whiletrying to get a job working as a salesman for IMC. He and Musk met on at leastthree occasions, according to the lawsuit, to talk about the job. O’Reilly thenwent on an overseas trip and struggled to get back in touch with Musk upon hisreturn.O’Reilly declined to discuss his case against Musk with me. But in thelawsuit, he claimed to have learned about Zip2 through happenstance manyyears after meeting Musk. While reading a book in 2005 about the Interneteconomy, O’Reilly stumbled upon a passage that mentioned Musk’s founding ofZip2 and its 1999 sale to Compaq Computer for $307 million in cash. Thephysicist was blown away as he realized that Zip2 sounded a lot like IMC, whichhad never amounted to much of a business. O’Reilly’s mind raced back to hisencounters with Musk. He began to suspect that Musk had avoided him onpurpose and that instead of becoming an IMC salesman, Musk had run off topursue the same concept on his own. O’Reilly wanted to be compensated forcoming up with the original business idea. He spent about two years making hiscase against Musk. The case file at the court runs hundreds of pages. O’Reillyhas affidavits from people that back up parts of his version of events. A judge,however, found that O’Reilly lacked the necessary legal standing to bring thiscase against Musk due to issues around how his businesses had been dissolved.The judge ordered O’Reilly to shell out $125,000 for Musk’s legal fees in 2010.All these years later, Musk still hasn’t made O’Reilly pay.While playing detective, O’Reilly unearthed some information about Musk’spast that’s arguably more interesting than the allegations in the lawsuit. He foundthat the University of Pennsylvania granted Musk’s degrees in 1997—two yearslater than what Musk has cited. I called Penn’s registrar and verified thesefindings. Copies of Musk’s records show that he received a dual degree ineconomics and physics in May 1997. O’Reilly also subpoenaed the registrar’soffice at Stanford to verify Musk’s admittance in 1995 for his doctorate work inphysics. “Based on the information you provided, we are unable to locate arecord in our office for Elon Musk,” wrote the director of graduate admissions.When asked during the case to produce a document verifying Musk’s enrollmentat Stanford, Musk’s attorney declined and called the request “undulyburdensome.” I contacted a number of Stanford physics professors who taught in1995, and they either failed to respond or didn’t remember Musk. DougOsheroff, a Nobel Prize winner and department chair at the time, said, “I don’tthink I knew Elon, and am pretty sure that he was not in the PhysicsDepartment.”In the years that have followed, Musk’s enemies have been quick to bring upthe ambiguities around his admission to Stanford. When Martin Eberhard suedMusk, his attorney introduced O’Reilly’s research into the case. And during thecourse of my interviews, a number of Musk’s detractors from the Zip2, PayPal,and early Tesla days said flat out that they think Musk fibbed about getting intoStanford in a bid to boost his credentials as a fledgling entrepreneur and then hadto stick with the story after Zip2 took off.At first, I, too, felt like there were a lot of oddities surrounding Musk’sacademic record, particularly the Stanford days. But, as I dug in, there were solidexplanations for all of the inconsistencies and plenty of evidence to underminethe cases of Musk’s detractors.During the course of my reporting, for example, I found evidence thatcontradicted O’Reilly’s timeline of events. Peter Nicholson, the banker whomMusk had worked for in Canada, took a stroll with Musk along the boardwalk inToronto before Musk left for Stanford and chatted about the incarnations ofsomething like Zip2. Musk had already started writing some of the earlysoftware to support the idea he’d outlined to Kimbal. “He was agonizingwhether to do a PhD at Stanford or take this piece of software he’d made in hisspare time and make a business out of it,” Nicholson said. “He called the thingthe Virtual City Navigator. I told him there was this crazy Internet thing goingon, and that people will pay big money for damn near anything. This softwarewas a golden opportunity. He could do a PhD anytime.” Kimbal and othermembers of Musk’s family have similar memories.Musk, speaking at length for the first time on the subject, denied everythingalleged by O’Reilly and does not even recall meeting the man. “He’s a totalscumbag,” Musk said. “O’Reilly is like a failed physicist who became a seriallitigate. And I told the guy, ‘Look, I’m not going to settle an unjust case. So it’sjust like don’t even try.’ But he still kept at it. His case was tossed out twice ondemur, which means that basically even if all the facts in his case were true, hewould still lose.“He’d tried his best to like torture me through my friends and personally [byfiling the lawsuit]. And then we’ve got summary judgment. He lost the summaryjudgment. He appealed summary judgment, then several months later lost theappeal and I was like, ‘Okay, fuck it. Let’s file for fees.’ And we were awardedfees from when he appealed. And that’s when we sent the sheriff after him andhe claimed that he had no money basically. Whether he did or didn’t I don’tknow. He certainly claimed he had no money. So we were like either we’ve gotto like impound his car or tap his wife’s income. Those didn’t seem like greatchoices. So, we decided that he doesn’t have to pay back the money he owes me,so long as he doesn’t sue anyone else on frivolous grounds. And, in fact, late lastyear or early this year [2014], he tried to do just that thing. But, whoever he suedwas aware of the nature of my judgment and contacted the lawyer I used, whothen told O’Reilly, ‘Look, you need to drop the case against these guys oreveryone’s going to ask for the money. It’s kind of pointless to sue them onfrivolous grounds because you’re going to have fork over the winnings to Elon.’It’s like go do something productive with your life.”As for his academic records, Musk produced a document for me dated June22, 2009, that came from Judith Haccou, the director of graduate admissions inthe office of the registrar at Stanford University. It read, “As per special requestfrom my colleagues in the School of Engineering, I have searched Stanford’sadmission data base and acknowledge that you applied and were admitted to thegraduate program in Material Science Engineering in 1995. Since you did notenroll, Stanford is not able to issue you an official certification document.”Musk also had an explanation for the weird timing on his degrees from Penn.“I had a History and an English credit that I agreed with Penn that I would do atStanford,” he said. “Then I put Stanford on deferment. Later, Penn’srequirements changed so that you don’t need the English and History credit. Sothen they awarded me the degree in ’97 when it was clear I was not going to goto grad school, and their requirement was no longer there.“I finished everything that was needed for a Wharton degree in ’94. They’dactually mailed me a Wharton degree. I decided to spend another year andfinished the physics degree, but then there was that History and English creditthing. I was only reminded about the History and English thing when I tried toget an H-1B visa and called the school to get a copy of my graduation certificate,and they said I hadn’t graduated. Then they looked into the new requirements,and said it was fine.”APPENDIX 2WHILE MUSK HAS REFLECTED PUBLICLY ABOUT HIS TIME ATPAYPAL AND THE COUP, he went into far greater detail than ever beforeduring one of our longer interviews. Years had passed since the tumultuous dayssurrounding his ouster, and Musk had been able to meditate more on what wentright, what went wrong, and what might have been. He started by discussing hisdecision to go out of the country, mixing business with a delayed honeymoon,and ended with an explanation of how the finance industry still hasn’t solved theproblems X.com wanted to tackle.“The problem with me going away was that I was not there to reassure theboard on a few things. Like, the brand change, I think it would have been theright move, but it didn’t need to happen right then. At the time it was this weirdalmost hybrid brand with X.com and PayPal. I think X was the right long-termbrand for something that wants to be the central place where all transactionshappen. That’s the X. It’s like the X is the transaction. PayPal doesn’t makesense in that context, when we’re talking about something more than a personalpayment system. I think X was the more sensible approach but timing-wise itdidn’t need to happen then. That should have probably waited longer.“As for the technology change, that’s not really well understood. On the faceof it, it doesn’t sound like it makes much sense for us to be writing our front-endcode in Microsoft C++ instead of Linux. But the reason is that the programmingtools for Microsoft and a PC are actually extremely powerful. They’re developedfor the gaming industry. I mean, this is going to sound like heresy in a sort ofSilicon Valley context, but you can program faster, you can get functionalityfaster in the PC C++ world. All of the games for the Xbox are written inMicrosoft C++. The same goes for games on the PC. They’re incrediblysophisticated, hard things to do, and these great tools have been developedthanks to the gaming industry. There were more smart programmers in thegaming industry than anywhere else. I’m not sure the general public understandsthis. It was also 2000, and there were not the huge software libraries for Linuxthat you would find today. Microsoft had huge support libraries. So you couldget a DLL that could do anything, but you couldn’t get—you couldn’t get Linuxlibraries that could do anything.“Two of the guys that left PayPal went off to Blizzard and helped createdWorld of Warcraft. When you look at the complexity of something like thatliving on PCs and Microsoft C++, it’s pretty incredible. It blows away anywebsite.“In retrospect, I should have delayed the brand transition, and I should havespent a lot more time with Max getting him comfortable on the technology. Imean, it was a little difficult because like the Linux system Max had created wascalled Max Code. So Max has had quite a strong affinity for Max Code. Thiswas a bunch of libraries that Max and his friends had done. But it just made itquite hard to develop new features. And if you look at PayPal today, I mean, partof the reason they haven’t developed any new features is because it’s quitedifficult to maintain the old system.“Ultimately, I didn’t disagree with the board’s decision in the PayPal case, inthe sense that with the information that the board had I would have made maybethe same decision. I probably would have, whereas in the case of Zip2 I wouldnot have. I thought they just simply made a terrible decision based oninformation they had. I don’t think the X.com board made a terrible decisionbased on the information they had. But it did make me want to be careful aboutwho invested in my companies in the future.“I’ve thought about trying to get PayPal back. I’ve just been too strung outwith other things. Almost no one understands how PayPal actually worked orwhy it took off when other payment systems before and after it didn’t. Most ofthe people at PayPal don’t understand this. The reason it worked was because thecost of transactions in PayPal was lower than any other system. And the reasonthe cost of transactions was lower is because we were able to do an increasingpercentage of our transactions as ACH, or automated clearinghouse, electronictransactions, and most importantly, internal transactions. Internal transactionswere essentially fraud-free and cost us nothing. An ACH transaction costs, Idon’t know, like twenty cents or something. But it was slow, so that was the badthing. It’s dependent on the bank’s batch processing time. And then the creditcard transaction was fast, but expensive in terms of the credit card processingfees and very prone to fraud. That’s the problem Square is having now.“Square is doing the wrong version of PayPal. The critical thing is to achieveinternal transactions. This is vital because they are instant, fraud-free, and fee-free. If you’re a seller and have various options, and PayPal has the lowest feesand is the most secure, it’s obviously the right thing to use.“When you look at like any given business, like say a business is making 10percent profitability. They’re making 10 percent profit when they may net out allof their costs. You know, revenue minus expenses in a year, they’re 10 percent. Ifusing PayPal means you pay 2 percent for your transactions and using someother systems means you pay 4 percent, that means using PayPal gives you a 20percent increase in your profitability. You’d have to be brain dead not to do that.Right?“So because about half of PayPal’s transactions in the summer of 2001 wereinternal or ACH transactions, then our fundamental costs of transactions werehalf because we’d have half credit cards, we’d have that and then the other halfwould be free. The question then is how do you give people a reason to keepmoney in the system.“That’s why we created a PayPal debit card. It’s a little counterintuitive, butthe easier you make it for people to get money out of PayPal, the less they’llwant to do it. But if the only way for them to spend money or access it in anyway is to move it to a traditional bank, that’s what they’ll do instantly. The otherthing was the PayPal money market fund. We did that because if you considerthe reasons that people might move the money out, well, they’ll move it to eitherconduct transactions in the physical world or because they’re getting a higherinterest rate. So I instituted the highest-return money market fund in the country.Basically, the money market fund was at cost. We didn’t intend to make anymoney on it, in order to encourage people to keep their money in the system.And then we also had like the ability to pay regular bills like your electricity billand that kind of thing on PayPal.“There were a bunch of things that should have been done like checks.Because even though people don’t use a lot of checks they still use some checks.So if you force people to say, ‘Okay, we’re not going to let you use checks ever,’they’re like, ‘Okay, I guess I have to have a bank account.’ Just give them a fewchecks, for God’s sake.“I mean, it’s so ridiculous that PayPal today is worse than PayPal circa end of2001. That’s insane.“None of these startups understand the objective. The objective should be—what delivers fundamental value. I think it’s important to look at things from astandpoint of what is actually the best thing for the economy. If people canconduct their transactions quickly and securely that’s better for them. If it’ssimpler to conduct their financial life it’s better for them. So, if all your financialaffairs are seamlessly integrated one place it’s very easy to do transactions andthe fees associated with transactions are low. These are all good things. Whyaren’t they doing this? It’s mad.”APPENDIX 3From: Elon MuskDate: June 7, 2013, 12:43:06 AM PDTTo: All <All@spacex.com>Subject: Going PublicPer my recent comments, I am increasingly concerned about SpaceXgoing public before the Mars transport system is in place. Creating thetechnology needed to establish life on Mars is and always has been thefundamental goal of SpaceX. If being a public company diminishes thatlikelihood, then we should not do so until Mars is secure. This is somethingthat I am open to reconsidering, but, given my experiences with Tesla andSolarCity, I am hesitant to foist being public on SpaceX, especially giventhe long term nature of our mission.Some at SpaceX who have not been through a public companyexperience may think that being public is desirable. This is not so. Publiccompany stocks, particularly if big step changes in technology are involved,go through extreme volatility, both for reasons of internal execution and forreasons that have nothing to do with anything except the economy. Thiscauses people to be distracted by the manic-depressive nature of the stockinstead of creating great products.It is important to emphasize that Tesla and SolarCity are public becausethey didn’t have any choice. Their private capital structure was becomingunwieldy and they needed to raise a lot of equity capital. SolarCity alsoneeded to raise a huge amount of debt at the lowest possible interest rate tofund solar leases. The banks who provide that debt wanted SolarCity tohave the additional and painful scrutiny that comes with being public.Those rules, referred to as Sarbanes-Oxley, essentially result in a tax beinglevied on company execution by requiring detailed reporting right down tohow your meal is expensed during travel and you can be penalized even forminor mistakes.YES, BUT I COULD MAKE MORE MONEY IFWE WERE PUBLICFor those who are under the impression that they are so clever that they canoutsmart public market investors and would sell SpaceX stock at the “righttime,” let me relieve you of any such notion. If you really are better thanmost hedge fund managers, then there is no need to worry about the valueof your SpaceX stock, as you can just invest in other public company stocksand make billions of dollars in the market.If you think: “Ah, but I know what’s really going on at SpaceX and thatwill give me an edge,” you are also wrong. Selling public company stockwith insider knowledge is illegal. As a result, selling public stock isrestricted to narrow time windows a few times per year. Even then, you canbe prosecuted for insider trading. At Tesla, we had both an employee and aninvestor go through a grand jury investigation for selling stock over a yearago, despite them doing everything right in both the letter and spirit of thelaw. Not fun.Another thing that happens to public companies is that you become atarget of the trial lawyers who create a class action lawsuit by gettingsomeone to buy a few hundred shares and then pretending to sue thecompany on behalf of all investors for any drop in the stock price. Tesla isgoing through that right now even though the stock price is relatively high,because the drop in question occurred last year.It is also not correct to think that because Tesla and SolarCity shareprices are on the lofty side right now, that SpaceX would be too. Publiccompanies are judged on quarterly performance. Just because somecompanies are doing well, doesn’t mean that all would. Both of thosecompanies (Tesla in particular) had great first quarter results. SpaceX didnot. In fact, financially speaking, we had an awful first quarter. If we werepublic, the short sellers would be hitting us over the head with a large stick.We would also get beaten up every time there was an anomaly on therocket or spacecraft, as occurred on flight 4 with the engine failure andflight 5 with the Dragon prevalves. Delaying launch of V1.1, which is nowover a year behind schedule, would result in particularly severe punishment,as that is our primary revenue driver. Even something as minor as pushing alaunch back a few weeks from one quarter to the next gets you a spanking.Tesla vehicle production in Q4 last year was literally only three weeksbehind and yet the market response was brutal.BEST OF BOTH WORLDSMy goal at SpaceX is to give you the best aspects of a public and privatecompany. When we do a financing round, the stock price is keyed off ofapproximately what we would be worth if publicly traded, excludingirrational exuberance or depression, but without the pressure and distractionof being under a hot public spotlight. Rather than have the stock be upduring one liquidity window and down during another, the goal is a steadyupward trend and never to let the share price go below the last round. Theend result for you (or an investor in SpaceX) financially will be the same asif we were public and you sold a steady amount of stock every year.In case you are wondering about a specific number, I can say that I’mconfident that our long term stock price will be over $100 if we executewell on Falcon 9 and Dragon. For this to be the case, we must have a steadyand rapid cadence of launch that is far better than what we have achieved inthe past. We have more work ahead of us than you probably realize. Let megive you a sense of where things stand financially: SpaceX expenses thisyear will be roug[h]ly $800 to $900 million (which blows my mind btw).Since we get revenue of $60M for every F9 flight or double that for a FH orF9-Dragon flight, we must have about twelve flights per year where four ofthose flights are either Dragon or Heavy merely in order to achieve 10%profitability!For the next few years, we have NASA commercial crew funding thathelps supplement those numbers, but, after that, we are on our own. That isnot much time to finish F9, FH, Dragon V2 and achieve an average launchrate of at least one per month. And bear in mind that is an average, so if wetake an extra three weeks to launch a rocket for any reason (could even bedue to the satellite), we have only one week to do the follow-on flight.MY RECOMMENDATIONBelow is my advice about regarding selling SpaceX stock or options. Nocomplicated analysis is required, as the rules of thumb are pretty simple.If you believe that SpaceX will execute better than the average publiccompany, then our stock price will continue to appreciate at a rate greaterthan that of the stock market, which would be the next highest return placeto invest money over the long term. Therefore, you should sell only theamount that you need to improve your standard of living in the short tomedium term. I do actually recommend selling some amount of stock, evenif you are certain it will appreciate, as life is short and a bit more cash canincrease fun and reduce stress at home (so long as you don’t ratchet up yourongoing personal expenditures proportionately).To maximize your post tax return, you are probably best off exercisingyour options to convert them to stock (if you can afford to do this) and thenholding the stock for a year before selling it at our roughly biannualliquidity events. This allows you to pay the capital gains tax rate, instead ofthe income tax rate.On a final note, we are planning to do a liquidity event as soon as Falcon9 qualification is complete in one to two months. I don’t know exactly whatthe share price will be yet, but, based on initial conversations withinvestors, I would estimate probably between $30 and $35. This places thevalue of SpaceX at $4 to $5 billion, which is about what it would be if wewere public right now and, frankly, an excellent number considering thatthe new F9, FH and Dragon V2 have yet to launch.ElonACKNOWLEDGMENTSFROM A PROCESS PERSPECTIVE, this will always be two books instead ofone in my mind. There’s the time Before Elon, and the time After Elon.The first eighteen months or so of reporting were filled with tension, sorrow,and joy. As mentioned in the main text, Musk initially opted against helping mewith the project. This left me going from interview subject to interview subject,giving a huge windup each time to try to talk an ex-Tesla employee or an oldschoolmate into an interview. The highs came when people agreed to talk. Thelows came when key people said no and to not bother them again. String four orfive of those no’s together in a row, and it felt at times like writing a proper bookabout Musk was impossible.The thing that keeps you going is that a few people do say yes and then a fewmore, and—interview by interview—you start to figure out how the past fitstogether. I’ll be forever grateful to the hundreds of people who were willing togive freely of their time and especially to those who let me come back again andagain with questions. There are too many of these people to list, but gracioussouls—like Jeremy Hollman, Kevin Brogan, Dave Lyons, Ali Javidan, MichaelColonno, and Dolly Singh—each provided invaluable insights and abundanttechnical help. Heartfelt thanks go as well to Martin Eberhard and MarcTarpenning, both of whom added crucial, rich parts to the Tesla story.Even in this Before Elon period, Musk did permit some of his closer friends tospeak with me, and they were generous with their time and intellect. That’s aspecial thanks then to George Zachary and Shervin Pishevar, and especially toBill Lee, Antonio Gracias, and Steve Jurvetson, who really went out of their wayfor Musk and for me. And I obviously owe a tremendous debt of gratitude toJustine Musk, Maye Musk, Kimbal Musk, Peter Rive, Lyndon Rive, Russ Rive,and Scott Haldeman for their time and for letting me hear some of the familystories. Talulah Riley was kind enough to let me interview her and keep pryinginto her husband’s life. She really brought out some aspects of Musk’spersonality that I had not encountered elsewhere, and she helped build a muchdeeper understanding of him. This meant a lot to me, and, I think, it will to thereaders as well.Once Musk agreed to work with me, much of the tension that accompaniedthe reporting went away and was replaced by excitement. I got access to peoplelike JB Straubel, Franz von Holzhausen, Diarmuid O’Connell, Tom Mueller, andGwynne Shotwell, who are all among the most intelligent and compellingfigures I’ve run into during years of reporting. I’m forever grateful for theirpatience explaining bits of company history and technological basics to me andfor their candor. Thanks as well to Emily Shanklin, Hannah Post, AlexisGeorgeson, Liz Jarvis-Shean, and John Taylor, for dealing with my constantrequests and pestering, and for setting up so many interviews at Musk’scompanies. Mary Beth Brown, Christina Ra, and Shanna Hendriks were nolonger part of Musk Land near the end of my reporting but were all amazing inhelping me learn about Musk, Tesla, and SpaceX.My biggest debt of gratitude, of course, goes to Musk. When we first starteddoing the interviews, I would spend the hours leading up to our chats full ofnerves. I never knew how long Musk would keep participating in the project. Hemight have given me one interview or ten. There was real pressure to get mymost crucial questions answered up front and to be to the point in my initialinterviewing. As Musk stuck around, though, the conversations went longer,were more fluid, and became more enlightening. They were the things I mostlooked forward to every month. Whether Musk will change the course of humanhistory in a massive way remains to be seen, but it was certainly a thrillingprivilege to get to pick the brain of someone who is reaching so high. Whilereticent at first, once Musk committed to the project, he committed fully, and I’mthankful and honored that things turned out that way.On a professional front, I’d like to thank my editors and coworkers over theyears—China Martens, James Niccolai, John Lettice, Vindu Goel, and SuzanneSpector—each of whom taught me different lessons about the craft of writing.Special thanks go to Andrew Orlowski, Tim O’Brien, Damon Darlin, Jim Aley,and Drew Cullen, who have had the most impact on how I think about writingand reporting and are among the best mentors anyone could hope for. I must alsooffer up infinite thanks to Brad Wieners and Josh Tyrangiel, my bosses atBloomberg Businessweek, for giving me the freedom to pursue this project. Idoubt there are two people doing more to support quality journalism.A special brand of thanks goes to Brad Stone, my colleague at the New YorkTimes and then at Businessweek. Brad helped me shape the idea for this book,coaxed me through dark times, and was an unrivaled sounding board. I feel badfor pestering Brad so incessantly with my questions and doubts. Brad is a modelcolleague, always there to help anyone with advice or to step up and take onwork. He’s an amazing writer and an incredible friend.Thanks as well to Keith Lee and Sheila Abichandani Sandfort. They are twoof the brightest, kindest, most genuine people I know, and their feedback on theearly text was invaluable.My agent David Patterson and editor Hilary Redmon were instrumental inhelping pull this project off. David always seemed to say the right thing at lowmoments to pick up my spirits. Frankly, I doubt the book would have happenedwithout the encouragement and momentum he provided during the initial part ofthe project. Once things got going, Hilary talked me through the trickiestmoments and elevated the book to an unexpected place. She tolerated my hissyfits and made dramatic improvements to the writing. It’s wonderful to finishsomething like this and come out the other side with a pair of such good friends.Thanks so much to you both.Last, I have to thank my family. This book turned into a living, breathingcreature that made life difficult on my family for more than two years. I didn’tget to see my young boys as much as I would have liked during this time, butwhen I did they were there with energizing smiles and hugs. I’m thankful thatthey both seem to have picked up an interest in rockets and cars as a result ofthis project. As for my wife, Melinda, well, she was a saint. From a practicalperspective, this book could not have happened without her support. Melindawas my best reader and ultimate confidante. She was that best friend who knewwhen to try to energize me and when to let things go. Even though this bookdisrupted our lives for a long while, it brought us closer together in the end. I’mblessed to have such a partner, and I will forever remember what Melinda did forour family.NOTES1.   Journal of the Canadian Chiropractic Association, 1995.2.   http://queensu.ca/news/alumnireview/rocket-man.3.   http://www.marieclaire.com/sex-love/relationship-issues/millionaire-starter-wife.4.   The investor Bill Lee, one of Musk’s close friends, originated this phrase.5.   http://archive.wired.com/science/space/magazine/15-06/ff_ space_musk?currentPage=all.6.   http://news.cnet.com/Electric-sports-car-packs-a-punch%2C-but-will-it-sell/2100-11389_3-6096377.xhtml.7.   http://www.nytimes.com/2006/07/19/business/19electric.xhtml.8.   A southern gentleman, Currie could never get used to Musk’s swearing—“he curses like a sailorand does it in mixed company”—or the way he would churn through prized talent. “He’d searchthrough the woods, turn over every rock and dig through brambles to find the one person with thespecific expertise and skill he wanted,” Currie said. “Then, that guy would be gone three months to ayear later if he didn’t agree with Elon.” Currie, though, remembers Musk as inspirational. Even asTesla’s funds dwindled, Musk urged the employees to do their jobs well and vowed to give themwhat they needed to be successful. Currie, like many people, also found Musk’s work ethicastonishing. “I would be in Europe or China and send him an email at two thirty in the morning histime,” Currie said. “Five minutes later, I’d get an answer back. It’s just unbelievable to have supporton that level.”9.   http://www.mercurynews.com/greenenergy/ci_7641424.10.   http://www.telegraph.co.uk/culture/3666994/One-more-giant-leap.xhtml.11.   http://www.sia.org/wp-content/uploads/2013/06/2013_SSIR_ Final.pdf.12.   Another moment like this occurred in late 2010 during a launch attempt in Florida. One of the SpaceXtechnicians had left a hatch open overnight at the launchpad, which allowed rain to flood a lower-levelcomputing room. The water caused major issues with SpaceX’s computing equipment, and anothertechnician had to fly out from California right away with Musk’s American Express card in hand to fixthe emergency in the days leading up to the launch.The SpaceX engineers bought new computing gear right away and set it up in the room. Theyneeded to run the equipment through standard tests to make sure it could maintain a certain voltagelevel. It was late at night on a Sunday, and they couldn’t get access on short notice to a device thatcould simulate the high electrical load. One of the engineers improvised by going to a hardware storewhere he bought twenty-five headlamps for golf carts. The SpaceX crew strung them all togetherback at the launchpad and hung them from a wall. They then put on their sunglasses and liteverything up, knowing that if a power supply for the computing equipment could survive this test, itwould be okay for the flight. The process was repeated for numerous power supplies, and the teamworked from 9 P.M. that night until 7 A.M. and finished in time to keep the launch on track.13.   http://www.space.com/15874-private-dragon-capsule-space-station-arrival.xhtml.14.   At the conclusion of the debate, Musk and I exchanged a couple of emails. He wrote, “Oil and gas isfirmly in the Romney camp and they are feeding his campaign these talking points. Until recently, theydidn’t care about Tesla, as they thought we would fail.“Ironically, it is because they are starting to think Tesla might not fail that they are attacking us.The reason is that society has to function, so the less there seems to be a viable alternative to burninghydrocarbons, the less pressure there is to curb carbon emissions. If an electric car succeeds, it spoilsthat argument.“Overall though, I think it is great that he mentioned us :) ‘Romney Tesla’ is one of the topGoogle searches!”I reached out to Romney’s camp months later, as sales of Tesla’s soared, to see if he wanted tochange his position but was rebuffed.15.   As Tesla has grown in size, the company has commanded more respect from suppliers and been able toget better parts and better deals. But outsourcing components still bothers Musk, and forunderstandable reasons. When it tried to ramp up production in 2013, Tesla ran into periodic issuesbecause of its suppliers. One of them made what should have been an inconsequential 12-volt lead acidbattery that handled a few auxiliary functions in the car. Tesla bought the part from an Americansupplier, which in turn outsourced the part from a company in China, which in turn outsourced the partfrom a company in Vietnam. By the time the battery arrived at Tesla’s factories, it didn’t work, addingcost and delays during a crucial period in the Model S’s history. It’s situations like these that typicallyresult in Tesla playing a much more active role with its suppliers when compared to other automakers.For something like an ABS braking controller, Tesla will work hand-in-hand with its supplier—in thiscase Bosch—to tune the hardware and software for the Model S’s specific characteristics. “Mostcompanies just hand their cars over to Bosch, but Tesla goes in with a software engineer,” said AliJavidan. “We had to change their mind-set and let them know we wanted to work on a very deep level.”16.   Tesla does seem to promote an obsession with safety that’s unmatched in the industry. J. B. Straubelexplained the company’s thinking as follows: “With the safety stuff, it seems like car companies haveevolved to a place where their design objectives are set by whatever is regulated or has beenstandardized. The rule says, ‘Do this and nothing more.’ That is amazingly boring engineering. It leavesyou maybe fiddling with the car’s shape or trying to make it a bit faster. We have more crumple zones,better deceleration, a lower center of gravity. We went in wondering, ‘Can we make this car twice assafe as anything else on the road?’”17.   Othmer has lined up to be the lucky owner of the first Roadster II.Musk has developed an unconventional policy to determine the order in which cars are sold.When a new car is announced and its price is set, a race begins in which the first person to handMusk a check gets the first car. With the Model S, Steve Jurvetson, a Tesla board member, had acheck at the ready in his wallet and slid it across the table to Musk after spying details on the ModelS in a packet of board meeting notes.Othmer caught a Wired story about a planned second version of the Roadster and emailed Muskright away. “He said, ‘Okay, I will sell it to you, but you have to pay two hundred thousand dollarsright now.’” Othmer agreed, and Tesla had him come to the company’s headquarters on a Sunday tosign some paperwork, acknowledging the price of the car and the fact that the company didn’t quiteknow when it would arrive or what its specifications would be. “My guess is that it will be the fastestcar on the road,” Othmer said. “It’ll be four-wheel drive. It’s going to be insane. And I don’t reallythink that will be the real price. I just don’t think Elon wanted me to buy it.”18.   Musk suspected Better Place came up with battery swapping as a plan after its CEO, Shai Agassi,heard about the technology during a tour of the Tesla factory19.   Musk had made a number of art cars over the years at Burning Man, including an electric one shapedlike a rocket. In 2011, he also received a lot of grief from the Wall Street Journal for having a high-endcamp. “Elon Musk, chief executive of electric-car maker Tesla Motors and cofounder of eBay Inc.’sPayPal unit, is among those eschewing the tent life,” the paper wrote. “He is paying for an elaboratecompound consisting of eight recreational vehicles and trailers stocked with food, linens, groceries andother essentials for himself and his friends and family, say employees of the outfitter, ClassicAdventures RV. . . . Classic is one of the festival’s few approved vendors. It charges $5,500 to $10,000per RV for its Camp Classic Concierge packages like Mr. Musk’s. At Mr. Musk’s RV enclave, the helpempties septic tanks, brings water and makes sure the vehicles’ electricity, refrigeration, airconditioning, televisions, DVD players and other systems are ship shape. The staff also stocked thecampers with Diet Coke, Gatorade and Cruzan rum.” Once the story hit, Musk’s group felt like ClassicAdventures had leaked the information to drum up business, and they tried to move to a new,undisclosed location.20.   http://www.sandia.gov/~jytsao/Solar%20FAQs.pdf.21.   Tesla employees have been known to sneak across the street to the campus of the software maker SAPand to take advantage of its sumptuous, subsidized cafes.22.   Shotwell talks about going to Mars as much as Musk and has dedicated her life to space exploration.Straubel has demonstrated the same type of commitment with electric vehicles and can sound a lot likeMusk at times. “We are not trying to corner the market on EVs,” Straubel said. “There are 100 millioncars built per year and 2 billion already out there. Even if we got to 5 or 10 percent of the market, thatdoes not solve the world’s problems. I am bullish we will keep up with demand and drive the wholeindustry forward. Elon is committed to this.”23.   Page presented one of his far-out ideas to me as follows: “I was thinking it would be pretty cool tohave a prize to fund a project where someone would have to send something lightweight to the moonthat could sort of replicate itself. I went over to the NASA operation center here at AMES in MountainView when they were doing a mission and literally flying a satellite into the south pole of the moon.And they like hurled this thing into the moon at a high velocity and then it exploded and it sent matterout into space. And then they looked at that with telescopes, and they discovered water on the southpole of the moon, which sounds really exciting. I started thinking that if there’s a lot of water on thesouth pole of the moon, you can make rocket fuel from the hydrogen and oxygen. The other cool thingabout the south pole is like it almost always gets sun. There’s like places high up that get sun andthere’s places that are kind of in the craters that are very cold. So you have like a lot of energy thenwhere you could run solar cells. You could almost run like a steam turbine there. You have rocket fuelingredients, and you have solar cells that can be powered by sun, and you could probably run a powerplant turbine. Power plant turbines aren’t that heavy. You could send that to the moon. You have like agigawatt of power on the moon and make a lot of rocket fuel. It would make a good prize project. Yousend something to the moon that weights five pounds and have it make rocket fuel so that you couldlaunch stuff off the moon or have it make a copy of itself, so that you can make more of them.”ABOUT THE AUTHORAuthor photograph © by Melinda VanceASHLEE VANCE is one of the most prominent writers on technology today.After spending several years reporting on Silicon Valley and technology for theNew York Times, Vance went to Bloomberg Businessweek, where he has writtendozens of cover and feature stories for the magazine on topics ranging fromcyber espionage to DNA sequencing and space exploration.Discover great authors, exclusive offers, and more at hc.com.ALSO BY ASHLEE VANCEGeek Silicon Valley:The Inside Guide to Palo Alto, Stanford, Menlo Park, Mountain View,Santa Clara, Sunnyvale, San Jose, San FranciscoCREDITSCOVER DESIGN BY ALLISON SALTZMANCOVER PHOTOGRAPH © BY ART STREIBER/AUGUSTCOPYRIGHTELON MUSK. Copyright © 2015 by Ashlee Vance. All rights reserved under International and Pan-AmericanCopyright Conventions. By payment of the required fees, you have been granted the nonexclusive,nontransferable right to access and read the text of this e-book on-screen. No part of this text may bereproduced, transmitted, downloaded, decompiled, reverse-engineered, or stored in or introduced into anyinformation storage and retrieval system, in any form or by any means, whether electronic or mechanical,now known or hereafter invented, without the express written permission of HarperCollins e-books.FIRST EDITIONISBN 978-0-06-230123-9EPub Edition MAY 2015 ISBN 978006230126015 16 17 18 19 OV/RRD 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1ABOUT THE PUBLISHERAustraliaHarperCollins Publishers Australia Pty. Ltd.Level 13, 201 Elizabeth StreetSydney, NSW 2000, Australiawww.harpercollins.com.auCanadaHarperCollins Canada2 Bloor Street East - 20th FloorToronto, ON M4W 1A8, Canadawww.harpercollins.caNew ZealandHarperCollins Publishers New ZealandUnit D1, 63 Apollo DriveRosedale 0632Auckland, New Zealandwww.harpercollins.co.nzUnited KingdomHarperCollins Publishers Ltd.1 London Bridge StreetLondon SE1 9GF, UKwww.harpercollins.co.ukUnited StatesHarperCollins Publishers Inc.195 BroadwayNew York, NY 10007www.harpercollins.com*   Two years after the birth of his son, John Elon began to show signs of diabetes. The condition amountedto a death sentence at the time and, despite being only thirty-two, John Elon learned that he would likelyhave six months or so to live. With a bit of nursing experience behind her, Almeda took it upon herself todiscover an elixir or treatment that would extend John Elon’s life. According to family lore, she hit onchiropractic procedures as an effective remedy, and John Elon lived for five years following the originaldiabetes diagnosis. The life-giving procedures established what would become an oddly rich chiropractictradition in the Haldeman family. Almeda studied at a chiropractic school in Minneapolis and earned herdoctor of chiropractic, or, D.C., degree in 1905. Musk’s great-grandmother went on to set up her ownclinic and, as far as anyone can tell, became the first chiropractor to practice in Canada.*   Haldeman also entered politics, trying to start his own political party in Saskatchewan, publishing anewsletter, and espousing conservative, antisocialist ideas. He would later make an unsuccessful run forParliament and chair the Social Credit Party.*   The journey took them up the African coast, across the Arabian Peninsula, all the way through Iran,India, and Malaysia and then down the Timor Sea to Australia. It required one year of preparation just tosecure all of the necessary visas and paperwork, and they suffered from constant stomach bugs and anerratic schedule along the way. “Dad passed out crossing the Timor Sea, and mum had to take over untilthey hit Australia. He woke up right before they landed,” said Scott Haldeman. “It was fatigue.”*   Both Joshua and Wyn were accomplished marksmen and won national shooting competitions. In themid-1950s, they also tied for first place in the eight-thousand-mile Cape Town to Algiers Motor Rally,beating pros in their Ford station wagon.*   Musk couldn’t remember this particular conversation. “I think they might be having creativerecollection,” he said. “It’s possible. I had lots of esoteric conversations the last couple years of highschool, but I was more concerned about general technology than banking.”*   When Maye went to Canada to check out places to live, a fourteen-year-old Tosca seized the momentand put the family house in South Africa up for sale. “She had sold my car as well and was in the midstof putting our furniture up for sale, too,” Maye said. “When I got back, I asked her why. She said, ‘Thereis no need to delay. We are getting out of here.’”*   The Musk brothers were not the most aggressive businessmen at this point. “I remember from theirbusiness plan that they were originally asking for a ten-thousand-dollar investment for twenty-fivepercent of their company,” said Steve Jurvetson, the venture capitalist. “That is a cheap deal! When Iheard about the three-million-dollar investment, I wondered if Mohr Davidow had actually read thebusiness plan. Somehow, the brothers ended up raising a normal venture round.”*   Musk also got to show off the new office to his mother, Maye, and Justine. Maye sometimes sat in onmeetings and came up with the idea of adding a “reverse directions” button on the Zip2 maps, which letpeople flip around their journeys and ended up becoming a popular feature on all mapping services.*   At one point, the founders thought the easiest way to solve their problems would just be to buy a bankand revamp it. While that didn’t happen, they did snag a high-profile controller from Bank of America,who in turn explained, in painful detail, the complexities of sourcing loans, transferring money, andprotecting accounts.*   Fricker disputed that he yearned to be CEO, saying instead that the other employees had encouraged himto take over because of Musk’s struggles getting the business off the ground. Fricker and Musk, onceclose friends, remain unimpressed with each other. “Elon has his own code of ethics and honor and playsthe game extraordinarily hard,” Fricker said. “When it comes down to it, for him, business is war.”According to Musk, “Harris is very smart, but I don’t think he has a good heart. He had a really intensedesire to be running the show, and he wanted to take the company in ridiculous directions.” Fricker wenton to have a very successful career as CEO of GMP Capital, a Canadian financial services company.Payne founded a private equity firm in Toronto.*   Musk had been pushed out as CEO of X.com by the company’s investors, who wanted a more seasonedexecutive to lead the company toward an IPO. In December 1999, X.com hired Bill Harris, the formerCEO of the financial software maker Intuit, as its new chief. After the merger, many in the companyturned on Harris, he resigned, and Musk returned as the CEO.*   After feeling ill for a few days, Musk went to Stanford Hospital and informed them that he’d been in amalaria zone, although the doctors could not find the parasite during tests. The doctors performed aspinal tap and diagnosed him with viral meningitis. “I may very well have also had that, and they treatedme for it, and it did get better,” Musk said. The doctors discharged Musk from the hospital and warnedhim that some symptoms would recur. “I started feeling bad a few days later, and it got progressivelyworse,” Musk said. “Eventually, I couldn’t walk. It was like, ‘Okay, this is even worse than the firsttime.’” Justine took Musk to a general practitioner in a cab, and he lay on the floor of the doctor’s office.“I was so dehydrated that she couldn’t take my vitals,” Musk said. The doctor called an ambulance,which transported Musk to Sequoia Hospital in Redwood City with IVs in both arms. Musk facedanother misdiagnosis—this time of the type of malaria. The doctors declined to give Musk a moreaggressive treatment that came with nasty side effects including heart palpitations and organ failure.*   When Zubrin and some of the other Mars buffs heard of Musk’s plant project, they were upset. “It didn’tmake any sense,” Zubrin said. “It was a purely symbolic thing to do, and the second they opened thatdoor, millions of microbes would escape and plague all of NASA’s contamination protocols.”*   Most of the stories written about Musk that touch on this period say he went to Moscow three times.According to Cantrell’s detailed records, this is not the case. Musk met with the Russians twice inMoscow, and once in Pasadena, California. He also met with Arianespace in Paris, and in London withSurrey Satellite Technology Ltd., which Musk considered buying.*   Buzza knew Hollman’s work at Boeing and coaxed him to SpaceX about six months after the companystarted.*   Including a 1,300-pound hunk of copper.*   Before returning to El Segundo, Hollman used a drill press to remove the glasses’ safety shield. “I didn’twant to look like a nerd on the flight home,” he said.*   Hollman left the company after this incident in November 2007 and then returned for a spell to train newpersonnel. A number of people I interviewed for the book said that Hollman was so key to SpaceX’searly days that they feared the company might flame out without him.*   In a press release announcing the funding round, Musk was not listed as a founder of the company. In the“About Tesla Motors” section, the company stated, “Tesla Motors was founded in June 2003 by MartinEberhard and Marc Tarpenning to create efficient electric cars for people who love to drive.” Musk andEberhard would later spar over Musk’s founder status.*   This was how the employee remembered the text. I did not see the actual e-mail. Musk later told thesame employee, “I want you to think ahead and think so hard every day that your head hurts. I want yourhead to hurt every night when you go to bed.”*   Musk fought to set the record straight, as he saw it, on the Huffington Post and wrote a 1,500-wordessay. Musk maintained that two months of negotiations with independent parties had gone into thepostnuptial agreement, which kept the couple’s assets separate so that Musk could get the spoils from hiscompanies and Justine could get the spoils from her books. “In mid 1999, Justine told me that if Iproposed to her, she would say yes,” Musk wrote. “Since this was not long after the sale of my firstcompany, Zip2, to Compaq, and the subsequent cofounding of PayPal, friends and family advised me toseparate whether the marriage was for love or money.” After the settlement, Musk asked AriannaHuffington to remove his essay about the divorce from her website. “I don’t want to dwell on pastnegativity,” Musk said. “You can always find things on the Internet. So it’s not like it’s gone. It’s just noteasily found.”*   The pair have continued to have their difficulties. For a long time, Musk ran all of the child-sharingscheduling through his assistant Mary Beth Brown rather than dealing directly with Justine. “I was reallypissed-off about that,” Justine said. And the time Justine cried the most during our conversation came asshe weighed the pros and cons of the children growing up on a grand stage where they’re whisked awayto the Super Bowl or Spain in a private jet on a moment’s notice or asked to play at the Tesla factory. “Iknow the kids really look up to him,” she said. “He takes them everywhere and provides a lot ofexperiences for them. My role as the mother is to create this reality where I provide a sense of normalcy.They are not growing up in a normal family with a normal dad. Their life with me is a lot more low-key.We value different things. I am a lot more about empathy.”*   Musk recalled their meeting as follows: “She did look great, but what was going through my mind was‘Oh, I guess they are a couple of models.’ You know, you can’t actually talk to most models. You justcan’t have a conversation. But, you know, Talulah was really interested in talking about rockets andelectric cars. That was the interesting thing.”*   He asked Riley to go with him, but she turned Musk down.*   By this time, Musk had built up a reputation as the hardest-charging man in the space business. Beforesettling on the Falcon 9, Musk planned to build something called the BFR, a.k.a. the Big Falcon Rocketor Big Fucking Rocket. Musk wanted it to have the biggest rocket engine in history. Musk’s bigger,faster mentality amused, horrified and impressed some of the suppliers that SpaceX occasionally turnedto for help, like Barber-Nichols Inc., a Colorado-based maker of rocket engine turbo pumps and otheraerospace machinery. A few executives at Barber-Nichols—Robert Linden, Gary Frey, and Mike Forsha—were kind enough to recount their first meeting with Musk in the middle of 2002 and their subsequentdealings with him. Here’s a snippet:“Elon showed up with Tom Mueller and started telling us it was his destiny to launch things intospace at lower costs and to help us become space faring people. We thought the world of Tom butweren’t quite sure whether to take Elon too seriously. They began asking us for the impossible. Theywanted a turbo pump to be built in less than a year for under one million dollars. Boeing might do aproject like that over five years for one hundred million. Tom told us to give it our best shot, and webuilt it in thirteen months. Build quick and learn quickly was Elon’s philosophy. He was relentless inwanting the costs to come down. Regardless of what we showed him on paper with regard to the costof materials, he wanted the cost lower because that was part of his business model. It could be veryfrustrating to work with Elon. He has a singular view and doesn’t deviate from that. We don’t knowtoo many people that have worked for him that are happy. That said, he has driven the cost of spacedown and been true to his original business plan. Boeing, Lockheed, and the rest of them havebecome overly cautious and spend a lot of money. SpaceX has balls.”*   To provide a glimpse of how well Musk knows the rockets, here he is explaining what happened frommemory six years after the fact: “It was because we had upgraded the Merlin engine to a regenerativelycooled engine and the thrust transient of that engine was a few seconds longer. It was only like onepercent thrust for about another 1.5 seconds. And the chamber pressure was only ten PSI, which is onepercent of the total. But that’s below sea level pressure. On the test stand, we didn’t notice anything. Wethought it was fine. We thought it was just the same as before, but actually it just had this slightdifference. The ambient sea level pressure was higher at roughly fifteen PSI, which disguised someeffects during the test. The extra thrust caused the first stage to continue moving after stage separationand recontact the other stage. And the upper stage then started the engine inside the interstage, whichcaused the plasma blowback which destroyed that upper stage.”*   Musk would later discover the identity of this employee in an ingenious way. He copied the text of theletter into a Word document, checked the size of the file, sent it to a printer, and looked over the logs ofprinter activity to find one of the same size. He could then trace that back to the person who had printedthe original file. The employee wrote a letter of apology and resigned.*   Griffin had pined to build a massive new spacecraft that would solidify his mark on the industry. But,with the election of Barack Obama in 2008, the Bush appointee knew that his time as NASA chief wascoming to an end and that SpaceX appeared poised to build the most interesting machines movingforward.*   It should be noted that there are many people in the space industry who doubt reusable rockets willwork, in large part because of the stress the machines and metal go through during launch. It’s not clearthat the most prized customers will even consider the reused spacecraft for launches due to their inherentrisks. This is a big reason that other countries and companies have not pursued the technology. There’s acamp of space experts who think Musk is flat-out wasting his time, and that engineering calculationsalready prove the reusable rockets to be a fool’s errand.*   Blue Origin also hired away a large chunk of SpaceX’s propulsion team.*   Musk has taken exception to Blue Origin and Bezos filing for patents around reusable rocket technologyas well. “His patent is completely ridiculous,” Musk said. “People have proposed landing on a floatingplatform in the ocean for a half century. There’s no chance whatsoever of the patent being upheldbecause there’s five decades of prior art of people who proposed that six ways to Sunday in fiction andnonfiction. It’s like Dr. Seuss, green eggs and fucking ham. That’s how many ways it’s been proposed.The issue is doing it and like actually creating a rocket that can make that happen.”*   Michael Colonno.*   According to Musk, “The early Dragon Version 1 work was just me and maybe three or four engineers,as we were living hand to mouth and had no idea if NASA would award us a contract. Technically, therewas Magic Dragon before that, which was much simpler, as it had no NASA requirements. MagicDragon was just me and some high altitude balloon guys in the U.K.”*   NASA researchers studying the Dragon design have noticed several features of the capsule that appear tohave been purpose built from the get-go to accommodate a landing on Mars. They’ve published a coupleof papers explaining how it could be feasible for NASA to fund a mission to Mars in which a Dragoncapsule picks up samples and returns them to Earth.*   The politicking in the space business can get quite nasty. Lori Garver, the former deputy administrator ofNASA, spent years fighting to open up NASA contracts so that private companies could bid on thingslike resupplying the ISS. Her position of fostering a strong relationship between NASA and the privatesector won out in the end but at a cost. “I had death threats and fake anthrax sent to me,” she said. Garveralso ran across SpaceX competitors that tried to spread unfounded gossip about the company and Musk.“They claimed he was in violation of tax laws in South Africa and had another, secret family there. Isaid, ‘You’re making this stuff up.’ We’re lucky that people with such long-term visions as Elon, JeffBezos, and Robert Bigelow [founder of the aerospace company that bears his name] got rich. It’s nutsthat people would want to vilify Elon. He might say some things that rub people the wrong way, but, atsome point, the being nice to everyone thing doesn’t work.”*   On this flight, SpaceX secretly placed a wheel of cheese inside the Dragon capsule. It was the same oneJeff Skoll had given Musk back in the mice-to-Mars days.*   Musk explained the look to me in a way that only he can. “I went for a similar style to the Model S (ituses the same screens as Model S upgraded for space ops), but kept the aluminum isogrid uncovered fora more exotic feel.”*   Rather insanely, NASA is building a next-generation, giant spaceship that could one day get to Marseven though SpaceX is building the same type of craft—the Falcon Heavy—on its own. NASA’sprogram is budgeted to cost $18 billion, although government studies say that figure is veryconservative. “NASA has no fucking business doing this,” said Andrew Beal, the billionaire investor andonetime commercial space entrepreneur. “The whole space shuttle system was a disaster. They’refucking clueless. Who in their right mind would use huge solid boosters, especially ones built insegments requiring dynamic seals? They are so lucky they only had one disastrous failure of theboosters.” Beal’s firm criticisms come from years of watching the government compete against privatespace companies by subsidizing the construction of spacecraft and launches. His company BealAerospace quit the business because the government kept funding competing rockets. “Governmentsaround the world have spent billions trying to do what Elon is doing, and they have failed,” he said. “Wehave to have governments, but the idea that the government goes out and competes with companies isfucking nuts.”*   The volume level on the sound system naturally goes to 11—an homage to This Is Spinal Tap and areflection of Musk’s sense of humor.*   And it’s not just that the Model S and other electric cars are three to four times more efficient thaninternal combustion vehicles. They can also tap into power that is produced in centralized, efficient waysby power plants and solar arrays.*   When the very first Roadster arrived, it came in a large plywood crate. Tesla’s engineers unpacked itfuriously, installed the battery pack, and then let Musk take it for a spin. About twenty Tesla engineersjumped in prototype vehicles and formed a convoy that followed Musk around Palo Alto and Stanford.*   At some point from late 2007 to 2008, Musk also tried to hire Tony Fadell, an executive at Apple who iscredited with bringing the iPod and iPhone to life. Fadell remembered being recruited for the CEO job atTesla, while Musk remembered it more as a chief operating officer type of position. “Elon and I hadmultiple discussions about me joining as Tesla’s CEO, and he even went to the lengths of staging asurprise party for me when I was going to visit their offices,” Fadell said. Steve Jobs caught wind ofthese meetings and turned on the charm to keep Fadell. “He was sure nice to me for a while,” Fadell said.A couple of years later, Fadell left Apple to found Nest, a maker of smart-home devices, which Googlethen acquired in 2014.*   It took a couple of years, from about 2007 to 2009, for the Energy Department application to morph intothe actual possibility of a loan from the government.*   The deal had two parts. Tesla would keep making battery packs and associated technology that othercompanies might use, and it would produce its own electric vehicles at a manufacturing facility in theUnited States.*   Musk had received a lot of pushback internally for trying to locate a car factory in or near California.“All the guys in Detroit said it needs to be in a place where the labor can afford to live and be happy,”Lloyd said. “There’s a lot of learned skill on an assembly line, and you can’t afford turnover.” Muskresponded that SpaceX had found a way to build rockets in Los Angeles, and that Tesla would find a wayto build cars in Northern California. His stubbornness ended up being fortuitous for the company. “If ithadn’t been for that DOE loan, and the NUMMI plant, there’s no way Tesla would have ended up beingso successful, so fast,” Lloyd said.*   Boeing used to make fuselages for the 747 in the SpaceX building and painted them in what became theTesla design studio.*   “He picks the most visible place on purpose,” said the investor and Tesla board member Steve Jurvetson.“He’s at Tesla just about every Saturday and Sunday and wants people to see him and know they can findhim. Then, he can also call suppliers on the weekend, and let them know that he’s personally putting inthe hours on the factory floor and expects the same from them.”*   Tesla got its start using the same lithium ion batteries that go into consumer electronics like laptops.During the early days of the Roadster, this proved a risky but calculated choice. Tesla wanted to tap intoAsia’s mature battery suppliers and get access to cheap products that would keep improving over time.The press played up Tesla’s use of these types of batteries, and consumers were fascinated by the ideathat a car could be powered by the same energy source sitting inside of their gizmos.There’s a major misconception that Tesla still depends on these types of batteries. Yes, thebatteries inside the Model S look like those found in a laptop. Tesla, however, started developing itsown battery chemistry in conjunction with partners like Panasonic dating back to late models of theRoadster. Tesla can still use the same manufacturing equipment as consumer electronics companieswhile ending up with a battery that’s safer and better tuned to the intense charging demands of itscars. Along with the secret formula for the battery cells themselves, Tesla has improved theperformance of its batteries by developing its own techniques for linking the cells together andcooling them. The battery cells have been designed to vent heat in a very particular way, and there’scoolant running throughout the entire battery pack. The battery packs are assembled at the Teslafactory in an area hidden from visitors.The chemistry, the batteries, the battery pack design—these are all elements of a large, continuoussystem that Tesla has built from the ground up to allow its cars to charge at record speed. To controlthe heat produced during the charging process, Tesla has designed an interlinked system of radiatorsand chillers to cool both the batteries and the chargers. “You’ve got all that hardware plus thesoftware management system and other controllers,” said J. B. Straubel. “All of these things arerunning at maximum rate.” A Model S can recharge 150 miles of range in 20 minutes at one ofTesla’s charging stations with DC power pumping straight into the batteries. By comparison, a NissanLeaf that maxes out at 80 miles of range can take 8 hours to recharge.*   Google’s attorneys had asked to make a presentation to Tesla’s board. Before he would permit this, Muskasked for the right to call on Google for a loan in case Tesla encountered cash flow issues afteracquisition talks became public, as there would otherwise be no way for Tesla to raise money. Googlehesitated on this for a few weeks, by which time Tesla ended up in the clear.*   Following the demonstration, Tesla struggled to deliver on the battery swap technology. Musk hadpromised that the first few stations would arrive in late 2013. A year after the event, though, Tesla hadyet to open a single station. According to Musk, the company ended up needing to deal with morepressing issues. “We’re going to do it because we said we’d do it,” Musk said. “It may not be on theschedule that we’d like but we always come through in the end.”*   As for the origins of the Model S name, Musk said, “Well, I like calling things what they are. We had theRoadster, but there was no good word for a sedan. You can’t call it the Tesla Sedan. That’s boring as hell.In the U.K., they say ‘saloon,’ but then it’s sort of like, ‘What are you? A cowboy or something?’ Wewent through a bunch of iterations, and the Model S sounded the best. And it was like a vague nod toFord being the Model T in that electric cars preceded the Model T, and in a way we’re coming full circleand the thing that proceeded the Model T is now going into production in the twenty-first century, hencethe Model S. But that’s sort of more like reversing the logic.”*   A handful of lawsuits have been filed against Tesla with auto dealers arguing that the company shouldnot be able to sell its cars directly. But even in those states that have banned Tesla’s stores, prospectivecustomers can usually request a test drive, and someone from Tesla will show up with a vehicle.“Sometimes you have to put something out there for people to attack,” Musk said. “In the long run, thestores won’t be important. The way things will really grow is by word of mouth. The stores are like aviral seed to get things going.”*   Or as Straubel put it, “Watching people drive the Model S across the country is phenomenal. There is noway you can do that in anything else. It’s not about putting a charging station in the desert as a stunt. It’sabout realizing where this is going to go. We will end up launching the third-generation car into a worldwhere this charging network is free and ubiquitous. It bugs me when people compare us to a carcompany. The cars are absolutely our main product, but we are also an energy company and a technologycompany. We are going down to the dirt and having discussions with mining companies about thematerials for our batteries and going up to commercialize all the pieces that make up an electronicvehicle and all the pieces that make an awesome product.”*   No, really. Both Lyndon and his wife play underwater hockey and used these skills to secure green cards,meeting the criteria for the “exceptional abilities” the United States desires. They ultimately played forthe U.S. national teams.*   Thirteen thousand people showed up in 2013.*   If you assume an average selling price of $40,000 per car for 300,000 cars sold in a year, that’s $12billion in annual revenue, or $1 billion per month.*   For the space buffs, here’s Musk talking more about the physics and chemistry of the spaceship: “Thefinal piece of the puzzle for figuring out the Mars architecture is a methane engine. You need to be ableto generate the propellant on the surface. Most of the fuel used in rockets today is a form of kerosene,and creating kerosene is quite complex. It’s a series of long-chain hydrocarbons. It’s much easier tocreate either methane or hydrogen. The problem with hydrogen is it’s a deep cryogen. It’s only a liquidvery close to absolute zero. And because it’s a small molecule you have these issues where hydrogen willseep its way through a metal matrix and embrittle or destroy metal in weird ways. Hydrogen’s density isalso very porous, so the tanks are enormous and it’s expensive to create and store hydrogen. It’s not agood choice as a fuel.“Methane, on the other hand, is much easier to handle. It’s liquid at around the same temperatureas liquid oxygen so you can do a rocket stage with a common bulkhead and not worry about freezingone or the other solid. Methane is also the lowest-cost fossil fuel on Earth. And there needs to be a lotof energy to go to Mars.“And then on Mars, because the atmosphere is carbon dioxide and there’s a lot of water or ice inthe soil, the carbon dioxide gets you CO2, the water gives you H2O. With that you create CH4 and O2,which gives you combustion. So it’s all sort of nicely worked out.“And then one of the key questions is can you get to the surface of Mars and back to Earth on asingle stage. The answer is yes, if you reduce the return payload to approximately one-quarter of theoutbound payload, which I thought made sense because you are going to want to transport a lot moreto Mars than you’d want to transfer from Mars to Earth. For the spacecraft, the heat shield, the lifesupport system, and the legs will have to be very, very light.”*   Musk and Riley were divorced for less than year. “I refused to speak with him for as long it took for thedivorce to be finalized,” Riley said. “And then, once it was finalized, we immediately got back together.”As for what caused the breakup, Riley said, “I just wasn’t happy. I thought maybe I had made the wrongdecision for my life.” And, about what brought her back to Musk, Riley said, “One reason was the lackof viable alternatives. I looked around, and there was no one else nice to be with. Number two is thatElon doesn’t have to listen to anyone in life. No one. He doesn’t have to listen to anything that doesn’t fitinto his worldview. But he proved he would take shit from me. He said, ‘Let me listen to her and figurethese things out.’ He proved that he valued my opinion on things in life and was willing to listen. Ithought it was quite a telling thing for the man—that he made the effort. And then, I loved him andmissed him.”*   As Musk recalled, “I told her, ‘Look, I think you’re very valuable. Maybe that compensation is right.You need to take two weeks’ vacation, and I’m going to assess whether that’s true our not.’ Before thiscame up, I had offered her multiple all-expenses-paid vacations. I really wanted her to take a vacation.When she got back, my conclusion was just that the relationship was not going to work anymore. Twelveyears is a good run for any job. She’ll do a great job for someone.” According to Musk, he offeredBrown another position at the company. She declined the offer by never showing up at the office again.Musk gave her twelve months’ severance and has not spoken to her since.*   According to Riley, “Elon is kind of cheeky and funny. He is very loving. He is devoted to his children.He is funny—really, really, really funny. He’s quite mercurial. He’s genuinely the oddest person I haveever met. He has moments of self-awareness and lucidity, which for me always bring him back around.He’ll say something cheeky or funny and have this grin. He’s smart in all sorts of areas. He’s very wellread and has this incredible wit. He loves movies. We went to see the new Lego Movie and afterwards heinsisted on being referred to as Lord Business. He tries to come home early for family dinners with meand the kids and maybe play some computer games with the boys. They will tell us about their day, andwe’ll put them to bed. Then we’ll chat and watch something together on the laptop like The ColbertReport. On the weekends, we’re traveling. The kids are good travelers. There were bajillions of nanniesbefore. There was even a nanny manager. Things are a bit more normal now. We try and do stuff just as afamily when we can. We have the kids four days a week. I like to say that I am the disciplinarian. I wantthem to have the sense of an ordinary life, but they live a very odd life. They were just on a trip withJustin Bieber. They go to the rocket factory and are like, ‘Oh no, not again.’ It’s not cool if your dad doesit. They’re used to it.“People don’t realize that Elon has this incredible naiveté. There are certain times when he isincapable of anything other than pure joy. And then other times pure anger. When he feels something,he feels it so completely and purely. Nothing else can impose on it. There are so few people who cando that. If he sees something funny, he will laugh so loudly. He won’t realize we are in a crowdedtheater and that other people are there. He is like a child. It’s sweet and amazing. He says this randomstuff like, ‘I am a complicated man with very simple but specific needs’ or ‘No man is an islandunless he is large and buoyant.’ We make these lists of things we want to do. His latest contributionswere to walk on a beach at sunset and whisper sweet nothings in each other’s ear and to take morehorseback rides. He likes reading, playing video games, and being with friends.”*   Jurvetson elaborated by saying, “Elon has that engineering prowess of Gates, but he’s moreinterpersonal. You have to be out there on the spectrum with Gates. Elon has more interpersonal charms.He’s like Jobs in that neither of them suffer fools. But with Jobs there was more of a hero-shit rollercoaster where employees went from in favor to out of favor. I also think Elon has accomplished more.”