 
 
 
 
 
1
Life in Undivided India
came into this world on a cold dark night, under a thatched roof, in the small
village of Gobindpura, tehsil Kot Addu in Muzzafargarh district, now in
Pakistan. Till today, I do not know the exact date or time of my birth. Such
details were of little consequence in those days. What mattered most to simple
rural communities like ours was the present, not the past or the future, just the
ebb and flow of our daily lives. However, as I grew older I realized how
necessary it was to have a date of birth and so, for official reasons, it has now
been recorded on my passport as 20 November 1932.
We were a large but contented family. My father, Sampuran Singh, was a
small-time farmer, with a piece of land that provided the family with food and
the cattle with fodder. My mother, Chawali Kaur, was a simple woman, who was
devoted to her husband and children. I can still conjure up memories of her
sitting at the chakki, grinding wheat to make rotis to feed us. My brothers, Amir,
Daulat and Makhan, and sisters, Makhani, Hoondi and Isher, were older than me,
while Gobind was the youngest. Amir, the eldest among us eight siblings, was
fifteen years older than me.
In those days children were married off at a very young age, and our family
was no different. My father had married off all my three sisters and two of my
older brothers. Amir and Daulat lived nearby with their wives and children.
Among my sisters, only Makhani lived in Gobindpura. Hoondi’s home was in a
village some 60 kilometres away, while Isher lived far away in Hyderabad, Sind.
Isher was my favourite sister, and I would really look forward to her visits back
home, especially since she would always bring me the sweets I loved—it was a
huge treat.We lived in a basic, two-roomed mud house—one room was shelter for the
cattle and storeroom for the fodder, while the other was our living quarters.
During the day, my brothers worked in the fields with Father, tilling the land,
sowing seeds and harvesting crops. Gobind and I, being the youngest, were
allowed to spend the day playing with the other village lads. At dusk, we would
return home and the entire family would gather around our mother who would
lovingly feed us with piping hot rotis with generous dollops of ghee.
Father, though illiterate himself, was a strong advocate of the benefits of a
good education, but money was always a hindrance. He was determined that his
sons study so that they could improve their status in life. However, when my
older brother Makhan Singh ran away from home to enlist in the army, without
completing his schooling, he was deeply disappointed. I was seven or eight years
old at the time. This was in the late 1930s, as war clouds were gathering over
Europe. I remember coming home from the village school one day and hearing
my mother weeping and wailing as if her heart was breaking, and wondered
what tragedy had occurred to make her so distressed. It was then that we heard
the shattering news. Although my mother had all her other children around her,
she could not cope with the news of Makhan’s departure.
With Makhan having dashed my father’s hopes of educating his sons, I
became the focus of Father’s ambitions. The school I was going to was in a
village nearby, where classes were held out in the open under a tree. Most of my
classmates were from neighbouring villages, and we would all sit on mats on the
ground around our teacher, Maulvi Ghulam Mohammad, who taught us
arithmetic and Urdu. He was a stern man, and at times, when we had not done
our homework or were being inattentive, he would rap us on the knuckles with a
twig broken from a neem tree; it stung like a whip. I remember the flat wooden
takhat (board), that I would carry with me, and the wooden pen that I would dip
into a pot of ink to write my lessons in Urdu. I was completely uninterested in
studying, and felt that it was something I could do without. All through the
school day I would impatiently wait for the moment when the bell would ring,
signalling the end of classes. I was a free bird once again and would rush off
home to play with my friends.
Makhan’s departure had started taking a toll on Mother’s health and she
cried all the time. Mother feared that Makhan, like other young men, would be
conscripted and sent off to fight an unknown enemy and never return. We were
all aware that beyond the narrow boundaries of our village, the spreading flames
of the Second World War were threatening us all. Those were innocent days,
people were superstitious and the wider world frightened them. Scary tales that
ladai lagi hai aur log mare ja rahe
 (the war is on and people are dying) hadreached us, and no one knew what the fate of these young men would be—
would they be killed or just disappear?
She kept pleading with Father to find him and bring him back home. Father,
for some reason, was quite reluctant. However, to pacify her, he went to the
recruitment centre in Kot Addu, and after many inquiries heard that Makhan was
in Madras, a city that was both distant and unfamiliar. Upon hearing this,
Mother’s cries got louder and stronger. Despite grave reservations, my father
boarded a train and set off on a journey to the unknown. When he reached
Madras, it took him almost two weeks to locate my brother. He had no idea
about where Makhan’s unit was or any other details; he could only ask if there
were any turbaned (Sikh) soldiers around. He wandered through the city, visiting
all the army centres, waiting to catch a glimpse of Makhan. He finally got some
leads that led him to Makhan. His patience had paid off. Both father and son had
a very emotional reunion, but when my father tried to persuade him to return
home, Makhan reassured him, saying, ‘Father, don’t worry, I am safe and will
come home for a holiday after six months, when I have completed my training.’
Father returned to Gobindpura, a happier man, and was able to convince
Mother that Makhan was happy in his chosen profession and would be coming
home soon for a holiday. Her spirits—and more importantly, health—improved
after that, and she waited in eager anticipation for her son’s return.
After I had completed Class Five at the village school, my father insisted
that I continue my education at a better school. Soon I was enrolled in a
government school in Kot Addu, which was about seven miles from Gobindpur.
The only other boy from my village to go to the same school was my friend,
Sahib Singh. In those days there were no clocks or watches in any home, and it
was only when the train to Multan passed by the village that I knew that it was
time to start the long walk to school. It would take Sahib Singh and me almost
two hours to cover the distance between our homes and school. In winter, it was
so bitterly cold that my hands and feet would be numb and frozen with frostbite,
and the fog so dense that often I could barely see the footpath. It was even worse
in summer, the heat so intense that it felt as if the earth was on fire. I would run
as fast as I could from one shady patch to another to escape from the blazing
sun, but yet, I couldn’t prevent blisters from developing on the soles of my bare
feet. Perhaps these were the first races I ran, at a time when I never imagined
what my future profession would be.
I studied at my new school for two years. I found it extremely difficult to
adjust to the new curriculum, particularly learning English, which was an alien
language for me. Both Sahib Singh and I were far behind the other students,
which frustrated me and made me hate school even more. But, there was no wayI could avoid school—my father’s wrath would be too great. I vividly remember
the day I bunked classes to go fishing with my friends, but when I returned home
at the normal time, my mother warned me, telling me to hide because a friend of
my father’s had spotted us and told him about it, and he was furious. I was
beaten black and blue that evening and vowed never to repeat the same offence.
As a punishment, every evening, my father would make me read to him the
English lesson taught that day in school. But what he never realized was that I
read out the same passage every evening, which I had memorized. Since he
didn’t know the language, he assumed that I was doing well in English at school,
and felt extremely pleased.
I was fifteen years old by then and very conscious of the ambitions that my
father had for me. But his high hopes did not achieve the results he wanted. The
approaching holocaust deemed it otherwise. The events of those terrible days, as
India was teetering on the brink of Independence from colonial rule, have had a
lasting impact on my life, and I will never ever forget the hatred and bloodshed
that had transformed men into beasts.
