 
 
 
 
 
2
Bhaag Milkha, Bhaag
efore Independence, Gobindpur was just like one big happy family, where
people would be in and out of each other’s homes, sharing a meal or
enjoying a good gossip. The population was predominantly Hindu and
Sikh, but we were on very cordial terms with the neighbouring Muslim villages.
It was a bond that had been developed over the generations. In those days there
was little emphasis on caste, creed or religion; it was only the brotherhood of
man that mattered. But this easy camaraderie between villages and communities
was soon to change.
In an effort to bring about a compromise between the squabbling political
parties, the British had agreed to partition the subcontinent along religious lines,
with Muslim-majority regions going to Pakistan and Hindus and Sikhs moving
to or remaining in India. In early August 1947, insidious rumours had begun to
seep into the collective consciousness of the people of the region and the tension
was palpable. We had heard that Hindus and Sikhs were killing Muslims; that
Muslims were killing Hindus and Sikhs. What did all this mean? And why was
this happening? We were simple village folk and to us the creation of an India
and a Pakistan were alien concepts. Our only concerns were to till our lands,
earn our daily bread and live in harmony with our neighbours, whether they were
Muslim, Hindu or Sikh. How would this break up affect us? We were soon to
learn how devastating the consequences were.
The spread of such vicious stories was fast and furious, and soon the
rumours became realities as the violence edged closer to Gobindpur and its
environs. Our friendly Muslim neighbours had been threatened by the more
radical Muslim groups from Rawalpindi and Dera Ghazi Khan, who accusedthem of supporting and sheltering the murderers of their brothers. They abused
them, thundering, ‘
Haramzadon, kafir ko panah dete ho 
(you bastards are giving
the unbelievers shelter).’ As a result, the children who would play with us,
stayed away, and the bonhomie that we had once shared vanished overnight.
People from different communities had begun to look at each other with fear and
suspicion. The fear was on both sides and depended on which community
dominated where.
I vividly remember the meeting at our village gurudwara to decide how to
face the looming bloodbath. We had received ultimatums from the Muslim
rioters demanding that we must cut our hair, circumcise baby boys, eat beef and
embrace Islam if we wanted to stay on in Pakistan. These demands were
unacceptable; how could we eat beef when we worship cows like our mothers?
No, we would rather sacrifice our lives than convert to Islam. Another Sikh
village had joined forces with Gobindpur and we were all prepared to fight with
all our strength. The woman would take refuge in the gurudwara, the men would
patrol the boundaries, keeping watch on all four directions, while the boys and
young men would be on guard to protect the honour of the women. We had no
guns, just dandas, kirpans, talwars and kulhadhis (axes), that were used to cut
trees with, but our strongest weapon was our courage and belief that we would
rather die than succumb to their threats and abuses.
On 14 August 1947, British India was partitioned into India and Pakistan.
Then, at the ‘stroke of the midnight hour’ on 15 August 1947, India became an
independent nation. Almost simultaneously, borders were being drawn along the
west and the east that would divide the subcontinent. We found ourselves on the
wrong side of the border. Almost overnight, the unrest intensified, plunging the
lands along the newly drawn borders into chaos and confusion. Politics had
poisoned people’s minds and hitherto friendly relationships were destroyed by
the sweeping waves of hatred and communalism. People no longer behaved like
human beings, they had become animals. Hindus, Sikhs and Muslims were
brutally massacred, thousands of homes destroyed, mothers lost their husbands
and children. There was only bloodshed everywhere.
Makhan, in the meantime, had got married to Isher’s sister-in-law, and he
and his regiment, the Army Supply Core (ASC), were posted in Multan, some
100 kilometres from Gobindpura. When he heard the news of the terrible danger
our village was in, he was given permission by his commanding officer to go
home and rescue his family and friends. Accompanied by a few jawans, he left
Multan in an army truck, but when they reached Kot Addu, they found the town
in flames and heard the heart-rending cries of afflicted citizens. The widespread
rioting horrified them, but there was little they could do to save the Hindus andSikhs in a town where the Muslims were in a majority. An armed and angry mob
surrounded the army truck. But just when Makhan and his fellow jawans were
about to retaliate in self-defence, the police arrived and assured Makhan that
since they were soldiers, their safety would be guaranteed in the town. They
were told to hand over their weapons, so that the mob stopped seeing them as a
threat. They also promised that help would be sent to our beleaguered village.
Makhan and his fellow jawans were then asked to drive to the police station, but
when they reached there, they were thrown into jail. It was at that moment that
Makhan realized how shockingly they had been betrayed, and that instead of
providing succour, the police had paved the way for the destruction of our
village by passing on the details of our village to the marauders.
When Father heard the news that Makhan was in jail, he and my brother
Daulat Singh left for Kot Addu at once. At the police station, Makhan urged
Father to leave Gobindpur, warning him of the imminent danger the village
faced, but Father refused. He stated that he would rather die than abandon his
home and land and flee like a coward.
As my brother had warned, catastrophe was awaiting the people of
Gobindpur. The policemen at Kot Addu had not only passed on the name and
location of our village to the Muslim fanatics, but also equipped them with guns
and ammunition and instructed them to obliterate our Sikh village. The
following evening after my father returned, hordes of militant fanatics and
looters fuelled by the flames of communal hatred, besieged our village, camping
just five hundred yards away. We could see the flaming torches they had placed
on the ground and hear their angry voices shouting that we must convert at once.
Heroically, our lambardar (sarpanch) leapt on to his horse and galloped to the
Muslim camp to tell them that we would neither convert nor leave our village
and homes. Incensed by his boldness, someone shot him in the back as he was
riding back, killing him instantly. We were terrified by what had happened and
fervently prayed to our Gurus to give us strength and courage to fight the
ferocious mob.
The attack came soon after at about 4 a.m. The hordes, waving guns and
talwars, broke through our defences, killing anyone who came in their way. It
was a bloody encounter— women hiding in the gurudwara while outside, every
man and boy put up a brave fight, in a desperate attempt to ward off the attack,
but our lathis were no match for their guns. They were killing everyone in sight.
I tried to hide, running from one spot to another to escape being caught. I saw
my father fighting valiantly, then I saw him fall, fatally struck by a horse-riding
murderer. As he fell, Father screamed ‘Bhaag Milkha, bhaag.’ I was petrified and
could barely move. As the carnage continued, I thought I heard my mother’swails of anguish as our village gurudwara, where she had sought refuge, went up
in flames. It was only much later that I found out what had happened to the rest
of my family that night; how my brothers, Daulat and Amir, killed their own
wives and daughters lest they fell into wrong hands, before they themselves were
slaughtered; the deaths of my baby brother, Gobind, and sister, Makhani. My
sister, Hoondi, who was in Gobindpur that night, was the only member of my
family who escaped. She was outside the burning gurudwara when she heard the
terrified cries of her one-year-old daughter who was trapped inside. Fearlessly,
she braved the flames, rescued the baby and ran away. Such is a mother’s love.
With my father’s warning ‘Bhaag Milkha, bhaag’ running through my head
I fled for my life, sometimes running, sometimes walking all the way to Kot
Addu. It was one of the most terrifying journeys of my life. In my traumatized
state, I imagined that every sound or rustle was that of a lurking assassin waiting
to kill me. I was in such a trance and till today, I do not know how I reached the
railway station. The blood-smeared train to Multan was standing at the platform
and I jumped into the first compartment I saw and hid under the berth. It was
reserved for ladies, and soon some burqa-clad women entered. When they saw
me they tried to raise a hue and cry, thinking that I was a thief, but I fell at their
feet with folded hands, and begged them to save my life by not revealing my
presence to the authorities. My pathetic plight evoked their pity and they allowed
me to remain in their compartment
Back at Kot Addu, Makhan collapsed when he heard the news about the
village’s annihilation. During his period of confinement, his commanding officer
(CO) in Multan had made repeated telephone calls to the police to free his men.
But when he received no response, he arrived in Kot Addu with two trucks filled
with soldiers to secure their release and take them to Gobindpura. As Makhan,
his CO and the other jawans entered the village, the sight before them was
terrible to behold and the stench overpowering. The fields were soaked with
blood and decomposing bodies lay scattered around, a feast for vultures and
dogs. Identification of the dead was almost impossible, and in desperation, the
soldiers placed all the bodies, including those of my family, in one big heap,
poured kerosene over them and cremated them. More than fifteen hundred
villagers perished on that fateful day in Gobindpura. It had taken just a few
hours to annihilate my family, home and native village.
When I reached Multan, I went straight from the station to my brother’s
quarters in the army barracks. His wife, Jeet, was there and we both waited
eagerly for Makhan to return from Kot Addu. It took him about three or four
days to get back to Multan. I broke down and wept inconsolably upon seeing
him standing at the door. We hugged each other tightly and kept crying for avery long time. Then he gave us the full story about his confinement in jail and
the gory massacre in my village. I had lost everything I cared for—it was the end
of my childhood.
As the days went by, we heard other terrible accounts about what was
happening all around us, and it seemed obvious that we would no longer be safe
in Multan. Finally, an official order was circulated stating that the families of all
Hindu and Sikh armed forces personnel in what was now Pakistan were to be
evacuated to India immediately. The regiments were asked to stay on until
further notice. Jeet and I, along with other families, boarded a military truck for
a long, eight-hour drive to the Hussainiwala–Ferozepur border. It was a silent
journey. We were all displaced people who had lost what had mattered most in
our lives, and an uncertain future lay ahead of us. How would we start anew?
How would we put down roots in a land we knew so little about? My mind was
still numb due to the enormity of the tragedy and I had no clue how to pick up
the pieces of my shattered life.
 