 
 
 
 
 
9
Meeting Pandit
Nehru
e returned to India via Hong Kong, where we spent four nights. Hong
Kong was a vibrant city with a swinging nightlife. However, my vow
of self-control remained steadfast and I was not tempted by what I
saw.
We landed in Calcutta to a tumultuous welcome. And then it was on to
Delhi. As we entered the airport building, a band started to play and well-
wishers rushed up to garland us and offer us sweets, felicitating us for the many
gold, silver and bronze medals we had brought back with us. Invitations from the
president, Dr Rajendra Prasad, prime minister, Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru, defence
minister and the chief of army staff poured in.
Panditji held a grand reception in honour of the Indian team on the lawns of
his imposing residence, Teen Murti Bhavan, which was attended by cabinet
ministers, government officials and high-ranking officers from the armed forces.
He received us graciously, warmly shaking our hands. When I was presented to
him, he gave me a friendly smile and then embraced me. I was elated that such a
great man had greeted me so fondly.
Panditji asked me to sit next to him at one of the tables. ‘My boy,’ he said to
me, ‘you have brought great pride to our country. If you keep up the hard work,
you will be one of the world’s top athletes.’
‘Panditji, my interest in running was awakened recently, and I have taken
an oath to persevere until I attain the goal I have set for myself.’
The prime minister was pleased by my reply, and asked me to tell him aboutmyself. When I narrated the story of my past and the tragedy of losing most of
my family during Partition, he reassured me in a voice choked with emotion, ‘I
cannot change the past nor bring the dead back to life, but remember my boy,
you are not an orphan. I, and many Indians my age, are your father and mother.
If ever you are in need of anything, you must come to me.’
He then told General Thimayya, the chief of army staff, to take special care
of me.
At Defence Minister V.K. Krishna Menon’s reception the next day, it was
announced that all gold medallists would be promoted immediately, an
unprecedented move that elevated me from a sepoy to the rank of a junior
commissioned officer (JCO). This promotion was a huge jump in my career. If I
hadn’t won two gold medals, I would probably have remained a sepoy or risen to
the rank of a havaldar at the most. Now thanks to the decision taken by the
defence minister and chief of army staff, a new military tradition had been
initiated, where it was mandatory that all soldiers who received gold medals in
international events would be promoted automatically. What a tremendous
incentive this would be for future sportsmen!
On the third evening, at General Thimayya’s reception, my promotion
became a reality. All of us who had received gold medals stood in a straight line
while we waited for our names to be called. When it was my turn, the general
called for the stars and ceremoniously fixed one on each of my epaulets. He
congratulated me saying, ‘The honour of the army and the nation is now in your
hands. I have ordered your unit to provide you with special facilities.’
After the function, I returned to my lodgings at my unit. My promotion had
filled me with such pride that I refused to remove my uniform and, wherever I
went, I was saluted by jawans—a novel experience for me. Throughout my army
life I was the one who had been saluting my seniors, and now, here I was, being
saluted at. Such are the ironies of life!
I returned to my unit in Secunderabad after a few days. As the plane was
hovering over the airport, a flood of emotions swept over me. This was the place
where I had begun my career, where I had made a solemn pledge that one day I,
too, would represent my country in international tournaments, where coaches
like Gurdev Singh had given me the confidence to compete, succeed and move
ahead. I remembered my late-night practices and the sacrifices I had made. The
insignificant jawan was now returning as a hero! But I would never let success
go to my head. My past helped to keep me grounded and I remained focussed on
higher goals.
Thousands of jawans, officers and the general public were impatiently
waiting for me at the airport. When the plane taxied to a halt, I emerged from thecabin and waved to the waiting crowds, who cheered me vociferously. The
military band started to play as I slowly descended. Brigadier G.S. Bal, our
commanding officer, came up to greet me, while cameras flashed. Jawans
presented the guard of honour and I proudly took the salute. With my face
covered by garlands of marigolds, roses and jasmine, I walked alongside
Brigadier Bal and other officers, down the red carpet lined by cheering jawans
dressed in their best uniforms.
Tea was served at the airport, and throughout the time we were there,
officers and their families kept coming up to me, eager to know more about my
victories in Tokyo. The band preceded me as I came out of the building, where
an open jeep awaited me. I sat between Brigadier Bal and Colonel Bhave, as our
cavalcade slowly moved through the twin cities of Hyderabad and Secunderabad
until we reached the unit. The roads were lined with local citizens, as well as
jawans who smartly saluted us. It was flowers, flowers all the way. My joy was
limitless and I was filled with gratitude for the affection and respect I had
received. God had been more than good to me.
 