excel in sports. So while my rivals—in the good old-fashioned way—tried to
incapacitate me and take me out of the equation, the sporting cheats of today
take much more sophisticated routes. My friends and colleagues had all asked
me to identify the attackers, but I remained silent.
Anyway, this incident made me even more determined for the next day’s
race.
Looking at my wounds, my doctor advised me not to run— he said that the
bruises and the swelling needed time to heal, but I was adamant. When I arrived
at the starting line, I saw some of the competitors give me startled looks, but
only I knew why. But I didn’t care. In that moment, all the hardships I had ever
faced in the past flashed before my eyes. This was the catharsis I had needed. In
that moment I swore to myself I would not let anyone (or anything) come in the
way of my 
future
. I focused all my energies on running fast. I took off like the
wind when I heard the gunshot and easily won the race. I had overcome all odds.
I was, however, truly saddened by the viciousness of my attackers, though in
some way, my winning had probably given them the worst beating of their lives.
I was selected to represent India at the Olympics in Australia. My joy had
no bounds. Here, at last, was the moment I had been waiting, even praying, for.
It was my proudest moment yet.
  
 
 
 
 
6
From the Bhangra
to 
the Foxtrot
ith eager anticipation we awaited the next stage. A tailor was called in
to measure the five of us boys and one girl, Mary Lila Rao, for the
sports kits. We were given blazers, tracksuits, shirts, vests, boots and
turbans for the four sardars. I did not know what to expect, or what to hope for—
all I knew was that I was filled with happiness, just like a child who had been
given a bag full of candy. After all, I would be fulfilling my dream to wear a
blazer with INDIA written on it!
A week later, we left for Australia. The night before we left I could not
sleep. My small suitcase had been packed with my kit and bedding and I waited
for the sun to rise. Excited by the prospects of what lay ahead, we boarded the
train to Bombay, the first lap of our long journey across the seas to far-off
Australia. We spent three days on the train, singing songs, drinking copious
amounts of tea and animatedly discussing the trip. When we reached Bombay’s
Churchgate station, we were taken by bus to the Astoria hotel. It was the first
time that I had seen such a grand place, and I could barely believe my eyes.
There was a posh restaurant, a bar and a ballroom where dances were held every
night. What was I, a simple village boy doing in such a different world? While
we were at the Astoria, Commander Rekhi, our manager, showed us how to knot
a tie and gave us lessons on table manners—how to use a napkin and eat with a
knife and fork. I have to say that we had great fun manipulating those two
implements, trying to pick up pieces of meat and vegetables from our plates and
pushing them into our mouths. How much easier it was to eat with our fingers!On the day of our departure, a deluxe bus waited at the hotel’s entrance to
take us to Santa Cruz airport. We were told to put our luggage in the bus—only
our bedrolls were to be stored at the hotel. I was slightly bemused by that—why
do we have to leave our bedding behind? Where would we sleep? What would
we do if the nights were chilly? Troubled by these thoughts, I boarded the bus to
the airport.
When we reached Santa Cruz, the entire atmosphere at the terminal seemed
unreal—its bright lights, the strange sounds, the rush of people. Except for Mary
Lila Rao, none of us has flown before. I was scared and confused. I had no
bedding and no food. Where would I sleep? What would I eat? How would the
plane take off with so many people, their luggage and other cargo? Would it
crash under so much weight? I followed my companions towards the huge
monster that awaited us, and blindly climbed up the ramp into the cabin. Once
inside, like a child, I meekly followed the airhostess to my seat, which was next
to Mohinder Singh, our triple and long jumper and another village hick like me. I
was asked to fasten my seatbelt, but naturally I did not know what to do and was
fumbling with the straps when the airhostess kindly helped me.
When the plane started to taxi along the runway, we both closed our eyes
and recited: ‘Wahe-Guru, Wahe-Guru.’ I had butterflies in my stomach as the
plane ascended. And then we were airborne. When I looked out of the window I
saw smoke pouring out of the engines, and raised an alarm, thinking that the
plane was on fire. The airhostess calmed me down, patiently explaining that it
was only the fuel burning. I felt very foolish and laughed with relief.
Our first stop was Singapore. I was awestruck when I saw the airport, by
how clean and organized it was, and by the different people all clad in the
colourful garments of their respective countries. I had never seen such groups of
races and communities before. It was a long flight to Sydney. I tried to sleep, but
it was impossible. I was much too excited by what lay ahead. We had a six-hour
stopover at Sydney and were given a tour of the city sights. I was shocked when
I saw how skimpily dressed the women were and how freely and intimately
couples behaved. How different this was from our orthodox society. In the India
of the 1950s, it was considered disrespectful for men to look at women directly,
or even talk to them. Such free-and-easy ways would definitely be frowned
upon. I felt embarrassed watching them and turned my eyes away. At the same
time, I realized that customs and norms differed from country to country.
When we arrived at Melbourne, the city that was hosting the Games, we
were taken straight to the Olympics Village, where athletes from all over the
world were provided with free board and lodging. The rooms were not large but
had every amenity that a person would require. What a change from the barracksthat had been my home for the past three years!
The Village itself was completely different from the village I grew up in.
There was a swimming pool, a state-of-the-art training centre with sophisticated
machines, recreational facilities like a cinema, dance hall and reading room, and
a restaurant, which dished up a lavish spread for every meal. I had never seen so
much food in my life, and yet yearned for the simple desi dal, roti and subzi.
In the evenings, the athletes would dance together in the dance hall. Again
it was a culture shock watching men and women holding each other or gyrating
to raucous music. I would shyly sit around almost in a trance watching the
antics; for me it was both shocking and amusing but what I remember most was
how cordial and friendly the atmosphere was. After a while, we also decided to
have some fun. Then, regardless of the music that was playing, we would dance
the bhangra.
Finally, the historic moment arrived. I proudly took my place in the Indian
contingent for the march past. The men were immaculately clad in blue blazers,
grey trousers and ties with the Ashok chakra printed on them, while the women
wore maroon saris with blue blazers. My dream had come true. Here I was
representing India at the Olympics, wearing a blazer with my country’s name
displayed on the front pocket. The Melbourne Cricket Ground was packed to
capacity, spectators clapping and cheering as their favourite athletes and top
sporting stars marched past. I felt like a lost child who had strayed into the
wrong party, and yet, I wanted to stay on and join in all the fun and games.
Although sports fans in India were getting more familiar with my name and
exploits, I was unknown in the international field. The 400-metre race had a
hundred and fifty competitors, and for the heats, we were divided into groups of
six. The best three in each group were moved up, and the rest eliminated. I was
so nervous and overwhelmed that I came last in my group and thus failed to
qualify for the next stage. I was deeply disappointed for I had not realized how
stiff the competition would be. How could a young and inexperienced athlete
like me hope to compete with top international stars? Though this hurdle seemed
insurmountable, it made me more determined to prove myself.
At the Village I met several foreign sportspeople, including Charles
Jenkins, America’s top athlete who had won the gold medal for the 400-metre
event at Melbourne. Jenkins was a great hero of mine and when I heard that he
was occupying the room next door, I was determined to meet him. Although I
had received very basic English lessons from an Anglo-Indian nurse in
Secunderabad, I was not very fluent in it, so enlisted my roommate Mohinder
Singh’s help. 
Jenkins was in the midst of an interview when we entered his room
and invited us to return the next day. When we finally met him, Mohinderintroduced me in his broken English saying: ‘Milkha Singh from India, 400
metres, timing 48 seconds’. He further requested him to advise me on how to
improve my timing. 
Jenkins kindly wrote down his complete training schedule
for me to follow and from what he had indicated, a runner could only improve
his timing and technique through regular and rigorous practice. His kind gesture
inspired me and strengthened my desire to excel.
I soon saw how celebrated athletes were and the adulation that was
showered on them almost amounted to hero worship. Sardars with their turbans
attracted a lot of attention and there were always huge crowds of people outside
the Village waiting to meet us, some insisting that we visit their homes, while
others wanted autographs. I could not understand why small books and pens
were thrust before me, and asked Mohinder what I should do. He said, just sign
your name—that’s an autograph—and so I did, many times over. When we
would get back to our room we would compare notes and ask each other, ‘
Tu
kinne sign kitte
? (How many did you sign?)’ That’s how innocent and naïve we
were.
Once the Games ended, we were given a few days off. After I had been
eliminated from the event, an Australian family called Smith had befriended me.
One evening, they invited Mohinder Singh, and me to their home for dinner, but
it was only when we reached their house and saw them bringing out the food that
we realized what being ‘invited for dinner’ meant. We had both had our meal at
the Village, but didn’t know how to communicate this to them. Mohinder tried to
tell them in his broken English, or with gestures like rubbing his stomach to
indicate we had eaten, but to no avail, and we were forced to have a second
meal. After dinner was over, the two daughters, Christine and Mary, asked us to
dance. We were embarrassed and said we could not dance. Mr Smith said, ‘No
problem, our girls will teach you.’
This left us with no option but to accept. We nudged each other, whispering
‘you first,’ ‘no, you first,’ awkward at the idea of touching the girls. Boldly, the
two sisters came up to us, took our hands and led us to the floor. The
gramophone started to play and to the beat of the music, Christine instructed me
to ‘put your right foot here and say “one”, put your left foot there and say “two”,
one, two, one two…’ And so with my left hand resting on her hand and my right
arm around her waist, we danced the foxtrot. Gradually my shyness vanished
and I began to enjoy myself.
That night when we returned to the Village, Mohinder Singh and I
discussed our evening in great detail. We had a good laugh about our ‘second
dinner’, and I teased him, saying, ‘
Tenu ta angrezi andhi hai
 (you claim to know
English), so why didn’t you say that we had eaten?’