 
 
 
 
 
14
From Sports to
Administration
n 1959, Gurnam Singh Tir, the Punjab government’s public relations officer,
had kindly fixed an appointment for me with the chief minister of Punjab,
Sardar Pratap Singh Kairon, who was a towering political figure in Punjab
and wielded immense power at the state as well as national level. The little I
knew about him was what I had gleaned from newspapers, but as a sportsman I
had little understanding about the nature of politics and the extent of influence a
politician commands. In our meeting, Kairon asked me probing questions about
the state of Indian sports and why our athletes performed so poorly in the
international arena, unlike their counterparts from other countries who won large
numbers of gold and silver medals. What did their training involve? Did their
governments actively support their endeavours? Give them financial aid and
special benefits? He strongly believed that Indians, too, had the potential to
succeed, but lacked the opportunities to develop their talents and skills. He then
outlined his proposal of setting up a separate department of sports under the
auspices of the Punjab government where fit young Punjabi boys could be
trained under my charge.
What the chief minister was suggesting was that I leave the army and take
on a civilian post. He then started to negotiate terms, comparing my current
salary of seventy rupees a month with the remuneration he was offering of eight
or twelve hundred rupees. Not only was this extremely generous, it would also
elevate me to a general’s grade. It did seem promising, but I was sceptical about
the outcome. I knew Kairon had tremendous clout, but could he actually procuresuch a prestigious position for me? My friends and colleagues thought I was
crazy to leave the army as they all felt that civilian jobs were not permanent and
dependent upon the whims and fancies of politicians. More important, I had
heard that an order had been sent to the defence minister, Krishna Menon,
recommending that I be promoted to the rank of lieutenant. This was a great
honour for me and meant that I, who joined as a humble jawan, would soon be a
commissioned officer. This news added to my confusion.
My noncommittal response to his proposal had no effect on Kairon Sahib,
and he continued to woo me. Whenever he was in Delhi, he used to stay at the
Constitution Club near the National Stadium, where I would be practising. He
would send regular emissaries to persuade me to change my mind. When I met
Kairon Sahib again after I returned from Rome in 1960, I expressed my doubts
about getting an honourable discharge from military service, but he airily
dismissed these away. He emphasized that he would take care of all the
formalities if I accepted his offer. He also assured me that all my requests would
be granted without questions.
A few days later, Kairon took me along to a function at Parliament House.
The high-powered guest list included the prime minister, union ministers, chief
ministers and other high-ranking dignitaries. When we arrived at Parliament
House, there was much jubilation among the assembled guests that Milkha Singh
had arrived, but little did I (or anyone else) know why I was there. It was
Kairon’s intention to bring up my case before Pandit Nehru so that a decision
could be taken then and there. He outlined his plan of setting up a sports
department in Chandigarh to train promising young boys and girls. He said that
for his plan to succeed, he needed an experienced and highly celebrated athlete
like me to take charge of the programme. Therefore, he requested that the prime
minister permit my discharge so that I could take up my position with the Punjab
government as soon as possible.
Panditji was reluctant to make a quick decision, knowing that my
resignation would be a big blow to the army under whose benign patronage I had
grown and triumphed as a sportsman. But Kairon Sahib was so persistent that
Panditji had no option but to inform Krishna Menon and General Thimayya that
they should relieve me of my duties so that I was free to enter the service of the
Punjab government. He added, tongue-in-cheek, ‘Milkha Singh is an Indian, so
what difference does it make if he’s in the army or with the Punjab government?
We will all share the honour he brings. Besides, in any case, he has given up
running races.’ Hearing this, Krishna Menon burst out laughing, but General
Thimayya was not amused, though there was little he could do to circumvent a
decision that had been taken at the highest level. He took me aside andembracing me said, ‘Young man, you are just like a son to me, you are making a
terrible mistake. A civilian job is shaky, unlike the army where your career is
assured. Besides, in a few days, we will be promoting you to lieutenant. I hope
you will not regret this step.’
The die had been cast, however, and the next day a telegram was sent to my
unit in Secunderabad, ordering them to prepare all the necessary papers for my
discharge. My centre commander, Colonel Barve, was thunderstruck when he
received that fateful telegram, and sadly broke the news to the other officers and
jawans.
The unit had been home to me ever since I had joined as a raw recruit in
1953. It was the only family I knew, who had loved, nurtured and guided me
through all the vicissitudes of life, encouraging and supporting me to fulfil my
dream of being a world-class athlete. And now it was time to say goodbye, to
leave my safe haven and enter a new, unfamiliar world.
It was a sad and poignant farewell. Colonel Barve addressed a huge
assembly of sorrowful jawans and officers, saying that although he was deeply
distressed by my decision to leave both the army and unit, he nevertheless would
like to wish me good luck in my future endeavours. When it was my turn to
speak, I could not find the words to express the heartfelt love and gratitude I felt
for the people who stood before me. I only knew that I would never forget my
unit and my colleagues and all the years I spent there. I recalled the tough life in
the barracks, the early morning roll calls and hard labour, the hours I spent on
the playing fields, the rigorous training schedule I had forced myself to endure,
and all the kindness I had received from my officers, coaches and fellow
soldiers. It was because of their confidence in me that I had risen from a
nonentity to a celebrity. I ended my speech by appealing to Colonel Barve to
produce many more Milkha Singhs, so that our unit could keep this tradition
alive.
I was overwhelmed by the warmth of their affection, and by the generous
gifts I received—a silver glass, silver thali, a beautiful embossed salver and a
gold kara that I still treasure along with my memories of the EME Centre. But
the transition was complete—my life in the army had ended and a new one as a
civilian awaited me.
I spent the next four months on a well-deserved holiday. Yet, I was still
concerned about the nature of my job. The salary that Kairon Sahib had offered
was more than double the amount I was getting in the army. And though the
thought of earning more money pleased me, I was not so sure what the work
involved. After all, I was a sportsman not an administrator. What did I know
about a desk job?When I joined the sports department in November 1961, I discovered that a
post had been specially created for me, that of deputy director of sports. My first
few weeks there, however, were a struggle and there were times when I deeply
regretted my decision to leave the army. Initially, I had to commute from Delhi
to Chandigarh and back again each day. I would leave Delhi at about 4 a.m. to
reach office by 9, and then, after a long day, would jump into my car at 5 p.m. so
that I could be home by 9.30 p.m. It was long and tedious journey, and
invariably I would report to work much past the stipulated time.
I used to drive a Fiat. In those days, people had to wait for months to buy
cars and scooters. But because I was ‘India’s best athlete’, Lal Bahadur Shastri,
who was transport minister then, kindly allocated an ‘out-of-turn delivery’ for
me. I had bought the car for five thousand rupees in 1958 with the help of money
I had won as an incentive. I was at the Tokyo Asiad, when the Maharaja of
Patiala, Yadavindra Singh, challenged me, saying, ‘If you beat Abdul Khaliq in
the 200-metre race, I will give you five thousand rupees.’ I did, and that is how I
had the money to purchase my first car—earlier I used to ride a motorcycle.
But being India’s best athlete made little difference to my working life in
Chandigarh. My irregular timings had led to tension in the office, and I found it
difficult to cope with the constant reprimands. More important, my long
commute as well as trying to adjust to a sedentary lifestyle had left me with little
time to practice, a routine that I could not afford to miss, particularly since the
next event was the Jakarta Asian Games in 1962.
In frustration, I went to Kairon Sahib and complained that I was not
enjoying spending my entire day doing paperwork and other administrative
duties, when I should be out on the track practising. If I were still in the army I
would have been exempted from military duties and allowed to spend as much
time as I could on the field, practising. The chief minister severely reprimanded
my senior officer. He told him that Milkha Singh was our nation’s pride and
should not be restricted to the mundane routine of office work. Instead, he
should be allowed the freedom to attend office as and when he could; that his
priority was to run for the country.
As a result of that meeting, I was given accommodation in Chandigarh, and
my office hours were relaxed. I was able to resume my morning and evening
practice routine. Over time, I also began to get more involved with my sports
development work and started enjoying creating projects that were close to my
heart.
At the same time, I continued to participate in events in India as well as
overseas. I was part of the Indian contingent for the Jakarta Asian Games in
August 1962, where I won two gold medals, one for the 400-metre race and theother as part of the 4x400-metre relay team. And then it was on to the Olympics
in Tokyo in 1964, after which I hung up my boots. My sports career finally set in
1964. A new chapter now awaited me.
Soon after retiring, I announced that I would give an award of two lakh
rupees to any athlete who breaks my record of 45.6 seconds in the Olympics. So
far, this has not happened, but I have stipulated that even, when I’m no more, my
son Jeev will honour the award.
