 
 
 
 
 
5
This was Not
Sports
he EME Centre’s sports meet, held in Secunderabad in December 1954,
was the beginning of my rise. I stood first in the 400-metre race, with a
timing of 52 seconds. A month later, at the Brigade Meet, in January 1955,
Sohan Singh won the 400-metre race with a timing of 49 seconds, and I was
second, clocking 50 seconds.
Sohan Singh saw my success as a threat to his position, and I now began to
experience the hostilities and rivalries that ran beneath the façade of
sportsmanship. Earlier, I had noticed how resentful established sportspeople
were towards newcomers, who they saw as challenges to their positions. I had
always had great respect and admiration for their prowess and commitment, and
now had, for the first time, seen how competitiveness had warped their attitudes.
Sohan Singh stopped talking to me and even refused to allow me to train with
him. His uncooperative behaviour pained me, but in no way did it stop me from
practising with renewed vigour and resolve. I was truly saddened by their
demeanour.
About a couple of weeks after the Brigade Meet, I went to Poona for the
Southern Command Sports Meet. For some mysterious reason Sohan Singh
withdrew from the 400-metre event, preferring instead to concentrate on the 800-
metre race. His decision gave me the chance to come first in the 400-metre race,
with a timing of 49.4 seconds. The applause and cheers I received from the
spectators greatly boosted my morale and self-confidence, which is very
important for any sportsperson.The next event that I participated in was as a member of the Southern
Command team for the combined services meet in Ambala. This was a gathering
of athletes from the Northern, Eastern, Western and Southern Commands as well
as a team each from the navy and air force. There were several national-level
champions, including Joginder Singh, India’s champion in the 400-metre event
who was representing the Eastern Command. Once again I came second in the
race, reaching the winning post just a few yards behind Joginder Singh. With this
success I qualified for the National Games to be held in Patiala in 1956.
The national-level games were one of the most important sporting events in
the country, and it was a great honour for me to have been selected. As a
member of the services’ team, I would be mingling with the best athletes from all
over the country, including sportswomen. What made it even more interesting
was that running was just one of the events; other sports including basketball,
volleyball, hockey and long jump were also part of the games. For me,
everything was new, and it seemed strange but wonderful. I felt like a rustic
village boy lost in a big fair.
The National Games in Patiala opened with great fanfare. Buntings, banners
and flags decorated the Yadavindra Stadium and when the Maharaja of Patiala,
Yadavindra Singh, declared the meet open, hundreds of white pigeons and
multicoloured balloons were released. In his inaugural speech, the Maharaja
urged all athletes, both men and women, to perform to the best of their abilities
because the selection for the Indian team for the forthcoming 1956 Australia
Olympics would take place here. This announcement unnerved me. Although I
yearned to be part of the Indian team, how could I even hope to be selected? I
would be competing against India’s best runners in the event, and was uncertain
on how I would fare.
A couple of days before the opening of the Games, a sharp stone pierced
my heel during practice and caused a swelling. I paid no heed to the injury and
continued practicing. As a result, the injury turned septic, and I was ordered by
the doctors not to run in the final race. But I could not let anything get in the way
of my ambitions, regardless of the consequences. It was as if my entire existence
depended on running the finals. I ignored medical advice and ran the race. I
came fourth, while Alex Silveria from Bombay came first, Joginder Singh,
second and Harjit Singh of Punjab Police came third. My hopes came crashing,
as I knew that by coming fourth, I had no chance of being chosen for the
coaching camp. But again, luck was on my side. The Maharaja had spotted me
running barefoot in the race and had asked who that boy was. My effortless style
impressed him and he recommended that I, too, should be selected for the
training camp since I showed great promise. My decision to run in the finals wasvindicated.
The training camp was held at the Sri Kanteerva Stadium in Bangalore.
This three-week period was a great learning experience for me, particularly since
I was being trained alongside India’s top sprinters and under some of our best
coaches, including Rufus and Baldev Singh. It was the first time I was taught
how to start a race as well as the technicalities of running a 400-metre race—to
accelerate speed in the last 100 metres. We were made to do hill running and
sand running to build stamina and we would lift weights to build muscle
strength. We ate healthy food and were given regular doses of proteins to
compensate for the nutrients we had lost during training. I was a quick learner
and practised zealously. My dedication on the track pleased the coaches, who
encouraged me with their praise and support. It was at the training camp that I
decided to switch to spiked boots—the latest fad in sports footwear—after
running barefoot for three years. I made this switch around the time when
Roshan Sports, Patiala, had just started manufacturing spiked boots for the first
time in India. I had always preferred the freedom of sprinting without the
constraints of shoes, and felt that wearing them would hamper my speed.
However, once I got used to them, I was amazed to find how wearing spiked
boots could improve my performance.
At the end of the three weeks, a trial race was held, where Joginder Singh,
the star of the event, and I were tied for the first place, both clocking 48.2
seconds. As a result, the boy who came second was relegated to the third place
and the one who came third to the fourth. Suddenly, I had become the hottest
topic of conversation in India’s sports fraternity.
Those of us who had attended the Bangalore camp were in Patiala once
again for the final selection of the Indian athletic team. Once again, some of my
colleagues reacted in a negative fashion, and I was constantly subjected to snide
remarks, but I chose to ignore their jibes. I did not allow their animosity to come
in the way of my aim and kept practising hard. However, I was completely
unprepared for the sinister incident that almost broke my legs.
The night before the selection race, I was suddenly jolted out of a deep
slumber by a hard hit on my legs. A bunch of people had pinned me down and
thrown a blanket over my head, so I couldn’t see them. They continued to hit me
with sticks, and only stopped when my screams alerted my companions in the
barrack. By the time help arrived, my assailants had fled. Even though I could
not see them, I knew who they were but never had the proof to confront them
directly. I only knew that I had become such a threat that people thought the only
way to prevent me from winning was by breaking my legs. This was also the
first time I realized there are people who firmly believe in taking short cuts to