 
 
 
 
 
17
The Jewels in my
Crown
n 4 May 1963, a day before my wedding, my baraat left Chandigarh for
Pathankot. By now Isher and the rest of my family had accepted the fact
that Nimmi and I were going to be married. They arrived for my
seharbandi ceremony and took charge of all the rites and rituals. I happily
submitted, not having the heart to dampen their enthusiasm. Isher, despite her
earlier objections, was elated that her brother had, at last, decided to settle down
with the girl of his dreams.
There was almost two hundred of us in my baraat— relatives, colleagues
and close friends, among them Kartar Singh and Sardar Umrao Singh, sports
minister and president of the Indian Athletics’ Association, whom we picked up
from Jalandhar.
Thousands of people had congregated on the streets and on the roofs of
houses to welcome our cavalcade as we wended our way through the streets and
bazaars of Pathankot, cheering and showering us with rose petals. There were
loud cries of ‘Milkha Singh, Milkha Singh!’ When we entered the bride’s home,
Makhan Singh did the honours, embracing and exchanging garlands with
Nimmi’s brother, Dev Dutt. Then it was time for the bride’s appearance.
Supported by her sisters and friends, she slowly came towards me, her head
demurely covered by a voluminous dupatta. We garlanded each other. After the
jaimala, the reception of the baraat was held, and then my family, friends and I
returned to the guesthouse where we were staying.
The next morning, we arrived at the bride’s house for the Anand Karaj.Nimmi looked beautiful, all dressed in her wedding finery—a heavy red and
gold brocaded sari, her arms covered with bangles dripping with kaliras—as we
solemnly circumambulated the sacred Guru Granth Sahib four times, before we
were declared man and wife. A lavish lunch followed and then it was time for
the vidai, where the bride’s family bids their daughter goodbye as she formally
enters her husband’s home. It was a very long, emotional and tearful farewell
before I tenderly put Nimmi into my trusty Fiat and we began our journey back
to Chandigarh.
A grand reception was held in Chandigarh the next day before we left for
our honeymoon in Srinagar. At the reception, attended by ministers, celebrated
sportspeople and other distinguished guests, the chief minister, Kairon Sahib,
made a speech in which he showered blessings on us and talked about the
importance of genes. He said that this was a union between two illustrious
sportspeople—an international sprinter and the captain of the Indian volleyball
team—whose progeny would surely follow in their footsteps. He hoped that our
children would be inspired by our careers and excel in the world of sports as
well. At that stage, I had thought it was too early to predict the future. All that I
was aware of was my new bride by my side, and that though I had won many
medals, awards and prizes in my career, all these paled before Nimmi, who has
remained the brightest, most treasured trophy God has given me.
Our early life together soon settled into some kind of a routine. That we
both worked at the same office had its advantages, it made our daily commute
much easier and gave us a common ground of interest. We also shared a deep
love for sports, and Nimmi always supported and encouraged me, whether it was
on the track or when I was setting up projects for the promotion of sports in
Punjab. She was a brilliant administrator and I would usually ask her for advice
when I was hassled by some technical detail or bureaucratic obstacle.
Our happiness multiplied when Nimmi gave birth to our first daughter in
January 1964. It is one of life’s most special moments to hold one’s first born in
one’s arms, to watch her smile and gurgle, and to adapt to the joys of
parenthood. We named her Aleeza, a name suggested by an English swimming
coach who was a close friend of ours. Our second daughter, Mona, arrived in
August 1965, followed by another daughter in December 1967. Our third
daughter was named Sonia because she was 
bahut soni
, so pretty. We were
delighted with our daughters, and felt that our family was now complete. But
fate had other plans for us, when we discovered that Nimmi was pregnant again.
Our fourth child, a son, was born in December 1970. When I gazed down into
his eyes, I saw my reflection in them. We named him Chiranjeev Milkha Singh.
Nimmi was a devoted wife and mother. I am still amazed by how efficientlyshe managed her personal and professional life without letting either of them
suffer. She was the perfect housewife, running our home so smoothly that all our
needs were taken care of. She ensured that there was always good, hearty food
on the table, looked after the children, supervised their homework, and yet, never
neglected her official responsibilities. But, we still worried, that as working
parents, could we give the children the stability they required while they were
growing up? Reluctantly, we decided to send Aleeza, Mona, and even Sonia who
just three years old, to St Mary’s Convent, a boarding school in Kasauli, a hill
station a short distance away from Chandigarh. Nimmi was so distraught by this
separation that every evening she would look up at the lights of Kasauli and cry
—she missed her daughters very much. I couldn’t bear to see her so upset and
after a few months we brought the girls down and enrolled them in Sacred Heart
Convent in Chandigarh.
As a family we shared many interests, attending school events, travelling
and a passionate love for dogs. My first pet, in 1958, was a dog I named Dolly
after an old girlfriend of mine. Since then, our home has always been filled with
dogs of almost every breed—Labradors, golden retrievers, poodles and even an
apso. The children would take them for long walks, play with them, groom and
feed them. They still haven’t lost their affection for dogs.
During the summer holidays, I would take the family with me for camps in
the mountains. It was a good experience for them to see a different way of life,
and also to understand and appreciate my vocation. They would also accompany
me when I went on shikar, and we would spend many happy days in the jungle.
In those days there was no taboo against hunting; instead, it was regarded as
a manly pastime, governed by strict rules and regulations that controlled the
number of animals killed, among other restrictions. It was mandatory for keen
shikaris, like me, to acquire permits to hunt in certain specially designated game
resorts, like the Meetawalli Block near Haridwar, which was also the regular
haunt of rich and famous.
My hunting was restricted to birds and animals, including partridge, duck,
wild boar and deer, which we would take home for the table, or if we were on an
overnight trip, cook over the campfire.
I’ve only had a couple of big game encounters, once when I shot a leopard.
I must admit that this was one of the most frightening experiences of my life. We
were at the Kothi resthouse, along the timber trail in Himachal Pradesh, when I
spied a spotted animal sitting on a rock. Thinking that it was a spotted deer or
chital, I picked up my gun and shot at the animal, which leapt up and
disappeared. We tried to search for it, but could find no blood trails, but then,
when I peered into a cave below, I saw a pair of bloodshot eyes staring back atme. It was only then that I realized to my horror that the spotted animal was
actually a leopard! Fortunately, my reflexes were quick, and I shot it dead.
My next encounter was when I was walking through the jungle and saw,
through the trees, a tigress with two cubs. Not wanting to disturb their frolic, I
quickly took a step back and slunk away. I had many such interesting
encounters.
