 
 
 
 
 
12
Going
West
returned to India in a thoughtful mood. I had confronted my past while in
Pakistan and accepted the reality that I was the product of both countries—
Pakistan was my childhood where I had learnt how to face hardships, India
was my youth and adulthood that saw the fulfilment of my dreams.
After a few days in Delhi, I left for Germany as captain of India’s athletic
team. This was the first stop on a tour of Europe that extended from May to July
1960 and culminated with the Rome Olympics in August.
I was pleasantly surprised to discover how famous I was in Germany. My
first race in Frankfurt was a friendly contest where I would be participating with
one of their top athletes, Carl Kaufmann. When I was introduced to this splendid
young man who later became a good friend of mine, he shyly told me, through
an interpreter, that his countrymen believed that except for Milkha Singh, he had
no equals in the world.
Typically, I was not in the best of spirits on the day of the contest. Perhaps I
was still jet-lagged or had yet to get acclimatized to the weather. As a result, I
lost the first race badly. My coach, Ranbir Singh, and teammates tried very hard
to console me, but I was too humiliated by my defeat. I had never lost a 400-
metre race till that day, so how could this happen?
Another contest was held at Cologne a few days later. I performed better
this time and Kaufmann and I were tied for the first place. For me, this was as
bad as being defeated. Then, it was announced that as a result of a photo finish, I
had reached the tape before Kaufmann. My victory convinced Kaufmann that Iwas getting back into form and that it would be more prudent to avoid further
contests. Another German ace sprinter, Manfred Kinder, participated in several
races with me, but I won each of them.
We spent about fifteen or twenty days in Germany, and one amusing
incident still stands out. On the day we arrived in Cologne, one of our team
members, Lal Chand, champion of the 26-mile marathon, was the cause of much
hilarity. The team was staying in a high-rise hotel and had been allocated rooms
on different floors. When we reached the hotel, we were told to deposit our
luggage in our respective rooms and then assemble in the dining room on the
ground floor. Being familiar with the mechanics of how a lift worked, we
reached our destination without any mishap. But not Lal Chand, a simple-
minded fellow ignorant of new technology, who went up and down for thirty
minutes, without knowing how to get off. Each time he tried to step out of the
lift the doors would close on him. When the other passengers enquired which
floor he wanted, he did not understand what they were saying, and just smiled.
Finally, he landed on the ground floor, wearing no necktie or shoes, just his
bathroom slippers. He looked dishevelled and harassed and complained loudly
that he been caught in the clutches of a demonic contraption that refused to let
him go! We were embarrassed by his appearance and the attention he was
attracting from the other diners and immediately dispatched him to his room,
telling him that he must return properly dressed for dinner. But he lost his
bearings, again. After dinner I went to Lal Chand’s room to find out what had
happened and found him arguing with the hotel staff. Apparently, his shoes and
suitcase were missing from his room. I tried to reason with him, explaining that
this was a five-star hotel with a reputation to uphold, and that his baggage could
not have been stolen; it must have been misplaced and would be returned to him.
But my words had no effect on him and he marched out of the room.
His next target was the receptionist, who could not understand what he was
saying, but was eager to help a guest. She sent a couple of attendants up to his
room, and when they entered, he pointed towards his bare feet to indicate that he
had could not find his shoes. Misunderstanding him, they took him to a shoe
shop where he raised a ruckus again, saying that he didn’t want new shoes, he
wanted his own ones back. When he returned to his room, he explained the
situation to me in Punjabi and I communicated the problem of his missing
clothes to the interpreter in English. It was then that we discovered that he had
left his room in such a mess that the staff had helpfully tidied up after him—his
shoes had been placed under the telephone table, and his clothes had been ironed
and packed inside his suitcase. Much ado about nothing! Lal Chand had spent
three hours caught up in a whirlwind of his own making, and to top it all, hadmissed his dinner as well.
I have always had a special love for Germany and the German people. Over
the years, I have been back several times, visiting many cities, including
Frankfurt, Cologne, Munich and even Berlin during the Cold War years. When I
saw the Berlin Wall, I was deeply saddened to see how one nation had been
forcibly split into two by this forbidding artificial boundary. It was yet another
instance of how the lives of ordinary citizens are disturbed by politics. The
Germans were familiar with my records and achievements and admired me to
such an extent that they even had calendars printed with my photograph.
From Germany we flew to London, and then on to the British army base at
Aldershot, about 140 miles away, where we had to undergo a military training
course. We were put up in the barracks, while our manager, a naval officer called
Commander Pereira, stayed at the officers’ quarters nearby. We had brought
along a cook from India, Harnam Singh, who had once been employed by the
Maharaja of Patiala. We had also carried dry provisions like flour, pulses and
masalas, and would go to the market every day to buy fresh vegetables, meat or
chicken so that Harnam could prepare desi-style khana for us. None of us could
have survived on bland English food.
One day, I received a visit from a distraught Englishman who lived on the
military base. He had a peculiar problem that he wanted to share with me, which
involved the Indian 32-mile walking champion, Zora Singh. The champion had a
flourishing six-inch-long handlebar moustache, whose tips almost reached up to
his eyes. Apparently, when Zora walked past their house, his appearance so
terrified the English officer’s three-year-old son that he would shriek in fear.
Zora Singh, oblivious of the impact he had, tried to be friendly, but the child was
too traumatized to be pacified. Our team was highly amused by the incident and
persuaded Zora Singh to either avoid interacting with the child or trim his
moustache. He decided to trim it; after all, he could always grow it back again
once we returned to India.
Behind the barracks there was a large, beautifully maintained playing field,
where we would practice every morning and evening. Our next event, was an
important athletic contest in London, in which sportsmen from fifty countries
would be participating. London’s Punjabi community had turned up in full force
and cheered me vociferously when I won race after race. The English gardener at
the stadium was a fan of mine and would always wish me good luck before a
race. ‘Mr Singh, I want to see you win,’ he would say, jumping up and down.
After each win, I would give him a small tip.
While I was in England, I had received a special invitation from the Soviet
Union to participate in a race in Moscow. This event was held in memory of theZnamensky brothers, Georgy and Seraphim, who, in the 1930s, were the Soviet
long-distance champions. This tournament, first established in 1958, is today an
annual event that draws athletes from all over the world. But when I went there
in 1960, most of the participants were from Soviet Bloc countries, though there
were a few sportspeople from Asia and Europe, including Korea, France,
Norway and England.
That was also the era when the India–Russia Friendship Treaty was at its
strongest, and wherever we went we would be greeted by cries of ‘Rusi–Hindi
bhai, bhai’, and snatches of Hindi film songs. Raj Kapoor and Nargis were
probably more popular in the Soviet Union then they were in India. Their film
Awara
 had been released in 1951 and since then its actors were treated like
glamorous celebrities. The Russian people had tremendous admiration for our
country and I was astonished by how much they knew about our history,
particularly the freedom movement and Independence, and leaders like Mahatma
Gandhi and Nehru.
Nina, my English-speaking interpreter, was equally curious about India, and
would keep asking me questions about the conditions of our workers and
peasants. I was pleasantly surprised by the serious tone of her enquiries. Most
other foreigners I had met seemed more interested in the more exotic aspects of
India—elephants, maharajas, snake charmers, jugglers and mendicants. That’s
when it dawned upon me how different the Soviet Union was from Western
countries.
Whenever I entered the Lenin Stadium, young boys and girls would run up
to Nina, requesting her to get them my autograph, or asking me, through her, to
tell them the story of my life and career. While listening to their eager questions,
I contemplated on the meaning of fame. Adulation and glory can be a double-
edged sword that can make or break a celebrity. In the world of sports, fans
follow and cheer their favourites, particularly when they win and break records,
but the moment their hero falters, their allegiance moves to the next rising star.
In this meet, too, my win was the result of a photo finish, the camera
proving that it was my torso that hit the finishing tape first. The crowds were
overjoyed, particularly the sizable Indian population that was living in Moscow,
who leapt out of their seats and ran into the stadium, embracing me and lifting
me up on to their shoulders with excitement.
I was interviewed by the Soviet press agencies, which asked me a series of
searching questions: What were my impressions about the Soviet Union? What
did I think of Indo-Soviet relations? What did the people of India think of
Russia? They seemed to be fairly happy with my bland replies.
When I left Moscow for London, Nina and a few others came to the airportto see me off. I had made some good friends during my short time in the city. I
continued to keep in touch with them for a while, and today, when I read their
letters, I remember the good times we had together all those years ago. For years
I had corresponded with many other friends, admirers, and even strangers, who
had entered my life at some time or the other. For me, meeting new people,
befriending them and then parting was a normal part of the interactions I’ve had
with a large number of strangers over the years. Yet, for me, establishing contact
with my fans was of the greatest importance.
 