 
 
 
 
 
16
The Bird and a Melancholic
Tree
round the same time, in 1960, I unexpectedly met Nimmi again. At that
time, she was working as the DPE (deputy physical education) instructor
at Delhi’s Lady Irwin College. One day, while I was practising at the
stadium, I was invited to attend a volleyball match, and when I entered the
enclosure, there was an announcement saying: ‘It is a matter of great pride for us
that Milkha Singh, the Flying Sikh, has graced this competition with his
presence.’ All eyes turned towards me, and deeply embarrassed, I quietly took
my seat. Soon after the match was over, a young lady came up to me, folded her
hands and greeted me with ‘Sat Sri Akal’. I looked up and recognized Nimmi
immediately. But what a transformation! Nimmi as a student displayed all the
mannerisms of a frivolous adolescent and was always demurely dressed in a
salwar–kameez and dupatta with her long hair tied in two plaits. Today, wearing
a sari and her hair knotted in a bun, she had the poise and confidence of a
professional young lady. I couldn’t reconcile the two disparate images.
After the competition, she came up to me and insisted that I accompany her
for tea in her hostel, which was fairly close to the stadium. While we talked, my
old feelings for her returned, much stronger now than ever before. How could I
have forgotten such a beautiful and empathetic young woman? She reproached
me, saying, ‘ You are like a carefree bird moving from tree to tree, while I am
like that melancholic tree, upon which you alighted for a brief moment and then
flew off. Have you ever once thought of this miserable tree who finds herself
alone and abandoned?’After a few minutes of silence, I said, ‘I have no reply to your question,
Nimmi.’
But from that day onwards, our relationship changed and we began to meet
more often. This was also the period when my professional life had entered a
new chapter. I had resigned from the army and was now based in Chandigarh, a
city that had been constructed as recently as the 1950s. It was a sprawling,
sparsely populated place and I felt unsettled and lonely without my friends and
colleagues. And though I missed them, I missed Nimmi even more, and every
weekend would drive to Delhi to spend time with her.
One evening, I picked Nimmi up from her hostel and took her for a drive in
my Fiat down Mathura Road. We were so engrossed in our conversation that we
hadn’t realized that the car had hit the pavement and ploughed through a group
of labourers, injuring one of the women. The crowd that had collected shouted at
me and smashed the car’s window frames in rage. I tried to placate them, but
their mood was too ugly and I was surrounded by the angry mob. Nimmi was
watching the proceedings with growing anxiety, fearful that because of the
accident our clandestine meetings would be publicized and that her family and
the college authorities would come to hear of them. Some of the onlookers
recognized me and appeared sympathetic, and in desperation, I appealed to them
to take Nimmi back to her college. She didn’t want to leave me, but I insisted. I
then turned my attention towards the injured woman, put her gently into the car
and took her to the nearest hospital. I paid for the woman’s fractured leg to be X-
rayed and for the subsequent treatment and also gave her husband one month’s
salary ex gratia. I felt this was the least I could have done.
We continued to meet in Delhi while Nimmi was still at Lady Irwin
College, but she soon took up a position as assistant director at the Sports
Department, Punjab, where I was deputy director. This gave us a chance to meet
more often, both in the office during our lunch and tea breaks and in the
evenings when we would take long walks along the lake. However, unlike a
bustling metropolis like Delhi, Chandigarh was a small town and our regular
meetings did not go unnoticed. People began to talk and word of our relationship
soon reached the ears of our all-powerful chief minister, which displeased him
greatly. There was another added complication that made Kairon Sahib even
angrier. The affluent Delhi family had heard about my courtship of Nimmi, and
wrote furious letters to Kairon Sahib, denouncing me for my callous treatment of
their daughter. Goaded by the onslaught of their letters, the chief minister called
for me and demanded to know what was going on.
I then narrated the truth about what took place in Delhi, explaining that
there was nothing untoward in my friendship with the girl; we would meet forthe occasional cup of coffee, or just for a chat. That was all, and if he and her
family didn’t believe me they could check with the girl.
He then shot back, ‘Your intimacy with Nirmal has become a public
scandal. This is very bad.’
I humbly said to him, ‘Sir, if you are displeased with me I will resign and
leave Chandigarh. But first, I request you to give me a fair and patient hearing.’ I
then proceeded to tell him that I loved Nimmi and wanted to marry her.
He listened sympathetically, and said, ‘If you want to marry Nirmal, go
ahead at once. Otherwise stop meeting her.’
I was overjoyed that the chief minister had believed me and that he had
given his consent to our marriage. But what I didn’t expect, and what I should
have, was how difficult it was to break the social conventions of those days. In
the 1960s, inter-caste marriages were frowned upon, and my family vehemently
declared that under no circumstances would they agree to their brother marrying
a Hindu.
By now the news of our relationship had reached Nimmi’s parents, and they
were furious. Her father, Choudhury Mehar Chand Saini, was an influential man
and staunch Arya Samaji, and he was convinced that if his daughter married a
Sikh his reputation and izzat would be at stake. Besides, they had been trying to
fix a match for her with an eligible engineer who had just returned from Canada.
They demanded that Nimmi return home to Pathankot immediately and
attempted to brainwash her to accept the proposal.
When Nimmi returned to Chandigarh, she was deeply distressed and wept
in my arms. Would family pressure force us to part? Was this the end of our
romantic dreams? Despite her sorrow, Nimmi found the courage to confront her
mother with an ultimatum—either to allow her to marry Milkha Singh or she
would remain a spinster all her life. But her threats made no difference to their
opposition.
Finally, Kairon Sahib decided to step in and break the impasse. He spoke to
Nimmi’s father, whom he knew very well, at great length, convincing him to
agree to the match. He explained that both Nimmi and I were determined to
marry each other, and if her family continued to object, then what would prevent
her from eloping and having a court marriage? We both were of age, so didn’t
really need parental consent. ‘Wouldn’t such a step,’ he asked, ‘be equally
harmful to your reputation? Wouldn’t it be easier to just say “yes”?’
And so, with the chief minister’s intervention, all the hurdles were crossed,
and preparations for our wedding began.