 
 
 
 
 
15
Nimmi
first met Nimmi in 1956 in Colombo.
I was in Ceylon (now Sri Lanka) to participate in another athletic
competition, and she was there in her capacity as captain of the Indian
women’s volleyball team to play a friendly match against the Ceylonese. One
day, while my friends and I were wandering around the bazaar, we came across a
group of Indian girls and among them was Nimmi. As it always happens, when
Indians, or for that matter any other nationalities, meet their fellow countrymen
in an alien land, there is instant recognition and bonds of camaraderie are forged
based on language, culture and traditions, even if they are total strangers.
Inevitably, we struck up a conversation with them, and Nimmi insisted that I
come to watch their match that evening. Naturally, I did not refuse, if for no
other reason than to support her team.
I reached the venue two hours ahead of the scheduled time, full of
anticipation. The Indian team was in full form, but Nimmi’s performance was
outstanding—her electric energy, superb high jumps and how she ran up to the
net to hit the ball. It appeared as if she could beat the entire Ceylonese team
singlehandedly on their home ground. Her skills were admirable.
I was eager to meet Nimmi again, but needed a valid excuse. I suggested to
my friend, tea magnate Daljit Singh Sitara, that he host a reception at his
residence in Ceylon for the victorious Indian volleyball team. His invitation was
accepted and the dinner party was fixed for the next evening, after my race. The
girls had demanded entry passes for my competition and turned up in full force
for the event. I ran as one possessed, very much aware of Nimmi’s presence.
There was absolutely no question of me losing the race, not with Nimmi as anonlooker. I wanted to impress her and it would just be too humiliating if I lost.
When I won, I stood before Nimmi and was thrilled by the glow of happiness on
her face.
At the dinner party, Nimmi discussed my race in minute detail, and I was
struck by how interested she was in my life and career. It seemed obvious that
we were on the brink of a new relationship, and I was determined to see her
again, but we were at a party and I had no card or piece of paper to write down
my telephone number. So quietly, lest anyone could see, I caught hold of her
hand and quickly wrote the number down on her palm. My touch made her blush
and she nervously looked around, wiping the sweat from her brow with her
dupatta. The rush of emotions that swept across me electrified me and I couldn’t
sleep a wink that night. The next morning, before she left for India, Nimmi
telephoned me and we agreed to meet at the Yadavindra Stadium in Patiala,
where I practised regularly, when I was with my unit there.
When I returned to Patiala from Colombo two days later, I received a
telephone call from the principal of the College of Physical Education, who
informed me that some of his students, including Nimmi, were coming to watch
me practice. She had wisely taken this precaution in case our growing
relationship would lead to gossip. When I met the principal, I congratulated him
on the volleyball team’s victory in Colombo and made special mention of
Nimmi’s contribution.
Nimmi and I met a couple of times thereafter, while we were both
practising at the stadium—she volleyball and I running. But there were few
outward signs that our relationship was ripening into love. All it amounted to, at
that stage, was a strong attraction between two people of the opposite sex. We
shared a bond, but for that bond to grow, we needed time, which was not
possible, mainly because my calendar was packed with events that made it
impossible for me to stay in any one place for a length of time. After a few days
I had to hurriedly leave Patiala and had no time to inform Nimmi of my
departure. I must sadly admit that my travels and the numerous events that I was
competing in soon obliterated all thoughts of Nimmi.
It was during this period of my life that I, too, had begun to experience the
adulation and admiration that popular film stars and other celebrities face. My
career and fame were on the rise, and I remember all the lovely ladies I had
encountered when I participated in running events across Europe, Asia, and even
India, who cheered loudly and clustered around me, asking for autographs or just
gazing at me with adoring eyes. I still remember Betty, Australia’s sprint queen
whom I met at the Melbourne Olympics in 1956. She had never seen a sardar
before and was mesmerized by my turban. I taught her how to tie it and evenpresented her with one of mine. To be honest, I could have succumbed to
temptation, but then I would always recall my vow of abstinence, well aware of
the deleterious effect sex would have on my mind and body. Sex can play havoc
with the self-imposed discipline and practice routine that is so essential for an
athlete’s growth and development.
Although my sister, Isher, was very keen to arrange a marriage for me, I
was really not interested at that stage, simply because I could never find a girl
who could measure up to my all-absorbing devotion to sports, or for whose love
I could sacrifice my métier, my chosen goal.
When I returned from the Tokyo Asian Games in 1958, the principal of the
College of Physical Education in Patiala invited me to give his students a lecture
on the Asian Games. I had little experience of public speaking, but agreed even
though I thought it incongruous that a young man like myself should be
addressing an audience who were almost the same age.
When I took my place at the podium, I began by thanking the principal for
the honour he had extended to me by inviting me to address his students. I then
narrated some of the highlights of the races I had participated in. Girls were
seated in the front row of the auditorium while boys filled the benches behind
them. It was here that I saw Nirmal, or Nimmi as she was affectionately called,
again. She was talking animatedly to her friends, and I presumed somehow that I
was the subject of her witty comments. After my lecture, several girls and boys
came up to me for autographs or to be photographed with me, but Nimmi
remained aloof. Perhaps she was too shy, or too proud to join the crowd. I saw
her staring at me but lacked the courage to single her out for a chat so that we
could renew our acquaintance.
There had been an innocence in my experience with the fairer sex so far,
but I soon realized how convoluted the mating game could be. It was at an
exhibition on Mathura Road in Delhi when I first set eyes on one of the most
striking young ladies I had ever seen. As a joke, a friend said, ‘Milkha, do you
think you could attract this girl?’ We joked about it and left if there. As it
transpired, she and her mother came to watch me run at the All-India Athletic
Meet at the National Stadium the next day. When I won the race, she came up to
congratulate me and generously invited my friends and me for dinner at her
house. That evening my friends teased me mercilessly, saying, ‘Beware, the
loveliest rose has thorns that can scratch you.’
The next day we went to her palatial house for dinner and met her parents,
who welcomed me warmly like a son, indicating that they had no objection to
their daughter’s friendship with me. They were an affluent business family and
they shrewdly felt that having a famous sportsman as a son-in-law would begood publicity for their company. As our interactions increased, I began to feel
very uneasy and stifled by the way her parents took command of my life and
how they tried to control my every move, to the extent that whenever I returned
from an overseas trip, their car would be waiting for me at Palam airport and
they would whisk me off to their house. They even tried to interfere with my
future, and dismissed my dreams and aspirations; instead they wanted me to
focus on how my image could enhance their business.
She entered my life when I was young and impressionable, and it was clear
to me, right from the start, that we could never have forged a deeper relationship.
She was very beautiful and we were close friends, but I had no desire to give
into her family’s demands and dikats.
Gradually, I began to distance myself from the family, but they were
extremely influential and threatened that if I did not marry their daughter, they
would destroy my career, or even get me murdered. Their threats and warnings,
however, did not frighten me. By now I had moved to Chandigarh and hoped
that the matter would be forgotten.
There were times when I would miss having a soulmate in my life, but I did
not want to lose focus in my quest to become the best athlete in the world.
