 
 
 
 
 
4
My Army Life
soon discovered how tough and disciplined life in the barracks was and the
strict rules and regulations that dictated a new recruit’s daily routine. Time
governed every minute of our waking hours, and besides our duties out of
doors, we had to make our beds, wash our mugs and plates and store them, with
all our other possessions, in a tin trunk under our beds. We would rise every
morning at 5 a.m., down a mug of piping hot tea and then assemble at the parade
ground for the roll call and physical training, where we had to go through a
series of complicated exercises. After breakfast, we returned to the ground where
we had daily drills on how to march smartly and in tandem with our fellow
soldiers. The rest of the morning was spent performing several military duties,
including practising shooting at the firing range. What we all dreaded most was
‘fatigue duty’, which meant the non-military duties we had to do every day like
digging trenches, building roads, gardening, peeling potatoes, washing utensils
in the mess, polishing senior officers’ shoes and other types of manual labour. If
a jawan disobeyed orders or was unruly, he was made to do push-ups and front
and back rolls. The harsher punishments were running around the grounds
carrying a knapsack full of rocks on the back or the threat of being sent to the
quarter-guard or army jail.
Our days were long and very tiring and we all looked forward to relaxing in
the recreational room to play carom, read or just sit around and chat or listen to
the radio. Each night, just before lights out, there was the final roll call for the
day to check if all were present and accounted for.
Our salary then was thirty-nine rupees a month, of which it was compulsory
to send ten rupees home. The balance went towards paying the dhobi, tailor andcanteen charges. What little was left over we spent watching movies.
The training was so rigorous and the regime so strict that often I would
despair that I couldn’t cope and wanted to run away. Some lads from my group
had done so because they couldn’t cope with the rigours. Whenever such
thoughts came to my mind I would recall my early hardships, and think: army
life may be tough, but it is better than the sufferings I had endured earlier. Then a
fortunate incident changed the course of my life.
One Saturday morning, after roll call, there was an announcement that a
six-mile race was to be held the next day, and the top ten, out of some five
hundred recruits who participated, would be exempted from fatigue duty and
would also be given an extra glass of milk every day. This was in January 1953.
That night, my Punjabi friends and I could talk of nothing else but the
forthcoming race. Our other competitors would be the unit’s recruits from all
over India and we had all unanimously decided that we could not let the
Bengalis, Biharis or Tamilians defeat us—our izzat would be threatened if that
happened. I barely slept that night—I was so excited, but at the same time,
apprehensive.
When the day dawned, all of us recruits, wearing our canvas shoes and
khaki vests and shorts, reported at the starting line. Filled with a sense of
mission, I ran with great gusto and took the lead in the first two or three miles.
When I would feel tired I would stop, rest for a while, and start running again
when I saw that the other boys were catching up. Luck was on my side that day
and I came sixth in the race. At roll call that night, my name was announced
before a large gathering of almost three hundred recruits. Friends, and even
strangers, wildly applauded and thumped me on my back, screaming,
‘Shahbash!’ I was overwhelmed with joy by the attention I received—this
moment was the starting point of my career as an athlete.
Our instructor was a former runner called Havaldar Gurdev Singh, who had
been with the army for about fifteen years. Although his task was to train new
recruits, he was a good runner and continued to participate in races. This time he
was there to ensure that the ten of us would run six miles each day, after which
we would be given that promised glass of milk. For me this was a treat after all
those years of deprivation. Gurdev was a taciturn, no-nonsense kind of man,
whose tough exterior hid his softer, gentler side. He would run with us during
our training period, prodding us with his danda (stick), shouting abuses:
‘
Haramzadon bhaago
! (run, you bastards!),’‘
gadho, hamari company first aani
chahiye
! (our regiment must come first, you donkeys!),’ if we did not perform
according to his expectations. He would use the same stick to hit the ground in
anger or frustration if we were being careless, calling us ‘
dangar di aulad
’. Butthat was his way of motivating and encouraging us. I strongly believe that he
was instrumental in motivating me to strive to become a world-class athlete.
Even today when I think of his danda and volley of abuses, I respectfully bow
my head in tribute to a great teacher.
Six weeks later, the Centre held a cross-country race. In this event, Gurdev
came first and I second. Suddenly I became the cynosure of all eyes. I was
twenty or twenty-one at that time, but looked much younger. A couple of weeks
later, I was asked to take part in the Brigade Meet in which all the units stationed
in the twin cities of Hyderabad and Secunderabad were participating. I was very
surprised when they asked me run in the 400-metre event, mainly because I did
not know what 400 metres meant, as I had always run six miles. When I asked
Gurdev, he said that I would have to run one round of the track that measured
400 metres.
Foolishly, I remarked, ‘What, only one chakkar (round)? I can run twenty
chakkars!’
Gurdev patiently explained, ‘No, you will have to put all your stamina and
speed in just one round, not twenty.’
At my first practice run, I took off my canvas shoes and stood there
barefoot, in my shorts. Gurdev clapped his hands for me to start—I did, and
clocked 63 seconds in my first try. I was eager to run four more rounds. After all,
I was used to running six miles every day and considered this quarter mile of
little consequence. For days I continued to practise and my time was further
reduced to less than a minute.
On the day of the Meet, I noticed that some young men had the word
‘INDIA’ inscribed on their vests. They were being mobbed by senior officers and
their children, and seemed to exude an aura of power and prestige. I could not
understand why this was so and when I inquired I was told that they were those
athletes who had represented India in international sporting events. That was my
Eureka moment, when I made a solemn promise to myself that I would not rest
until I, too, found a place in that hallowed world of Indian athletes who had the
privilege of displaying our country’s name on their blazers and vests.
The Meet opened with much fanfare. Our unit’s team was smartly clad in
full khaki uniforms—boots, jersey, trousers and vests carrying the name EME;
the Sikh soldiers had tied turbans over their joodas (topknots). The military band
played stirring martial tunes as all the regiments marched in perfect tandem
round the stadium, dipping their colours before the dais where Brigader S.P.
Vohra, our commanding officer, took the salute, and declared the Meet open. We
then returned to our tents to change into our sporting kits.
As soon as the call for the 400-metre race was given, we reported at thestarting point. I was very apprehensive; this was the first time that I was
competing in such an event and that, too, before the eyes of some four thousand
spectators. My fellow competitors had all stood first in national events, and here
was I, a puny, barefooted village bumpkin surrounded by stalwarts. I had no idea
what the procedures were for such events, or what the technicalities were until
the race began. And then it all became clear. Numbered lots were first drawn,
indicating the lane in which we would run. Then when the starter, who held a
gun in his hand, said, ‘On your marks,’ the participants would place their feet on
the starting line and ‘get ready’; and when he fired the gun, it was a signal for us
to take off. I came fourth in the race, but this was of little consequence when
compared with the line-up of stars before me—Sohan Singh of the Sikh
Regiment, who was also the national champion in the 400-metre race, came first,
and Pritam Singh, one of the privileged few who had represented India, was
second.
I was disappointed but not disheartened. My participation in the Brigade
Meet gave me the chance to attend the coaching camp in Secunderabad, and also
go to Bombay for the Southern Command Meet, where I was given the chance to
be a part of the Brigade team for 4x400-metre relay race.
When I returned to Secunderabad it was back to work as usual—parades,
other military duties and sitting for examinations, simple language tests that we
had to pass if we wanted to be promoted to the next level. Despite the regular
routine, my burning desire to succeed as an athlete never dissipated. In the
evening, after a day’s hard work, I would carry my food back to the barracks and
hide it under my bed. While my colleagues relaxed, I was at the grounds
practising. I was still unaware of the techniques needed to run a 400-metre race,
but followed the rule of thumb—I would run one round at the swiftest speed, rest
and then run another one. I would complete five or six rounds every night, then
return to my room, bathe and eat my dinner. This was my nightly routine for
many months—a clandestine activity no one was aware of.
Then one night, while doing my regular practice rounds, I was spotted by
Brigadier S.P. Vohra, who was on his regular after-dinner walk. He stopped me
and enquired what I was doing at that hour. I sprang to attention, saluted sharply,
and modestly replied that I was practising for the 400-metre race.
‘Why are you practising at this hour?’ he asked.
‘Because I don’t have time for practice during the day, sir,’ I said.
This seemingly inconsequential encounter led to a series of incidents that I
could never have anticipated. The next day, the brigadier spoke to my company
commander asking him to exempt me from fatigue duty, so that I had the time to
practice. The brigadier also expressed the desire to meet me. As a recruit,however, it continued to be mandatory for me to be present at PT (physical
training) and the parade. The company commander told the JCO ( Junior
Commissioned Officer), who in turn told my ‘ustad’.
The next day, I was summoned by my ‘ustad’, who severely reprimanded
me for daring to complain to the brigadier. ‘If you had a problem, you should
have come to me, not the brigadier,’ he said, poking me in the ribs with his stick.
This was grossly unfair. I had made no complaint; the brigadier had spotted me
and asked why I was practising at that hour. I had merely, and honestly, told him
that it was because I did not get enough time during the day. But the furious
‘ustad’ chose to punish me by making me carry a knapsack full of stones and run
up and down for two hours. I did not even realize why I had been penalized so
harshly.
Still, the brigadier’s order had to be obeyed. But to get to his office I had to
move, step-by-step, up the hierarchical ladder, being interviewed and threatened
and abused by each officer. It took me almost a week to meet the brigadier, who
ordered that I should be groomed as an athlete, given proper facilities and a
special diet, and be exempted from fatigue duty.
This incident opened up a whole new world for me, one that offered
innumerable opportunities. The armed forces in India have had a long tradition
of promoting sporting events and athletes, and if soldiers show potential and are
hardworking, they are given incentives to encourage and motivate them to
develop as competent professionals.
 