 
 
 
 
19
Once an
Athlete, 
Always
an Athlete
lthough I had retired from the track in 1964, I was still much in demand
on the international circuit, and would be invited to attend events and
meets all over the world. I was there in Munich for the 1972 Olympics
and witnessed the tragic shooting of eleven members of the Israeli team, in what
must be one of the dastardliest acts in the history of sports. With me in Munich
was the celebrated American athlete, Jessie Owens, who had won three gold
medals at the 1936 Berlin Olympics, where the world saw, for the first time, the
power of Hitler’s Nazi Germany. Both were events where the very essence of
sportsmanship was overshadowed and diminished by politics.
In 1980, I was the only Indian sportsperson to be as chosen by the United
Nations to carry a torch for peace throughout the world. Only the best runners
from each country were given the privilege to participate in this humanitarian
relay. I remember running along the Great Wall of China, and handing the torch
over to the presidents of Nigeria and Kenya, as well as to Giani Zail Singh, who
was then president of India.
When Delhi hosted the 1982 Asian Games, I had the honour of lighting the
torch at the newly constructed Jawaharlal Nehru Stadium. After the ceremony
was over, I was taken to the VIP enclosure and given a seat next to Rajiv
Gandhi, his wife, Sonia, and her family. His mother and our prime minister,
Indira Gandhi, was seated nearby.
We greeted each other cordially, and then Rajiv turned to his father-and
brother-in-law and pointing at me, asked them, ‘Do you recognize this man?’They looked blank, but when he explained that I had participated in the 1960
Rome Olympics, they exclaimed in excitement: ‘Oh, the saint!’ and asked for my
autograph. During the Games, whenever I would appear from the tunnel that led
into the stadium, the spectators would look at my long hair and beard, and cheer
wildly, calling me a guru, a mendicant, a saint. It was that image that had
remained in their minds for all these years.
I have always had a very close association with the Nehru– Gandhi family.
Panditji loved sports and it was because of his influence that Delhi hosted the
1951 Asian Games. His daughter, Indira, would always joke with me about her
running days when she was in school in Switzerland, and how she would always
come first in the races. In 1982, at the Veterans’ Athletic Meet, she came up to
the starting line, hitched up her sari and prepared to join the race. Her security
guards were shocked, and pleaded with me to escort her back to the seating
enclosure. Such are my warm memories of the Gandhi family.
In the thirty years that I worked in the sports department, first as deputy director
of sports, and then director of sports and education, I initiated several projects to
promote and improve the quality of sports in the state. Among them was the
opening of about thirty or forty sports wings attached to schools and colleges in
various districts. The objective was to search for talented young players at the
village and district levels and encourage them to take up sports as a career.
We sent messages to the principals of all educational institutions asking
them to identify young boys and girls who showed promise in the field of sports,
be it hockey, football, volleyball, athletics and more. Officials from our
department would visit the schools and check what facilities they offered,
including playgrounds, gymnasiums, hockey fields and athletic tracks. The next
step was to hold trials and select the best, who were then placed in specially-
created sports wings, where the government provided them with free tuition,
hostel facilities, food, training and equipment like tracksuits and sports kits. We
set up tough practice schedules and hired qualified coaches who could supervise
and monitor their progress. In this way, the budding sportspersons would receive
training in sports, and at the same time, continue their education.
The process was further refined according to interest and specialization. If a
boy or a girl showed potential in a specific field, whether it was gymnastics,
hockey, football or athletics, we would send them to specially designated schools
or areas where their talents could be further developed, like for example,
Hoshiarpur, which specialized in football. There they could also participate inregular competitions and learn that healthy competitiveness went hand-in-hand
with the spirit of sportsmanship. Our persistent efforts and zeal were rewarded
and we produced several world-class sportspersons, including Ajit Pal Singh and
Surjit Singh—both were students of the sports school in Jalandhar and later
captained India in hockey; Balbir Singh Jr represented India in hockey; Ajaib
Singh was the 400-metre champion and Mahinder Singh Gill, a triple jumper.
Many of them participated in national-level games, and when they won they
would be offered lucrative jobs by the railways, police, banks, and even
corporate houses like Tata.
All my life, I have firmly believed that a strict training programme under
the guidance of professional and competent coaches was the key to success, as
well as will power and determination. Those were the principles that I stressed
upon during the training period; they were, after all, the very mantras that I had
lived by in my early years. I also believed that talent must be nurtured from a
very young age for it to grow and flourish. If I hadn’t received the support and
encouragement from the army when I was starting off, would I have reached the
heights that I did?
During the summer vacations in May and June, the department held month-
long summer camps in picturesque hill stations such as Srinagar, Simla, Manali,
among others. We would book a stadium that had all sports facilities, and
organize accommodation and make arrangements for food for almost five
hundred boys and girls. The camps adhered to a strict schedule, beginning the
day with prayers and a roll call. Thereafter, the time was spent on the field. The
weather, fortunately, was cool and pleasant, so being outdoors was always
invigorating. My role in the camps was to inspire and motivate each and every
child and to convince them that the road to fame was not a bed of roses, that only
hard work, dedication, will power and discipline would lead them to their
destiny. I would tell them about my early life, about the relentless training
schedules I had set for myself, about the toil and perseverance, all because of my
overpowering desire to succeed in international events. Because I was so
obsessed with training, I would oversee the programme to check if the coaches
were being as diligent as they should.
I have very fond memories of the summer camps, particularly of the
enthusiastic youngsters who never complained or tried to shirk their duties. I
also remember with gratitude the help I received from Kashmir’s chief minister,
Farooq Abdullah, and his father, Sheikh Abdullah, who welcomed me to
Srinagar and provided me with all facilities while we were there, and General
Gurbaksh Singh, who kindly allowed me to hold a camp in Shimla’s Annadale
grounds, said to be the highest cricket ground in the world at that time. None ofthis would have been possible if I had been an unknown sports official. They
knew and respected me, and above all, believed in what I was doing and never
hesitated to extend every support they could to the cause.
Another policy I initiated in the early 1970s was to make the games period
compulsory in every school in Punjab. I had learnt, to my horror, that since this
period came at the end of the school day, it was the easiest one to bunk. I sent
urgent appeals to all principals and physical training instructors throughout the
state, telling them emphatically that it was their responsibility to ensure that all
students attend this period, if they wanted their schools’ sports standards to
improve. The purpose of the period was to teach children to play games, to train
them, to tell them what the rules were, but if there were no attendees, the entire
exercise would become a farce. I emphasized that it was up to the principals or
instructors to set examples, and if they were sincere, committed, and above all,
strict, the students would be equally dedicated.
Throughout my tenure, the message I repeatedly sent to all institutions and
associations was that if we wanted to improve the quality of sports, not only in
Punjab but also throughout India, we should all unite and work towards a
common goal. But to achieve that goal, each of us should be sincere and
dedicated, whether it was the athlete, the coach or the association. Halfhearted
measures will not work. I travelled extensively across Punjab to spread my
message. Wherever I went, people would come up to me, saying that my son is a
good runner, or is keen on football, can you give him a chance? I would then test
them and if they were truly talented, I would place them in the relevant sports
wing. What drove me was my deep desire to pass on what I knew to young
children. For that purpose, I have never rested in my mission.
Sadly, after I retired, most of my initiatives faded away—no camps have
been held since 1991, students continue to bunk the games period, and the
standards of the sports wings have deteriorated. The stark truth is that nobody
cares or is interested, or has the vision to plan ahead or think of the future of
sports in India. It is only by grooming children when they are young that we can
create a strong group of sportspeople who will shine in international events. We
are such a large and diverse nation, and yet after Milkha Singh and P.T. Usha,
there has been no other athlete who has been able to compete successfully in
either the Asian or Olympic games.
Just before I retired in 1991, I had sent a request for the Chandigarh
government to give me ten acres of land to establish a national-level athletic
academy to train and develop young sportspeople. My dream was to build
hostels, stadiums and swimming pools, create spaces for athlete tracks, football
and hockey fields, and every other facility that such an institution demands. Butthe idea was summarily dismissed even before it could be discussed or debated
impartially. One of the objections put forth was the money required for such a
project; the land itself would cost crores of rupees. I was very disillusioned that
there was no one who was decisive enough to take a decision, and so a project
that was dearest to my heart faded away into oblivion, just like all my other
initiatives.
Almost six decades after my first race in 1953, I have come to the sad conclusion
that the decline of sports is also because, somewhere over the years, Indian
athletes have lost the killer instinct when it comes to winning events at the
international level. When I was in China for the 2008 Olympics, I visited several
of their sports academies and was impressed by how organized they were and the
single-minded determination with which they went about achieving their targets.
Their eventual ambition is to become the top sporting nation in the world.
In China, kids are selected at a very young age and they train year after
year. Talented young athletes are required to undergo a strict training regime, so
much so that a gymnast is made to repeat an exercise not once but a million
times, until they perfect their technique. Their coaches are equally resolute
because they know that they are entirely responsible for their trainees’ success or
failure. And since failure is not an option, all their energies are concentrated
towards ensuring that their students win.
How very different this systematic approach is from the lackadaisical
manner in which we try to develop our sportspeople. Selections in India are ad
hoc, often dictated by political diktats, or through personal contacts and
connections. What India needs today is a firm goal to aspire towards, and what
could be more prestigious than aiming for an Olympic gold? Success in the
Olympics should be our ambition, but to achieve that end, we need international-
level coaching, and for that, I would strongly recommend emulating the Chinese,
right from creating a world-class sports infrastructure to spotting and grooming
kids with talent. We need to overhaul our selection process and training
methodology and choose only the most talented young boys and girls who show
promise and have the potential to produce results. Give them professional
guidance, use scientific training methods, discipline them if their standards fall,
and above all, inspire and motivate them. What needs to be instilled in them
right from the beginning is: toil hard to increase efficiency, stamina and strength,
be resolute in thought, word and deed, and most important of all, take pride in
your performance.But no sportsperson can achieve results without an equally dedicated and
committed coach. Thousands of coaches graduate from the National Institute of
Sports (NIS) every year, but what has been their contribution to the development
of our sportspeople? Unlike China, they are not held accountable if their trainees
do not produce the expected results. The sad truth is that no one questions them,
neither the government who employs them, nor the associations who sponsor
them, not even their students whose careers depend upon them. As a result, they
have grown complacent in their jobs.
A lethargic or apathetic coach can only impede the growth and progress of
an athlete. If there were no Gurdev Singh, Ranbir Singh or Dr Howard when I
first started running, would I have ever achieved the success I did? No. And I
will reiterate what I have always said that it is only the coach who has the power
and influence to build a sportsperson’s stamina, prowess and self-confidence.
To rid ourselves of this malaise, I would suggest that the government should
not employ coaches on a permanent basis, simply because as government
employees they have the security, if not job satisfaction, and when they retire
they are assured of their pensions. India desperately needs more coaches like
Pullela Gopichand, whose student, the world-class badminton champion Saina
Nehwal, is a credit to his patience and meticulous grooming. And, if we are
really serious about wanting to improve the situation, we need to be more careful
about our selection of coaches: hire those who are capable and who share the
same goals, give them four-year contracts on the assurance that their contracts
will be renewed only after they have produced some tangible results. They must
be made to understand that during this period their performance will be judged
by how they and their students perform. The performers would then be
rewarded, while the non-performers should be shown the door. Every country
hires coaches on a contract basis, so why not India? But such a change will only
be possible once the current group of coaches retires, and government and sports
associations are ready to take on a new challenge.
