 
 
 
 
 
10
‘Come on,
Singh’
spent a few days at the EME Centre before the next major sporting event—
the Sixth British Empire and Commonwealth Games was a few months later.
It was initially known as the British Empire Games and was renamed to the
British Empire and Commonwealth Games in 1954 and the British
Commonwealth Games in 1970, before finally gaining its current title, the
Commonwealth Games, for the 1978 edition.
I had resumed my practice schedule soon after I returned from Tokyo and
when it was confirmed that I was part of the Indian team, I was filled with both
joy and trepidation. Joy at the thought of competing with some of the best
athletes in the world, trepidation because I was uncertain about the outcome.
Friends and well-wishers who came to see me off at Delhi airport were all very
supportive and repeatedly remarked that they had great hopes of me returning
with another gold medal. But in my present state of apprehension and self-doubt,
this seemed a formidable task.
We landed in London and after a brief stopover left by train for Cardiff in
Wales, where the Games were to be held. On the train we were informed that for
part of our journey we would be travelling through a tunnel that had been built
under the River Severn. I was flabbergasted by this fact and wondered what
amazing engineering feat had created this underwater tunnel.
At Cardiff, we were received by representatives of the organizing
committee and taken to the military base where we, along with the other teams,
were staying. In the evening we were taken to the Cardiff Arms Park forpractice. There I saw athletes who looked stronger and sturdier than I. Some
even seemed seven feet tall! Compared to them I was like a pigmy among giants.
All the press reporters and cameramen were clustered around athletes of
international repute and no one paid me the slightest notice. My fame was
restricted to Asia, but here I was just another participant in the midst of eminent
sportsmen from about thirty-five nations who formed the Commonwealth.
Three days later, Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth declared the Games open,
and the specially designed Commonwealth flag was ceremonially raised. The
Queen’s Baton, which she had handed over at Buckingham Palace and which
had then been carried by a relay of runners to Cardiff, was presented to Prince
Philip, the Duke of Edinburgh, so that he could read the Queen’s message to the
assembled participants and audience. The Queen’s Baton, which is so much a
part of the Commonwealth Games today, was launched at Cardiff.
Our American coach, Dr Howard, had accompanied the Indian team. He
was an outstanding trainer, who was very well acquainted with international
training patterns and techniques. He was also very astute and could easily judge
the strengths and weaknesses of the other athletes. For an entire day he mentored
me, giving me pointers on what to expect. More than anything, he was trying to
rid me of my inferiority complex and instil self-belief. I had convinced myself
that there was no way that I could be among the six finalists, let alone win a gold
medal. What chance did I have against superbly fit professionals like Malcolm
Spence from South Africa, George Kerr from Jamaica, Kevan Gosper from
Australia, Terry Tobacco from Canada and John Salisbury from England.
However, because of Dr Howard’s motivation and advice, I won heat after
heat, and effortlessly reached the finals. The night before the race, Dr Howard
reiterated the tips he had drilled into me. He revealed that Spence had more
stamina than speed, and that I should stick to my own style of running the 400-
metre race, that is, to start in top gear. He emphasized that I must not start
slowly, that I must maintain my speed for the first 300 metres, and then give it
my all in the last 100 metres. He said that if I ran the first 300 metres at full
speed, Spence would do the same, although that was not his running strategy.
The morale-boosting attitude and clever strategies Howard gave me,
equipped me with the confidence I badly needed. I started believing that I could
be the best. Another constant motivation was a burning desire to do well for the
country—I was well aware that my good performance would lead to the glory of
India.
In spite of all my positive thoughts, I spent another sleepless night before
the race, tormented by nightmares of what could go wrong. My confidence again
had plummeted and I wondered what I should do—participate or quit. The lackof sleep and my morbid thoughts had drained me. The race was scheduled for 4
p.m. in the afternoon. I got up at the usual time, soaked in a tub of hot water to
relax, had breakfast and then fell back into bed and covered myself with a
blanket. After a refreshing nap, I awoke at noon, had a meagre meal of a cup of
soup and a couple of slices of bread. I did not want to overeat, in case it would
impact upon my performance.
At 1 p.m., I combed and knotted my long hair on the top of my head and
covered it with a white kerchief. In my Air India bag, I packed my spiked shoes,
a small towel, a comb and a packet of glucose. Then I put on my tracksuit, and
closed my eyes in meditation, conjuring up images of Guru Nanak, Guru Gobind
Singh and Lord Shiva. I silently and fervently prayed to them to give me
strength and to guide me through what lay ahead.
My other team members were waiting for me on the bus. When I took my
seat, they jokingly remarked: ‘Today, Milkha Singh is off colour.’ ‘Well my
friend, what is the matter?’ ‘Why are you not happy?’ I did not respond to their
wisecracks and humour, but it did lighten my mood. All my thoughts and
emotions were focused on the forthcoming event.
Sensing my nervousness, Howard came and sat next to me. Encouragingly
he said, ‘Milkha Singh, today’s race will make or mar you, it will either put you
up or pull you down. Such a chance will not come your way for another four
years and four years is a long time. It is now or never. If you follow my tips, you
will beat Malcolm Spence. This feat is not beyond your capacity.’ His words
raised my spirits, somewhat.
When we reached the stadium I went to the dressing room and lay down,
agitated and disturbed. I felt feverish and queasy, sick both in mind and body. At
3 p.m., Howard came to me, rubbed my back and massaged my legs. He said,
‘My boy, get ready. Your race begins in an hour.’
I reached the track, put down my bag and, like the other competitors, began
my warm-up exercises. Throughout the waiting period, Howard stood beside me,
murmuring words of encouragement.
The first call for the 400-metre race came at 3.50 p.m. The six of us
reported at the starting line and were made to stand in a row. As we stood there, I
heard voices calling, ‘Come on, Singh; come on, Singh’. I wiped the sweat from
my legs with my towel and was tying the laces of my spiked boots when the
second call came. I removed my tracksuit and stood there in my shorts and vest
emblazoned with the word INDIA under the Ashok chakra. I took a few deep
breaths. The six of us went through the usual courtesy of wishing each other
good luck. Salisbury was in the first lane, Spence in the second, Kerr in the third,
Gosper in the fourth, Tobacco in the fifth, and finally I in the last one. My heartwas pounding wildly. When the starter said ‘On your mark’, I got into the
starting position, with my left foot just behind the starting line, my right knee
parallel to my left foot and both hands touching the ground.
I invoked the blessings of the Almighty once again while I waited for the
signal. The gun went off with a loud bang and as we took off there were loud
cheers and claps from the spectators, some backing Spence, some Gosper, while
the majority were yelling for Salisbury.
I ran as if the furies were after me. I remembered Howard’s advice and
strained every muscle for the first 300 metres. I was in the lead and when Spence
saw that I was running at lightning speed, he tried to overtake me, but luck was
on my side. I saw the white tape when I was just fifty yards away and made a
mighty push to reach it before Spence caught up. There was a gap of a yard or so
between us when I floated ahead and breasted the tape. Wild cries of ‘Come on,
Singh; come on, Singh’, filled the air. I had won the race!
And then, my body felt lifeless and I fell to the ground unconscious. The
effort I had put into the race had taken its toll. From what I later heard, I was
taken on a stretcher to the medical post, where I was revived with oxygen.
It was only after I regained consciousness that the realization that I had won
started sinking in. My teammates and other supporters surrounded me and lifted
me on to their shoulders. As they brought me back to the stadium from the
medical post, thunderous cheers greeted me. I draped the Indian flag around me
and took a victory lap of the stadium.
After my race, I was interviewed by BBC television.
‘Mr Singh, how do feel after winning the race?
‘I felt nothing at all, I was lost in another world. Now 
I feel just like
any other winner in my position—on 
top of the world!’
‘Did you hope to win the race?’
‘I had no such hope. I only tried to do my best and I 
am happy that I
succeeded beyond my expectations.’
‘In your hour of victory, do you have any messages for your
 
country?’
‘Only to say: my country, your son has done his duty 
towards you.
May every citizen do his duty to his 
motherland.’
‘ 
What are your impressions about the people of this country?’
‘Their love and good wishes inspired me to win.’ (This 
reply was just a
formality.)‘Did you have a chance to run with these athletes before?’
‘No, this is the first time that I have had the honour.’
My win was a historic event, particularly significant because this was the first
time that an Indian athlete had won a gold medal at the Commonwealth Games.
My victory had put India on the sports map of the world.
When I first arrived in Cardiff I was a nonentity. Today, I was treated like a
celebrity. Our high commissioner to the Court of St James, Mrs Vijaylakshmi
Pandit, had watched my win from the VIP enclosure, and she came up to
congratulate me after the victory ceremony. When I saw her approach, escorted
by our manager Ashwini Kumar, I wondered who that lady with ‘bob-cut’ hair
was. Then we were introduced and I was very happy to meet the sister of our
prime minister, Pandit Nehru, whom I had the privilege of meeting after I had
returned from Tokyo. She embraced me and remarked that I had raised India’s
honour and the nation was proud of me. I was uplifted by such warm
felicitations. Then she told me that Panditji had sent a message asking what I
would like as a reward for bringing such glory to India. I requested that a
national holiday be declared on the day I landed in India—a wish that the prime
minister happily granted! The Duke of Edinburgh had also come up to greet me.
He had watched me winning the race and said, ‘I greatly appreciate Milkha
Singh’s style of running.’
That night we met sportsmen from all the other Commonwealth nations. We
congratulated each other and talked of this and that. The next morning, I
received a tsunami of telegrams praising my performance and congratulating me
for winning.
After the Games ended, we left for London where we stayed at the
Dorchester Hotel. Queen Elizabeth had invited all the teams who had
participated in the Games for a grand banquet at Buckingham Palace. We were
all awestruck by the invitation, well aware of how prestigious it was for us
humble athletes to be given the opportunity to visit the Queen’s palatial
residence and mingle with a distinguished guest line-up of royalty, ministers,
diplomats and celebrities. When our team arrived at the palace, smartly clad in
our blue blazers—and us sardars in turbans—we attracted the attention of the
glamorous crowd. A ball was held after the banquet. By then the guests had
congregated in groups and drinks were served. I had my first ever sip of beer that
evening and was bold enough to join the dancing couples on the floor. After all, I
had received good practice in this area in Australia. The Indian contingent was
amused, but I egged them on to join in. I said, ‘Today is a day of great rejoicing
and no one should disapprove of dancing at such an occasion.’ My words actedas an incentive and my companions joined in the festivities. While we were
dancing, the lights dimmed and some couples got closer and more intimate with
their partners. When the lights came on, we were all amused to see that many of
the young men had traces of lipstick on their lips. Such behaviour is
unacceptable in India, but this was the West.
We left for Delhi the next morning, where once again I was received
rapturously. What was even more gratifying was that my arrival was celebrated
with a national holiday!
I was a star, my name a household word and the stories of my exploits had
acquired legendary proportions. My struggles and perseverance had finally
heaped huge rewards, not only for me but for my country as well.
 