 
 
 
 
 
3
Ten Days in Jail
erozepur was a sea of refugees, who were desperate to find a familiar face
—a husband, wife, child or relative. We were all in the same boat,
searching for survivors or finding shelter. After days of aimless loitering, I
came upon a dilapidated house abandoned by a Muslim family. Though we had
some sort of a roof over our heads, it was almost impossible to find food that
would feed the two of us. But the lack of money had made me resourceful. I
made frequent forays into the army barracks, where I would polish shoes or do
some other menial chores for the soldiers, in exchange for leftover or discarded
dal and rotis, which I would take back to share with Jeet. On some days we went
to sleep hungry.
We had by now lost all contact with Makhan, who was still in Pakistan with
his regiment, but there was little time to worry—we had other, more immediate
problems to cope with. At the end of August, the swollen Sutlej river that runs
through Ferozepur overflowed its banks and the city was swept by devastating
floods. Jeet and I managed to save ourselves by climbing on to the roof of a
submerged house, but what little possessions we had with us were washed away.
By now I had had enough of Ferozepur and was very keen to leave and move to
Delhi, where, I had heard, that it was easy to find jobs. Clinging to one another,
we waded through the floodwaters towards the railway station.
Once again, a sea of humanity surrounded us. There was absolute chaos at
the station with people moving this way and that with no sense of direction.
Getting to Delhi was my priority, but the refugee trains were so overcrowded
that it was almost impossible to find a seat. Luckily, Jeet managed to squeeze
into the ladies’ compartment, but I could only find place on the roof. From myelevated position I could see caravans of men, women and children, some on
foot, some on bullock carts, cycles or any mode of transport, moving towards
India or Pakistan. It was a heart-rending sight, this mass migration of people
who had lost loved ones, homes and belongings in what must be one of the
greatest tragedies of history.
Memories of those bloodthirsty events of that August still haunt me. I had
lost most of my family, and yet, I recall the kindness of the ladies on the train.
Although I bemoaned my lost childhood, I also knew that I had to find the
strength and courage to face whatever lay ahead.
Once we reached Old Delhi railway station, we, like thousands of other
refugees, were stranded on the platform with no clue of where to go or what to
do. We had no money or contacts, so I teamed up with a couple of other boys to
try to find work, but we soon discovered that in those unsettled days, people
were wary of employing refugees. Finally, I found a cleaning job in a shop at
Ajmeri Gate, which would give me a salary of ten rupees. Jeet and I spent a few
chaotic days at the station, mingling with the other displaced people; we were
always scared about what would become of us, where would we go. I can still
remember how desperate people were and the intense hunger that would drive
them to grab the free food distributed by charitable trusts—it was like vultures
attacking their prey.
When we had arrived, we had registered our names at one of the help desks
in the hope that we would find some members of our families. Throughout the
day and night, regular announcements were made, giving the names and
whereabouts of relatives. It was then that I heard that my sister, Isher, her
husband and his family, had survived the holocaust and were living in Shahdara.
When we reached their house, the family reunion was tearful and poignant. At
last we had found some family members who were alive and a place to stay.
My joy was short-lived, however. I had barely been in that house a few days
when I saw how badly Isher was being treated by her in-laws, particularly her
mother-in-law, an enormously fat lady, who would sit on a manjee (cot) all day,
issuing orders to Isher. Jeet, on the other hand, was treated with great respect;
she was the only daughter among seven brothers and her husband was in the
army, which was regarded as a steady profession in those days. It hadn’t taken
her long to forget our recent hardships and the bond we had shared travelling
from Multan to Delhi.
My poor sister worked like an unpaid maid in that house, waking up at 4
a.m. to start her chores, which included washing clothes and utensils, cooking
the meals, looking after her young brothers-in-law and fulfilling whatever
demands her husband’s family made on her. At the same time, she was a dutifulwife and would present her husband with a child at regular intervals. It was a
large family, in keeping with the times, and my sister had to labour from
morning to night to keep them happy, but they were never satisfied, and even if
she made the slightest mistake, they would thrash her mercilessly. Their
unkindness and ingratitude upset me deeply, but there was little I could do to
stop them. I kept hoping Makhan would come back and save his sister.
As the days passed, I soon realized that I was not welcome. Jeet’s family
constantly taunted and mocked me by saying that I was a useless, good-for-
nothing fellow, who could only sit around all day and eat their food; that I should
go out and fend for myself rather than being a burden on them. It reached such a
point that I was given only one meal a day. I would then remember my mother
and how she would feed her husband, children and extended family with what
little was available. I missed her so much that I would sit and cry, indulging in
bouts of self-pity at my helplessness. Isher was deeply distressed by my plight
and would surreptitiously give me a couple of rotis, whispering, ‘Bhaag ja,
bhaag, if they find out they will beat me.’ These I would eat with salt or an
onion, as I was not allowed any dal or vegetables.
By now we had heard that Makhan and his unit were back in India, but we
had no idea where he was. The situation at home had made me so unhappy that
my health deteriorated. Yet, on some days I reverted to being a carefree lad again
—racing trains, flying kites or laughing and cracking jokes with my friends. I
would have liked to have resumed my education, but there was no money to
pursue that avenue. It was at this time that I had my first infatuation. I was just
seventeen and the object of my ‘fancy’ was the beautiful fifteen-year-old who
lived next door. In those days, the mohalla had only one municipality water tap
and everyone lined up there to fill their buckets. That’s where I first saw her. She
was standing behind me and I offered to let her fill her bucket before me.
That day onwards, I tried to help her in small ways, by allowing her to take
my place in the queue, or carrying the bucket back to the house. But we were so
young and innocent, and there was little else I could think of to further the
romance other than waiting to catch a glimpse. We would look at each other
when she left for school, or when she went up to her terrace, or when she
stepped out of the house on errands. I would talk incessantly about her to my
friends. Finally, I decided to pour my heart out and sent her a letter written in
Hindi, wrapped in a ball which I threw on to the terrace of her home. To my
delight, she reciprocated my feelings. Our romance took wings, but our flight did
not last long.
I still vividly remember the day when I had taken her for a walk after
school finished. It seemed magical. We lost track of time and she reached homelate. Her parents found out about us and were furious. She was thrashed and
locked up in a room. She also stopped going to school.
Soon after, her parents got her married off. I was heartbroken.
The following eight or nine months that I spent in limbo were the worst
times of my life. It was also a period that I am still deeply ashamed of. As was
inevitable, I fell into bad company, and began to gamble. There was no elder or
role model to give me advice or direction or to supervise my actions. As a result,
my life went rapidly downhill.
My friends and I would indulge in all kind of nefarious activities. We would
steal bags of sugar or rice from the goods trains that were standing at Shahdara
railway station and sell them at cheaper rates at the local bazaar. But the thefts
were soon discovered and reported to the police, who began to keep a close
watch at the station. One day they caught us in the act, and though some of the
boys were arrested, I ran so fast that I managed to escape the dragnet.
Fate, however, had other plans for me. In 1948, I was travelling by a local
train from Shahdara to Delhi without a ticket, a jaunt I had successfully managed
several times before. But as luck would have it, this time I was arrested and
brought before a magistrate who stipulated that I either pay a jurmana of fifteen
rupees or go to jail. I had not a penny, let alone fifteen rupees, and was thus
sentenced to three months’ rigorous imprisonment. I was deeply humiliated
when the constables handcuffed me and threw me in jail. It was only after a
couple of days that I managed to send word to Isher. She secretly sold her gold
earrings and paid the fine. I was released, after spending ten days in the company
of thieves and dacoits. Often, while in jail, I would get so dejected that I
seriously thought of becoming a feared dacoit after my stint behind bars.
Nothing had changed in the house in the ten days that I was in jail. Isher
was working as hard as she always did, and the newly instituted rewards for her
were regular beatings. I was still humiliated by my stint behind bars and would
sit around the house moping. Then we heard the news that Makhan had been
posted at Delhi’s Red Fort. When he came to visit us, I fell upon him in
desperation, bombarding him with tales of our troubles, and about how harshly
his wife’s family treated Isher. Although he was a hen-pecked husband,
completely dominated by his wife, he did try to make an effort to ease the
situation during the short time he stayed with us in Shahdara. But his military
duties prevented him from being in the house all day, and the ill treatment never
really stopped. One day, all my pent-up frustration and anger erupted at the sight
of Isher being violently abused yet again. I went into Jeet’s room, picked up
Makhan’s gun, which he had forgotten to take with him, brought it out and
aimed it at Isher’s in-laws. I said menacingly, ‘
Khabardar, agar meri behen kophir se haath lagaya to jaan se maar doonga!
 (If you dare to touch my sister
again, I will kill you all).’ They looked at me with fear, and I would like to
believe that the beatings became less frequent after that incident.
While Makhan was in Delhi he managed to get me admitted in the local
school, but it had been more than a year since I had looked at a book and I found
it difficult to concentrate on my studies. Regretfully, I must admit, I could not
renounce my bad habits and was back on the streets again, in the company of
delinquents. When my brother discovered my truancy, he would beat me.
Despite the thrashings Makhan tried hard to find me a vocation, but before
a suitable job could materialize, he was transferred to Jhansi and I was back to
my bad old ways. Somehow, deep within me, I knew that I wanted to lead a
better, more productive life. I yearned to join the army, but it was 1949 and there
were thousands of unemployed refugees who had the same ambition. Hopeful
young boys like me would throng the recruitment centres, but there were too
many of us and too few vacancies to fill.
I was rejected two or three times. At my first attempt at the recruitment
centre in Red Fort, I was one of almost five hundred lads who had queued up,
waiting for our turn to come. Then, we were asked to stand in line in our shorts,
where we were weighed. Thereafter, the medical officer asked me to run a
hundred yards, after which I was asked to expand my chest and my chest
measurements were taken. A cross was then marked on my chest and I was
informed that I was not fit enough to be recruited. At that time my height was 5
feet 9 inches, and my weight 65 kilograms. Dejected but not defeated, I tried
again but with the same outcome.
To occupy myself and earn some money, I began to work as an apprentice
at a rubber factory, with a salary of fifteen rupees a month. I would hand my
wages over to Jeet’s parents only to receive in return dry rotis and onions for my
morning meal. The poor diet and miserable work conditions ultimately had an
impact on my health and I was seriously ill for almost two months.
Makhan was now posted in Kashmir and I gave him an ultimatum that he
must get me recruited into the army if he did not want me to give the family a
bad name. In November 1952, with my brother’s recommendation, I was
selected at the army’s recruitment camp held in Kashmir. I was overjoyed. The
other new recruits and I were taken by military transport to Srinagar and then on
to Pathankot. My final destination was the Electrical Mechanical Engineering
core (EME) Centre at Secunderabad.
 