 
 
 
 
20
The Politics of
Sports
t is common knowledge that the international sports calendar is fixed years in
advance to give every participating nation the opportunity to prepare for
them, whether it is to train athletes or for the host country to set up the
required infrastructure. The New Delhi Commonwealth Games 2010 was not the
best example of either.
India’s hosting of this sporting extravaganza led to an unfortunate chain of
events, starting with charges of large-scale corruption in the organization of the
Commonwealth Games against certain people, who were subsequently jailed
because of these charges, and eventually ending in the International Olympic
Committee (IOC) suspending the Indian Olympic Association in December
2012. What this means is that unless India is readmitted by the IOC, no Indian
athlete can compete at future Olympic Games.
For sports to flourish in India, drastic measures need to be urgently taken.
There has to be a unanimous agreement between the government, sports
federations and associations, to discard personal agendas and gains and strive
towards a common goal. The government has provided more than adequate
funds and several state-of-the-art facilities, but what are they getting in return?
Hard-hitting questions need to be asked: what are the plans for the future? What
has been done to implement them? Have funds been honestly disbursed? It is
only when these questions have been debated and answered should funds be
allocated.
Many initiatives can be taken if we want standards to improve. But, first
there must be a desire to change the system. Our one-point agenda should be togroom sportspeople to succeed in national and international events, to win
medals and accolades. A strategic plan needs to be put in place and implemented
decisively and purposefully. One way could be to identify areas where talent
exists and tap it—for example, wrestling in Haryana, archery in the Northeast,
hockey in Punjab. Planning must be focused and enforced honestly—it is only
then that India can emerge as a front liner in the sports world. Each one of us
must contribute if we want to change the system.
The all-pervading influence of politics on sports has to end. A while ago,
the sports ministry had invited me to sit on the board of the Athletic Federation;
I attended some meetings, but soon realized that I was in the minority, and that
my frank views were not welcome. Several people with vested interests resented
my presence on the board, only because they felt that a veteran athlete like
myself would eclipse their prominence. Often I used to wonder how people who
have never played a game could have been given such important positions. Why
couldn’t sportspeople head sports organizations? But this can never happen,
simply because vested interests will prevent such a move. More important is the
fact that these are elected positions and no sportsman will be able to garner more
votes than a wily and powerful politician.
When Margaret Alva was the sports minister, I often told her that all heads
of influential sports bodies should have tenures of just five years, so that there
will be a change in the style of functioning. I voiced the same opinion to the next
minister, Ajay Maken, but only an act of Parliament can initiate such a policy.
What we can’t comprehend is that the world is changing rapidly and that we
will be left far, far behind if we don’t move with the times. In all these decades,
sports technology, too, has changed. When I was starting my career in the early
1950s, there were no running shoes, and it was only in 1956 after Roshan Sports
in Patiala began to manufacture them, that they were accessible to the public.
Another revolutionary change has been the introduction of synthetic tracks. This
has meant that athletes have achieved feats that were considered near impossible
during our times. With shoes, tracksuits and other sophisticated equipment and
benefits so readily and openly available, why then is it so difficult for our
sportspeople to reach international standards?
What saddens me most today is the universal use of drugs. When I used to
run, the only drugs I knew of were those taken for medicinal purposes, yet today,
drugs have spread like cancer, even at the school games’ competition levels.
Visit any educational institution in the Punjab, and you will find needles and
other substance abuse paraphernalia lying around openly. Drugs are easily
available either in medical stores or through dealers, and each person, whether a
child or adult, knows what drug to take, when and how much. Up-and-comingyoung athletes have no qualms about taking any type of illegal substances,
whether it is heroin, cocaine, or banned supplement drugs to enhance their
performances to achieve spectacular results without hard work. The authorities
are aware of what is taking place, so are the coaches and doctors who pretend
that they don’t. In the last few years, there has been a spate of scandals regarding
the use of drugs among Indian sportspeople.
Two members of the Indian women’s 4x400-metre relay team who won
gold medals at the Delhi Commonwealth Games in 2010, later tested positive for
the use of performance-enhancing steroids; more recently was the unexpected
allegation that Olympic bronze-medallist, Vijender Singh, had taken heroin and
other banned substances, though the tests turned out to be negative. Despite the
personal humiliation and disgrace of medals being returned and dishonour to the
country, no action has been taken to stop the spread of drugs. If the government
and sports authorities are serious about the eradication of illegal drugs, they must
act swiftly and enforce a strict clampdown on all the sources and suppliers; ban
athletes who take drugs from participating in future events, and suspend or sack
doctors and coaches who are responsible for importing drugs or introducing
them to their students. Strong, almost authoritarian, measures are the only ways
in which to deal with such serious and harmful practices.
In 2001, the Bharatiya Janata Party government offered me the Arjuna Award,
almost forty years after I had received the more prestigious Padma Shri in 1958.
When the award was introduced in 1961, its premise was very clear—that it
would only be granted to those outstanding sportspeople who had received
medals in international events, including the Olympic, Asian and
Commonwealth games.
When I looked at the list I discovered that it included even team members
for games which have no global presence like kabbadi, which is played in just
four countries. I brought this and other examples of unworthy candidates to the
notice of the then minister of sports, Uma Bharati, and told her that I considered
it a farce to be included in the same list of nominees who have not even
represented their country. It was as if the Arjunas had been given away like
prasad, to any and everybody, ignoring those who truly deserve them.
I firmly refused the award because the selection committee had ignored the
fundamental premise on which it was founded, and that by giving me the award
at this stage it did not recognize ‘the stature of the services I had rendered to the
nation’. If her government had wanted to give me an award, why didn’t theyseparate my name from the general list, and announce that they were honouring
me with a lifetime achievement award? Moreover, why has it taken so long for
my achievements to be acknowledged and recognized? After all, I had received a
Padma Shri at the height of my career, when I was ‘Asia’s Best Athlete’ and the
’Nation’s Pride’. My refusal made headline news, but as far as I was concerned,
if the government had wanted to offer me an Arjuna, why did it take them forty
years?
Besides the Padma Shri, my other awards included the Helms World
Trophy for the best athlete in the world presented by the United States of
America in 1959, and the Indira Priyadarshini Gandhi Award in 1997. Such
awards and decorations play a major role in boosting a sportsman’s morale, they
bring fame and immortalize a person’s name, but unfortunately very few of them
bring great financial benefits. In the early years of the Arjuna Award,
sportspeople received a sum of money, but few benefits, unlike today when
awardees are entitled to railway passes, discounted airfares, petrol and gas
agencies, among others.
I have always been a strong advocate for the cause of continuing official
patronage for prominent sportspeople when they retire. Most sportspeople come
from indigent, uneducated backgrounds, whose parents neither had the means
nor the influence to develop their child’s potential. But what differentiated these
children from the rest was their hunger and drive to develop their abilities and
succeed.
But what happens when they retire? They have no family money or assets
to fall back on, and their brief careers have not provided them with a secure
future; they receive no benefits or any monetary gain, and once they leave the
field, they are forgotten. There have been so many tragic stories of sportspeople,
even Arjuna awardees and gold medallists, who have died in abject poverty,
including Dhyan Chand and Trilok Singh. I have often suggested to the
government that they should introduce some schemes that will help sportspeople
when they retire—give them jobs, a regular pension and other benefits. The
more prominent ones can be appointed to sports bodies, or even as state
governors. Such incentives will encourage the aspiring youth to choose sports as
a career.
Another reason why sports standards are declining is that over the last few
decades, cricket has overshadowed every other sport in India. Open any
newspaper, put on the television, and what first grabs a person’s attention are the
screaming headlines and images of star cricketers in action. No other sport gets
the kind of exaggerated coverage that cricket does. Besides, there’s a constant
cycle of cricket—test matches, one-dayers, IPL and what not—taking placethroughout the year, so many events that there seems to be very little respite
between one match and the next. Compelling images, swashbuckling exploits,
glamorous lifestyles, and most important, the money are the lures that attract
young children towards the game.
Just a handful of youngsters are interested in any other sport. Even if a
sportsperson wins or breaks a record in any other game, be it athletics, hockey,
boxing, wrestling, shooting, tennis or badminton, attention will focus on them
for only a short while. For example, our medallists at the 2012 London
Olympics, including Saina Nehwal, Sushil Kumar, M.C. Mary Kom, were
greatly fêted for their successes when they returned, but then the attention was
back to cricket once again. I think the media should help encourage other sports
in every possible way.
A vital ingredient to promote a product, a film, a book or a sport is
publicity, which is why cricket has become such a dominant sport today. When
my first autobiography was released in Punjabi in the mid-1970s, I had hundreds
of fans, children and adults alike, coming up to me, saying that they wanted to be
Milkha Singh. I would then put them in the training programme, but after four or
five days they would abscond because they could not cope with the gruelling
routine. I would ask, ‘Do you think that to become Milkha Singh is a joke? A
sleight of hand? No, to be Milkha Singh, you need courage and conviction, as
well a goal to aspire towards.’ And for me, that goal always was to excel in
running. Otherwise, would I have practised so relentlessly?
Some years ago, I donated my medals, trophies and other sports memorabilia to
the NIS, Patiala, and Delhi’s National Stadium, while the spiked shoes I wore to
run the 1960 Rome Olympics was donated by me for a charity auction organized
by actor Rahul Bose’s NGO, The Foundation. Rakeysh Omprakash Mehra, who
made the film on my early life and running days—
Bhaag Milkha Bhaag
—
bought the shoes for twenty-four lakhs rupees.
Life has given me much more than I hoped for, however, I have one
remaining desire: to see an Indian runner win back the Olympic medal that
slipped away from my hand on that fateful day in Rome.
