 
 
 
 
 
11
The Flying
Sikh
y triumph at the Commonwealth Games had elevated my status to such
a level that I was now an international sports celebrity. Between 1958
and 1960 I received numerous invitations from different countries and
travelled throughout the world, participating in at least eighty international races,
out of which I won seventy-seven. The international press featured glowing
articles on my life and achievements, because wherever I went I broke the old
400-metre records, establishing new ones.
In 1960, the much-awaited Olympic Games was to take place in Rome. I
was very excited; this would be my second Olympics after Melbourne in 1956.
In the years since then, I had matured and grown as an athlete, and was now at
my peak. Perhaps I would have better luck this time.
But, before that, in January, I was to participate in the National Games at
Delhi’s National Stadium. My sister Isher and her family were very keen to see
me run. They had heard of my exploits but had never watched me on the track. I
happily invited them for the event. I was overjoyed to see them, especially my
beloved sister Isher, who had sold her gold earrings to secure my release from
jail all those years ago. When I greeted her, she said, ‘Dear brother, you have
endured terrible hardships and trials, but now good fortune has smiled upon you,
and us because of you. Don’t get exhausted by running so fast.’ Her love and
concern overwhelmed me and I embraced her warmly, at the same time assuring
her that running did not debilitate my body; instead it gave me added strength.
She responded with tears in her eyes, ‘My dear brother, your name is like ashining star in the world today. You have raised the honour of our family
enormously. If only our parents were alive to see what you have achieved. How
happy and proud they would have been.’ I wiped her tears gently and tried to
console her, ‘Who can fight fate? Perhaps I would never have reached such
pinnacles of success if I hadn’t endured those early days of austerity and
adversity.’
My sister was unaware of the little surprise I had planned for her. I asked
her to put on my India blazer. Once she did, I asked her to put her hands in the
side pockets of the blazer. I had put a gold earring in each of the pockets. ‘These
are for you’, I told her. She took the earrings and just couldn’t stop crying.
Inside the stadium, I ordered tea and fruit for my family, but Isher demurred
saying, ‘Why are you going through all this trouble for us? We’ve already had
tea.’ Her simple remarks filled me with affection as I led them into the stadium.
As we entered, I felt the crowd staring at their simple attire with disdain. For a
moment I felt embarrassed, but then was filled with loathing at people’s
snobbish attitudes. With great love and consideration I made them sit in the best
seats and stayed with them until my event began.
Isher asked me where I would run and I pointed to the track, and patiently
explained that the athlete who would reach the winning post first would receive
a medal, which added to his glory as a sportsman. When I entered the field, Isher
tried to keep her eyes fixed on me throughout the duration of the race. I came
first as usual, but fainted yet again because of the energy I had expended while
running. My poor sister thought that I had been shot dead by the gun that had
started the race. She started wailing loudly when she saw me being carried away
on a stretcher. The other spectators attempted to reassure her, but she was not
convinced and demanded that she be taken to me immediately. When she saw
me lying down looking pale, with a film of glucose on my lips, she cried, ‘I can’t
bear to see you in this condition. 
Veer
 (brother), please, I beg you, give up
running.’
When I recovered, we returned to the stadium to be greeted by vociferous
cheers. I nudged Isher and remarked, ‘Look at the honour and praise I receive
when I run and win races. If I stop running, no one will bother about me.’ But
she was still not convinced.
The National Games were held for three days, during which I set new
records—100 metres (10.4); 200 metres (20.8); 400 metres (46.1); 4×100-metre
relay (42.1); and 4×400-metre relay (3.12.6).
Soon after the National Games, our team had received an invitation from
the Pakistani government for the Indo-Pak Sports Meet. What an ironic twist of
fate. I was returning to the land where I was born, where I had lost my home andmost of my family in the inhuman savagery that followed Partition. It was not
the religious bigotry that troubled me, just the fear that the visit would revive
those horrible memories. I did not want to go, but Pandit Nehru intervened,
saying that this visit was for the honour of our country and that I was going there
as an ambassador for India. The others in our team felt as I did, as we reluctantly
travelled to the border at Attari via Amritsar. The welcoming committee at the
border greeted us warmly and then we were taken by bus to the Faletti’s Hotel in
Lahore.
Days before the Meet opened, headlines in newspapers as well as banners
and posters carried large-print notices that said:
‘Indo-Pak Athlete Duel
Abdul Khaliq to meet Milkha Singh’
The Meet was declared open by the president of Pakistan, General Ayub
Khan, at the newly constructed Gaddafi Stadium. There were more than thirty
thousand spectators in the men’s enclosure, and several thousand more of burqa-
clad ladies in the women’s. The general, other senior officials and their families
sat comfortably in the Presidential Box.
At this event I was once again pitted against my old opponent, Abdul
Khaliq, whom I had defeated at the Tokyo games.
Consequently, the massive crowd’s excitement levels were high as they
eagerly waited for the moment when their hero would defeat me. In this Meet,
too, the pattern of our victories were the same as at Tokyo—Khaliq won the 100
metres and I, the 400-metre race. The deciding race would be the 200-metre one.
My teammates reassured me by saying that there was no way that I could lose,
my technique was too finely honed and my timing was much better than the one
at Tokyo. But as usual, on the day of the race, I woke up feeling feverish and
bilious. I was shivering, either because I was unwell or by memories of those
terrible days that still haunted me. Instead of succumbing or feeling sorry for
myself, I forced myself to get up and go to the stadium. As I said to myself, over
and over again, I had to win because a defeat in Pakistan would be a fate worse
than death.
The Pakistanis had heard about me, but only because I had defeated their
hero two years ago in Tokyo. They felt that the time had come for Khaliq to
avenge his defeat. While the two of us were going through our warm-up
exercises, there were deafening shouts from all the spectators: ‘Long Live
Pakistan, Long Live Abdul Khaliq.’ The entire audience kept cheering for him as
he walked in before me, followed by other Pakistani athletes and Makhan Singh,the only other Indian besides me.
At the starting line, I put down my bag, warmed-up and wiped the
perspiration from my body with a towel. As we waited for the race to begin, a
couple of moulvis, with flowing beards, skullcaps and carrying rosaries in their
hands, encircled Khaliq. They blessed him, saying, ‘May Allah be with you.’
Irritated by this blatant favouritism, I shouted, ‘Moulvi Sahib, we, too, are the
children of the same God. Don’t we deserve the same blessings?’ For a moment,
they were dumbstruck, and then one of them half-heartedly muttered, ‘May God
strengthen your legs, too.’
There was pin-drop silence as we stood at the starting line waiting for the
race to begin. The silence was oppressive. The starter, dressed in a white shirt
and trousers, a red overall, white peaked cap and black shoes, stood on a table
behind us. He shouted, ‘On your marks,’ fired the gun and the race began. The
audience suddenly awoke and began to chant: ‘Pakistan zindabad; Abdul Khaliq
zindabad.’ Khaliq was ahead of me but I caught up before we had completed the
first 100 metres. We were shoulder-to-shoulder, then surprisingly, Khaliq seemed
to slacken and I surged ahead as if on wings. I finished the 200 metres about ten
yards ahead of Khaliq, clocking 20.7 seconds that equalled the world record. My
coach, Ranbir Singh, the manager and all my team members leapt to their feet in
jubilation. I was embraced, thumped on the back and then lifted on to their
shoulders as they expressed their happiness both vocally and physically.
It was indeed a joyful day for India, but a terrible tragedy for Pakistan.
Khaliq himself was so devastated that he lay on the ground weeping pitifully. I
patted his back and tried to console him by saying that victory and defeat were
part of the same game and should not be taken to heart, but he was too
humiliated by the fact that he had been defeated before the eyes of his
countrymen.
After the race, I ran a victory lap of the stadium, while loudspeakers
announced: ‘The athlete running before you is Milkha Singh. He does not run,
he flies! His victory will be recorded in Pakistan’s sports’ history, and we confer
the title of “Flying Sikh” on him.’ It was General Ayub Khan who coined the
title ‘Flying Sikh’, when he had congratulated me, saying, ‘
Tum daude nahi,
udhey ho
—you do not run, but fly!’ As I passed in front of the women’s section,
the ladies lifted their burqas from their faces so that they could have a closer
look at me—an incident that was widely reported in the Pakistani press.
And so, with this victory, I became the Flying Sikh, a title that soon became
synonymous with my name all over the world. 