We were both horrified by the parents’ laxity, allowing their daughters to
dance so closely with strange men. Such a thing would never ever happen in
India. As the days went by, we shed our inhibitions and decided to join in the
fun. We invited the girls to the Village and took them to the ballroom. But once
there, we did not dare dance with them, so conscious were we by the censure we
saw in our fellow Indians’ eyes.
We spent five days with the Smith family. They had begun to regard us with
affection and even came to see us off at the airport. We promised to keep in
touch, but this is not always possible. We were geographically too far apart, and
culturally too different.
Our flight back was uneventful. By now, we had grown accustomed to
flying and did not panic as we had before. I was returning home with no trophies
or medals, just my resolve to be a world champion. From now on, this became
my sole purpose in life.
  
 
 
 
 
7
My God, My
Religion, 
My
Beloved
returned to India, chastened by my poor performance in Melbourne. I had
been so excited by the prospects of being part of the Indian Olympics team,
but naïvely, hadn’t realized how strong and professional the competition
would be. My success in India had filled me with a false sense of pride and it
was only when I was on the track that I saw how inconsequential my talents
were when pitted against superbly fit and seasoned athletes. It was then that I
understood what competition actually meant, and that if I wanted to succeed on
the international arena, I must be prepared to test my mettle against the best
athletes in the world. I remembered Charles Jenkins’ advice that it was only
through regular and rigorous practice that a sportsman can improve his technique
and build his stamina. In my determination to avoid failure, I set myself a goal to
work towards, that is, to transform myself into a running machine.
Between 1956 and 1957, my primary mission in life was to excel in
running. The track, to me, was like an open book, in which I could read the
meaning and purpose of life. I revered it like I would the sanctum sanctorum in a
temple, where the deity resided and before whom I would humbly prostrate
myself as a devotee. To keep myself steadfast to my goal, I renounced all
pleasures and distractions, to keep myself fit and healthy, and dedicated my life
to the ground where I could practise and run.
Running had thus become my God, my religion and my beloved.
My life during those two years was governed by strict rules and regulationsand a self-imposed penance. Every morning I would rise at the crack of dawn
and after the usual ablutions, would get into my sports kit and dash off to the
track, where I would run two or three miles cross-country, in the company of my
coach. After the run I would do stretching exercises to develop my muscles.
I followed a similar routine in the evenings—running a couple of miles,
jogging between races, and then there would be a period of cooling down. No
matter what the weather was, I would practise for five hours every morning and
evening, seven days a week, three hundred and sixty-five days a year. It was this
disciplined routine that moulded me into the athlete I became. Running had
become such an obsession that even when asleep, I would run races in my
dreams.
To further build my stamina and strengthen my muscles, I would run long
stretches on the sand, or wherever possible, do hill running by going up and
down mountain slopes. Three days a week I would lift weights to strengthen my
arms, legs and stomach. Sometimes I would play vigorous games like hockey,
football or handball, all with the end goal in sight.
I practised so hard and so strenuously that often I was drained of all energy
and looked pale as death when the session was complete. There were times when
I would increase my speed to such an extent that after my rounds, I would vomit
blood or drop down unconscious through sheer exertion. My doctors and
coaches warned me, asked me to slow down to maintain my health and
equilibrium, but my determination was too strong to give up. My only focus was
to become the best athlete in the world.
I recall my practice sessions during the hot summer months of May and
June at the National Stadium in Delhi, when temperatures would rise to as high
as 45 degrees Celsius. My friends thought I was mad taking such risks, but I
refused to let their remarks or the weather daunt me. I would run round after
round under the blistering sun and when I would pause for a rest, I could feel the
heat radiating from my body and my vest would be dripping with sweat. I would
then pull it off and wring it dry into a bucket. By the time I had finished my
practice, the bucket would be filled with my sweat, and I would be lying
prostrate on the ground, totally exhausted. In desperation I would cry out,
‘
Wahe-Guru, ais wari mainoo bachha lo aur main aae phir kadi nahi karanga
!
(Oh God, save me this time and I will never do this to myself again!)’ But then
images of packed stadiums filled with cheering spectators, wildly applauding me
as I crossed the finishing line, would flash across my mind and I would start
again, encouraged by visions of victory.
I had learnt the hard way that the road to success would not be easy, and
that I would encounter many obstacles and barriers along the way. Yet, I hadintentionally embarked upon this difficult journey, driven by my desire to
succeed. At heart, I was still that impoverished boy who ran to school in his bare
feet and who had courageously fought with fate to become what he is today.
My perseverance and tenacity were relentless. Besides, I firmly believed
that if a person works hard and sincerely, his efforts would be rewarded. My
coach during these years was Ranbir Singh, who would observe my every move
and action to see that I adhered to the programme he had prepared.
In my experience, the relationship between a coach and a trainee has to be
based on extreme trust. He is your guide, your mentor and also your sternest
critic. A coach should be a hard taskmaster as well and discipline you if the need
arises; after all, it is he who controls your career as an athlete. All the coaches
who have trained me, including Gurdev Singh, Baldev Singh, Ranbir Singh and
Dr Howard, have been sources of great inspiration and motivation for me. In
fact, it was because of Dr Howard’s motivation that I won the gold at Cardiff. I
will always be grateful to them.
My strenuous training programme had to be supplemented by a balanced,
high-protein diet to make up for the nutrients lost during practice. I avoided fatty
substances like butter and ghee, and instead, drank glasses of milk and ate plenty
of green vegetables, fruit, eggs, fish and lean meat. I would never eat the same
meals every day, but would vary the ingredients and combinations to help
digestion. There is nothing more ruinous than a sportsman with diarrhoea.
One of the maxims I have always followed was early to bed and early to
rise, because rest and sleep help raise energy levels. I lived an austere, almost
monkish life, abiding by the rules I had set for myself. I shunned late nights and
never indulged in bad habits like smoking, drinking or too much caffeine—I
have seen the impact such addictions have had on athletes, how they affect speed
and reduce muscle power.
As my fame grew, so did the attention I received from my fans, both men
and women. Huge crowds would follow me wherever I went, and often I would
find that the girls outnumbered boys. At times their boldness would embarrass
me, but there were also moments when I would feel flattered by their admiration.
But one of my rules was to avoid any close relationships with the opposite sex.
Starting a romance in those days was not an option for me; I did not want any
complications in my life then. I was convinced that I didn’t want any distractions
that would keep me away from my goal. Besides, I was still young, and in no
hurry to find my soul mate.
I had the full support of the army during these years when my demanding
practice routine had taken over my life. My regiment gave me extra food and
milk and I was exempted from the regular military duties so that I couldconcentrate on my training. My victories made my regiment very happy, more so
because by setting new records, I was also bringing glory to the armed forces.
 