 
 
 
 
 
8
Going for
Gold
n 1957, my career was an unbroken record of victories. I participated in all
the usual sports tournaments, ranging from regimental events to all-India
meets, establishing new all-India records. At the Bangalore National Games, I
won both the 400-and 200-metre races, clocking 47.5 seconds for the former and
21.3 seconds for the latter. As a result, my name became well known throughout
the country, not only in sports circles but also in every home.
The next year, 1958, was a glorious one for me, one that I firmly believe
was the year of my destiny. My coach was an American called Dr Howard, who
taught me an advanced technique of taking a start. Once again, there was the
usual cycle of events. My demanding routine had brought the expected results
and I was now a running machine, breaking the records I had set the previous
year—clocking 46.2 seconds for 400 metres and 21.2 seconds for 200 metres—
at the National Games held at the Barabatti Stadium in Cuttack. Other runners
lagged far behind me. Seemingly, I had broken the previous Asian record in 400
metres, but I found my new record hard to believe and requested the National
Games’ organizing committee to measure the track again. They did so and I was
assured that my timings were correct.
My new record had created a stir not only in India but also throughout Asia.
I intensified my practice, bearing in mind that the 1958 Asian Games in Tokyo
were due to take place a few months later. Although the Indian contingent was
large, all eyes were fixed on me.
In May, our team left Calcutta for Tokyo. I was thrilled to have been given achance to visit Japan, a country I admired for the tenacious way they had
rehabilitated themselves after the devastation wrought by the Second World War.
When we landed at Tokyo airport, our eyes were dazzled by the brightness of the
multicoloured lights. The puddles of water that had collected after a recent
shower glowed with the reflection of the lights as well. As we deplaned, we saw
hordes of reporters, press photographers and cameramen waiting outside. They
had heard that Milkha Singh had arrived, but wanted to know who he was. In
response, India’s chef-de-mission, Ashwini Kumar, presented me to the press,
saying, ‘This is Milkha Singh.’ Cameras flashed and microphones were thrust
before me as I was surrounded by dozens of reporters. I was made to stand in
front of the other athletes as a newsreel was shot. Fortunately, I did not have to
answer any of the questions that I was bombarded with—they were all taken
care of by Mr Kumar and Baldev Singh, our coach.
I boarded the deluxe bus, still bemused by the reception I had received. Our
bus was escorted by two smart young men, dressed in black outfits and white
caps, riding motorcycles, with lights flashing and sirens blaring as we raced
through the city. When we reached Diatchi hotel, the place we were staying,
hordes of people had gathered outside, waiting for me. I was mobbed when I got
off the bus, some people even thrust autograph books at me. Suddenly, Mr
Kumar was at my side. He grabbed my arm and led me away, saying, ‘Please
don’t get distracted by all this. Concentrate on your practice and the event. I
have collected the autograph books and you can sign them in your room. I will
return them to their owners.’ He then turned to the crowds and said, ‘I request
you all to please excuse us so that the athletes can settle down in their rooms and
rest after their long journey.’
When we entered the hotel, the receptionist greeted us, saying, ‘We have
received many telephonic enquiries about Milkha Singh. Kindly give us a time
when we can hold a press conference.’
Mr Kumar replied, ‘We have just arrived after a long journey and are tired,
so at this moment it will not be possible for Milkha Singh to meet anyone. We
request all well-wishers to excuse us for now. If they can come to the hotel
tomorrow morning at 11, Milkha Singh will be at their disposal.’
My roommate on this trip was Parduman Singh, who had for many years
been the Indian and Asian champion for shot-put and discus. We were both
gratified by the affection that we had received but could not understand why this
was so.
In the bathroom, I looked at my face in the mirror—my eyes were
bloodshot and I looked tired. At the same time I was flushed with joy. I smiled at
my reflection, wondering how an ordinary person like me could receive such ahero’s welcome. I soaked in the tub for a while and then went to the dining
room. When I entered, I saw flashes of recognition on the faces of the other
diners and was greeted warmly by everyone. My English was still weak, even
after all the lessons I had received, and I found it difficult to respond to their
queries.
At the dining table, Mr Kumar told us all about Tokyo and its famous
sights, its clubs, nightlife and fast-paced lifestyles. He warned us not to leave the
hotel at night, and said that whoever disobeyed this order, would face strict
disciplinary action and be sent back home. He added that after the Games, we
would be allowed to stay on and then we could do what we liked. His warning
was timely, because Japanese society, like Australia’s, was open and sexually
progressive. We retired to our rooms early because we had to report for practice
at 8 a.m. the next morning.
At 7 a.m. our doorbell rang. When I opened the door I saw a pretty girl, all
dressed in white, standing there holding a tea tray in her hands. She bowed and
politely wished me ‘Good morning.’ She entered the room, put the tray down
and asked me, ‘How much sugar do you take? Would you prefer milk or a slice
of lemon?’ When I repeated what she had asked to Parduman, he protested,
saying, ‘She has not wished me “good morning”. Tell her to send another girl up
to serve me tea.’
The poor girl looked bewildered, so I asked her to sit down and explained.
Smilingly, she poured the tea and handed the cups to us. As we chatted, I
discovered that she, like many other young girls, came from good families and
worked at the hotel to earn money so they could continue their education. They
cleaned the rooms, made beds, washed and ironed clothes, as well as did other
chores that made a hotel guest’s stay comfortable.
After we drank our tea, we changed into our running kits and left by bus for
the stadium that was about three miles away. Teams from all over Asia had
collected on the grounds, practising with great enthusiasm—I was electrified by
the highly charged atmosphere. When we walked in, all eyes were turned
towards us. Cameras clicked as I started to warm-up. Film units took action
photographs of me from different angles. We practised for two hours and then
returned to the hotel for the press conference.
For about forty-five minutes, the journalists asked me numerous questions:
‘When did you start taking part in races?’ ‘When did you get interested in
sports?’ ‘What are your hobbies?’ And so on and so forth. My answers were
basic, and I’m sure, not quite what they expected. One of them even invited me
for dinner, another for drinks.
It was at our hotel that I first met Abdul Khaliq, a member of the Pakistaniteam. Baldev Singh introduced us, saying, ‘Meet Abdul Khaliq, the world-
renowned sprinter in 100 and 200 metres. And this is Milkha Singh, our racing
star. Beware of him, he’s a fiend in 200 metres.’ In annoyance, Khaliq shot back,
‘I have met and run races with many a Tom, Dick and Harry like him. They are
no match for me.’ I was completely unprepared for such a spiteful attack, and
thought to myself, ‘Why is he being so rude? India may have been partitioned,
but we still belong to the same race. Surely, he could not have forgotten our
traditional norms of courtesy and tameez?’
In the days before the Games were due to open, the newspapers carried
glowing accounts of my achievements and career, accompanied by large
photographs on the front page. I was deeply gratified by the publicity I had
received and hoped that I would be able to live up to their expectations.
At last the opening day arrived. All the participating nations had gathered at
the stadium, waiting for the opening ceremony to begin. When the band started
to play, it was a signal for the march past to commence. The Indian contingent,
smartly clad in blue blazers, grey trousers, white shirts and blue ties with the
Ashok chakra printed on them, were led by a beautiful Japanese girl wearing a
blue sari and carrying our national flag. As each team passed in front of the
saluting base, they dipped their colours before Emperor Hirohito of Japan, who
then declared the Games open. The jubilant spectators cheered, waving
multicoloured flags, thousands of balloons were released and fireworks burst to
mark the memorable occasion. And then there was a hush as a veteran Japanese
athlete, Mikio Oda, ran into the stadium carrying aloft a burning torch—an
Olympics tradition that was introduced at the Tokyo Asiad. He encircled the
stadium and then placed the torch on a specially made stand in front of the
emperor. The torch, a symbol of steadfastness, sportsmanship and good luck,
was kept lit throughout the duration of the Games, protected by armed guards.
The torchbearer then made a reverse turn and left the stadium, followed by the
marching teams.
The 400-metre race was held the next day. Several of my fellow
competitors, whose timing was more than mine, came up to me to ask for advice
and I was happy to offer them some quick tips. I had practised hard and ran the
race in a very relaxed manner. I not only won the race, but also set a new Asian
Games record.
My heart was bursting with pride as I stood at the first position on the
victory stand. On my right and left were the second and third place winners from
Japan and the Philippines respectively. The emperor walked slowly towards the
stand, flanked by military guards, and led by three beautiful girls carrying trays
in which the gold, silver and bronze medals were ensconced. When the emperorstood in front of me, the loudspeakers announced that Milkha Singh from India
had won the 400-metre race, clocking 46.5 seconds, a new record for Asia. The
audience erupted with joy, cheering and applauding. I felt my hair stand on end
and a shiver of delight ran through me. With a smile, the emperor held out his
hand, which I happily shook. I then bent my head and he draped the gold medal
around my neck. He followed the same procedure for the other two. When the
ceremony was over, we all turned towards the flagpoles to watch the flags of
India, Japan and the Philippines go up as the band played the national anthems
of the three nations. The entire audience of a hundred thousand people rose as
one to honour our flags and anthems. It was the most stirring moment in my life
and I was filled with great patriotic fervour just seeing the Tricolour fluttering in
the open blue sky. Overcome with emotion, I closed my eyes for a moment,
thinking that it was for this flag and for our motherland that thousands of martyrs
(shaheeds) and patriots had suffered and sacrificed themselves. Then the
realization hit me that this was not only my triumph—my success had brought
glory to my country as well.
When I returned to the hotel, I found hundreds of congratulatory messages
waiting for me. My victory had affected each member of the Indian contingent
and our mood was upbeat that evening. Friends and colleagues would come up
to me, pat me on my back, praising me on my performance. The next morning, I
was headline news:
MILKHA THRILLS CROWDS
THE REFUGEE WHO ROSE TO STARDOM
MAGNIFICENT EFFORT BY MILKHA: SETS NEW 400-METRE MARK
I was thrilled to see my photographs in the newspapers and to read about my
exploits, but only for a short while—I still had another crucial event ahead of
me.
The 200-metre race would take place the next day in which I would be
competing against the Pakistani champion, Abdul Khaliq. Many thought I could
not win, but my spirits were high, buoyed by my victory and the encouragement
I had received from my well-wishers. All through the night before the race, I was
consumed by an intense desire to defeat Khaliq so that I could be declared Asia’s
best athlete. The criterion for winning the title was clear: both Abdul Khaliq and
I were at the same position, he had won the 100-metre race and I the 400-metre
one, and this event would be the decisive one to prove who was the better
athlete.
When we reached the stadium, we both did warm-up exercises inpreparation for the race, which was to be held in the afternoon. I was in a fever
of anxiety when the call for the race came, a feeling all athletes experience
before a major event. The six of us finalists stood at the starting line in our shorts
and vests. Khaliq got the outer lane and I the inner one. We wished each other
good luck, a mere formality neither of us meant. The gun was fired and the race
began. The spectators held their breath, watching, waiting… We both completed
the first 100 metres and were running in tandem, our steps parallel. Despite
focusing on our running, we were each aware of the other’s progress and were
pushing ourselves and our utmost limits. It was fast, it was furious, it was neck-
to-neck. Then there was high drama. About three or four yards from the
finishing line, I pulled a muscle on my right leg. Then my legs got entangled and
I tripped and tumbled over the finishing line. At that very moment, Khaliq
breasted the tape too. Fortunately for me, the cameras had photographed every
movement at the finishing line from different angles, but we still had to wait
half-an-hour for the verdict as the organizers needed time to develop the pictures
for adjudicating the photo finish. For thirty minutes, the longest in my life, we
did not know who had won. Then came the long-awaited result—I had won!
Khaliq was devastated. I, on the other hand, was on top of the world—by
winning my second gold medal I was now Asia’s best athlete!
Once again I stood at the first place on the victory stand, with Khaliq on the
second and a Japanese athlete at the third place. Professor G.D. Sondhi, a
member of the Indian Olympic Committee, placed the gold medal around my
neck. I felt like reminding Khaliq about ‘Tom, Dick and Harry’, but that was not
my style.
With this victory I had entered the select group of Asia’s top athletes. My
fame had spread quickly, with headlines proclaiming: 
MILKHA RUNS 200
METRES IN RECORD TIME
. I returned to my room and once again found
scores of congratulatory messages, letters and telegrams waiting for me. As I
looked at them, I thought about how far I had travelled from my obscure little
village in Pakistan, and a sense of loss suddenly came upon me as vivid images
from my life flashed through my mind— my father’s and brothers’ deaths, my
mother’s anguished cries from inside the burning gurudwara, the horrors of
Partition, bloodshed and slaughter, the train to Delhi, despair, suffering, poverty,
rejection, struggles, the days of crime on the streets, ten days in jail, a lucky
break in the army, life in the barracks, my chance encounter with running, my
relentless training schedule, my sacrifices, my goal, lady luck smiling on me,
fame and recognition, hero-worship by the loving masses… My dreams had
become reality… The rush of emotions overwhelmed me and I put my head
down and sobbed like a child. The storms had steeled me, but the glories of thepresent had rocked me back into dark visions of the past. But then the stream of
life moves on.
Parduman Singh, who had won the gold in shot-put and silver in discus,
returned to the room in good humour. Listening to him speak and laughing at his
jokes was like a tonic and I began to feel more cheerful again. As we talked, the
phone kept ringing and there were frequent knocks at the door as my fellow
athletes, including some Pakistani athletes from Punjab, came in to congratulate
me. This spirit of camaraderie, particularly from the Pakistanis, dispelled some
of the rancour of our bloodstained past.
That night, we attended the emperor’s banquet at the Imperial Palace and I
was formally introduced to His Highness, who graciously said, through an
interpreter, ‘We were pleased to watch your run. If you continue your efforts you
will become the world’s number one champion.’ I humbly thanked him for his
kind words of encouragement and diffidently replied, saying that my success
was due to the love and encouragement extended to me by the people of Japan.
For the closing ceremony on the next day, we assembled once again at the
stadium as the Japanese bid us sayonara. Electronic boards displayed messages
in both Japanese and English that said: ‘We have done our utmost to make these
Games a success. Please forgive us for any inadequacies, and do visit our city
and country again.’ Towards the end of the show, the lights dimmed and children
in rainbow-coloured clothes holding lit torches performed a wonderful dance. It
was a magical conclusion to a memorable event.
Fans were waiting for us at the hotel and the moment we descended from
the bus, we were mobbed by scores of eager and well-meaning boys and girls.
Some brought us little tokens and gifts while others just wanted autographs. I
was touched by their love and affection.
Parduman Singh and I wanted to buy presents for the young girls at the
hotel, but they surprised us by giving us dolls and other small objects. We
thanked them in Japanese: 
‘arigatou gozaimasu’
, we offer our thanks to you.
They were delighted. In return we gave them scarves and some brass curios we
had brought from India. We had grown very fond of them and when we left, they
came to the airport to see us off.
 