 
 
 
 
18
I Have a
Dream
s the children started growing up, we began to think about their future.
My early struggles as an athlete were always at the back of my mind, and
I didn’t want them to enter a field that offered little money and security.
Like my father, it was my desire that the children should receive a good
education and earn professional degrees, so that they could become doctors or
engineers, solid and conservative careers that would reap dividends in the future.
The girls were progressing well at school, but Jeev was a cause of some concern.
Right from a very young age, Jeev had started to show a distinct inclination
towards sports; more significant was the fact that he was demonstrating a great
aptitude for it as well. He was an excellent sprinter as I noticed when I was the
chief guest at one of his school’s functions—he was studying at St John’s School
in Chandigarh then. I saw him run so swiftly that he was far ahead of the other
boys. The spectators were most impressed and remarked that he would surely
break my records one day. When he was studying at Bishop Cotton in Simla, he
was the captain of the school’s cricket team, and I remember what Kapil Dev’s
coach, D.P.S. Azad who worked under me, said, ‘Sir, if you allow me to train
Jeev, I can assure you that he will be a member of Indian cricket team in just a
few years.’ Then I recalled Kairon Sahib’s wise words about genes, and realized
how true they were proving to be. Our daughters, too, were competent
sportspersons—Sonia was a superb tennis player, while Aleeza and Mona were
good swimmers.
Life can often be unexpected. When I first developed an interest in golf it
was as late as 1969, but little did I realize how this game would dominate ourlives.
A friend of mine in Edmonton had presented me with a golf set, but I had
no wish whatsoever to take up the game and carelessly asked him what I should
do with it. He insisted that I should keep it and so, the set came back to India
with me. For a long time it languished in a forgotten corner of the house,
gathering dust. One day, when I was taking my usual run along the golf course, I
was stopped by Dharma Vira, then the governor of Punjab, who asked, ‘Milkha,
why are you running around the course? Come, I’ll teach you how to play golf
instead.’
‘No’, I replied emphatically, ‘it’s an old man’s game, and I find it too slow
and boring.’ He laughed at my dismissal of the game he loved, and retorted,
‘Bring your set tomorrow and I will give you lessons.’
The next day, I dusted the grime off my set, went to the golf course and had
my first lesson. I have to admit that the game intrigued me, and after that first
lesson I was addicted and would rush to the course whenever I had any free time.
When Jeev was little, he would follow me around the course, fascinated by
my every move. Day by day his interest grew until it became an obsession. I had
no objection to my children dabbling in sports; what I didn’t want was for them
to take it up as a professional career. They had been brought up in the lap of
luxury and I didn’t think that they had the disciple and will power to work hard.
In sheer desperation, I got him admitted in one of India’s most prestigious public
schools, Bishop Cotton in Simla. Both Nimmi and Jeev were very upset but I
insisted. He spent two years at Bishop Cotton, from 1983 to 1985.
Though we had sent Jeev to boarding school, his passion for golf did not
diminish. It was then that I understood that it was destiny that had led my son to
golf.
In January 1985, when he had come down for the winter vacations, Jeev
participated and won the American Express Golf Tournament at the Delhi Golf
Club. He was thirteen years old then. After winning the tournament he returned
to Bishop Cotton to sit for the Class 7 final examinations. Meanwhile, we had
got him admission in a school in Chandigarh, Shivalik Public School, so that he
could study as well as play golf. In June, he left for Woodbridge in England for a
month-long coaching camp. This was the starting point on his road to fame.
In 1987, when he was fifteen and in Class 9, he participated in the Doug
Sanders golf scholarship selections. He won at each stage of the event: first, the
India selection held at the Delhi Golf Club, followed by the Asian selection in
Melbourne, concluding with the final selection in Aberdeen. Being awarded the
Doug Sanders golf scholarship at the Abilene Christian University, in Houston,
Texas, meant that Jeev could combine formal education with a sports curriculum.All this travelling around meant that he was missing classes at school and
he still had to complete his education. The Shivalik Public School, however, was
most supportive, and arranged extra classes and special tuitions for him. He
completed his Class 10 at this school, and then transferred to DAV College,
Sector 10, Chandigarh, for the final two years. In 1991 he passed out of DAV
College and left for a new life in Houston, Texas.
Jeev’s years in the United States were highly successful ones. He played
several NCAA (National Collegiate Athletic Association) division tournaments
where he represented his university. I was filled with pride when he won the
NCAA II Division championship and when his team came first in the Inter-
University Golf Championship in 1993. In the same year, he graduated from
Abilene Christian University with an associate degree in business administration
and returned to India where he turned pro. Thereafter, he won numerous
tournaments on the Asian and European tours. He was also the first Indian to
qualify for the European Tour. My hopes for my son had exceeded all
expectations.
Today, I am glad that Dharma Vira persuaded me to start playing golf,
because it was my fascination for the game that lured Jeev to it. His quick
aptitude and inherent skill combined with his passion and determination have
made him the gifted sportsman that he is. When I accompany Jeev on his tours,
whether it is in India, Europe, the US or elsewhere, and walk beside him when
he’s playing, my knowledge of the game allows me the freedom to offer not only
fatherly advice but professional pointers as well. Besides, it is through him that I
relive my days of glory. I was on cloud nine when Jeev was given the Arjuna
Award (1999) followed by the Padma Shri (2007).
It has been an amazing journey and today, I am a proud husband, father and
grandfather. Nimmi and I keep ourselves busy running the Milkha Charitable
Trust in Chandigarh, where we provide humanitarian services to the poor and
needy, particularly penniless sportspeople and their families. These are causes
that are very close to our hearts.
My children have brought me immense happiness, and though Aleeza and
Mona live in the United States, we are as close as if they lived next door. Mona
is a doctor, fulfilling my wish that my children would have professional careers.
I have five grandchildren—Aleeza’s daughter Shaina is now twenty-one years
old and her son Ishaan is thirteen, Sonia has twins, a boy and a girl, Amaan and
Amaanat who are six, Jeev’s son Harjai Milkha Singh is the youngest and is just
three. Their future lies ahead, and they are content in knowing that both Nimmi
and I will always be there for them, loving and supporting them through the
passage of life.