 
 
 
 
 
13
So Near, and Yet So
Far
month before the Rome Olympics, the preliminaries were held in London.
While sitting in the gallery watching the races, I observed the black
French athlete, Abdul Saye, clock an unbelievable 45.9 seconds in the
400-metre event. This was a sensational record and was most worrying because
my timing in the same race was a little over 46 seconds. When the French heard
that Milkha Singh was part of the Indian Olympic team they invited me to
France for the next preliminaries in which reputed sprinters from England,
Jamaica, the West Indies and Kenya were participating. This was just a week or
so before the Olympics.
My track record before this event had been impeccable. I had run many
races and won against other world-class athletes, but Abdul Saye was a
challenge. Usually I had beaten other contestants by a margin of five or seven
yards, but could I do the same this time? Commander Pereira, in his broken
Hindustani, did his best to motivate me, saying, ‘Milkha Singh, you must beat
Abdul Saye today.’
In the stadium, the mostly French audience watched as I went through my
warm-up exercises. To them, I was a curiosity with my long hair, turban and kara
and they did not know what to except of me. When the race began, I ran with a
vengeance, straining every muscle and won, establishing a new record of 45.8
seconds—point one second less than the previous Olympic record of 45.9. My
achievement made headline news in the international press the next day. When I
returned to my hotel room, I watched the reruns of the race that were beingtelecast on television. It was a new experience to watch myself run as well as
observe the audience’s reaction to my win. I was deeply gratified by the
accolades I had received.
When I returned to Aldershot, my team members were elated by my victory
and were convinced that I would have the same success in Rome.
Rome, the Eternal City, looked very festive when the Indian contingent, led
by Ashwini Kumar, landed at the airport. Milling crowds filled streets lined with
flags and banners. As we drove through this historic city towards the Olympic
Village, we were infected by the excitement around us. This time, I was
privileged enough to be given a separate room so that I would not be disturbed
by too many visitors.
Rome in August is hot, almost like India. On the opening day the
temperatures had risen to above 40 degrees Celsius and it was extremely
uncomfortable. Yet, the crowds were not daunted by the weather and filled the
stands by the thousands, carrying red and black umbrellas as protection against
the sun. The mammoth stadium, Stadio Olimpica, had been recently renovated
and looked very impressive. The opening ceremony was spectacular. The
military bands played the Italian national anthem and marches from operas,
including Bellini’s 
Norma
 and Verdi’s 
Ernani
, as the smartly dressed contingents
from all over the world saluted the president of Italy, Giovanni Gronchi, when
they briskly marched past his box. And as the Olympic flag was being raised, a
choir sang the anthem of the Games with great emotion.
Athletes from almost a hundred and fifty nations were participating in the
400-metre race. I won round after round in every heat until I reached the semi-
finals. By now only twelve of us remained, but in this race the number would be
further reduced to the top six. The semi-finals took place and I was through to
the final.
Over the years, I had, through continuous hard work and an intense practice
schedule, built up my stamina to such a high level that I could compete in and
often win two races each day, even in global competitions. Sadly, this ability was
of little consequence in Rome, mainly because of the curious two-night gap
between the semis and the finals. As a result I had more time to think and brood.
I was so nervous and tense that I spent two sleepless nights before the finals. The
night before, I kept thinking about the race and that put me under a lot of
pressure. I was extremely tense and paced the floor in agitation, wondering what
the next day would have in store for me. Then there was a knock on my door. It
was Mr Umrao Singh, our manager, who came in and whisked me off for a long
walk. As we wandered through the cobbled streets, past noble edifices, fountains
and archways, he tried to distract me from the forthcoming contest by talkingabout the Punjab and telling me stirring stories of the Sikh Gurus and other
valiant heroes. We walked and talked, and for a while I was at peace.
Early next morning, I returned to the stadium and joined the other
participants at the starting line. It was at the moment when the lanes were being
allocated that everything went wrong. Carl Kaufmann was in the first lane, the
American Ottis Davis in the second, while the third one went to a participant
from Poland and the fourth to my old Commonwealth Games’ rival, Malcolm
Spence. I had the misfortune to be given the fifth lane next to a German athlete,
who was the weakest of the six of us. This was a huge blow to me because the
German was the only runner in my line of vision. With nothing but negative
thoughts running through my mind, I took my standing position. When the
starter shouted, ‘On your marks!’ I got down on my knees and offered a silent
prayer to the ground beneath me, ‘Oh, Mother Earth, you have bestowed many
favours on me. I pray that you will do the same today.’ I bowed my head and
took a deep breath. The starter shouted ‘Set!’ and when he fired his gun we flew
off at lightning speed.
I started off by being ahead of the others, and at the 250-metre mark, I was
running so perilously fast that I decided to slow down in case I collapsed—a
fatal decision I regret even to this day. As I completed 300 metres, the three
competitors right behind me came abreast and began to move ahead, and even
though I increased my speed, trying desperately to catch up with Spence, who I
had beaten at Cardiff, or the two before him, I could not wipe out the deficit of
those six or seven yards. And thus, as fate would have it, my error of judgment
at that crucial point in the race, had dragged me to the fourth position and
destroyed all my chances of winning that elusive Olympic gold.
Yet, it was a very close race, where the top positions were decided through
a photo finish, which meant that the announcements were delayed. The suspense
was excruciating. When the results were declared, all four of us—Davis,
Kaufmann, Spence and I—had shattered the previous Olympic record of 45.9
seconds. Davis had come first with 44.9 seconds; Kaufmann was second with the
same time of 44.9 seconds and Spence third with 45.5 seconds. Even though I
had come fourth, my timing of 45.6 seconds was still a new record.
I felt completely bereft and humiliated by what had happened. I had scaled
the heights of success and now the decline had set in. I knew no one can remain
on the top forever. I had dominated the global sports scene for several years and
it was time to go. I felt that I could not return to India in this dejected frame of
mind, and so participated in competitions in London, Denmark, Sweden and
Norway. And then it was time to get back home. On the flight back, I drank
copiously to drown my sorrow and landed in Bombay in an inebriated condition,tired and filled with self-loathing. This time, however, there were no adoring
crowds waiting eagerly to welcome me, just a few members of the press. Several
well-wishers tried to console me, saying that one loss was not the end of the
world and that other prestigious awards awaited me, but I remained adamant that
my days as a sportsman were over.
Next day, my retirement was headline news. Many fans and supporters sent
letters of regret, begging me to re-consider my decision. They said that Milkha
Singh was not an ordinary individual, but the custodian of India’s honour in the
sports world, and that I must continue to run, not for private gain, but for the
glory of my country. Despite the defeat, I was still the hope of Indian athletes,
they insisted. Thus, goaded by pressure from the press and sports officials, and
the support of friends I rescinded my decision. After a short period of
‘mourning’, I resumed my practice again.
All through my life, I have been tormented by the fatal mistake I made in
Rome on the day of the 400-metre race. I knew that I could have won, but
perhaps, luck was not on my side that day. The one medal I had yearned for
throughout my career had just slipped through my fingers because of one small
error of judgement. Even today, if I look back on my life, there are only two
incidents that still haunt me—the massacre of my family during Partition and my
defeat at Rome.
