1097Investing GuidelinesFinancial TenetsThe financial tenets by which Buffett values both managerial excel-lence and economic performance are all grounded in some typi-cally Buffett-like principles. For one thing, he does not take yearlyresults too seriously. Instead, he focuses on four- or five-year averages.Often, he notes, profitable business returns might not coincide with thetime it takes for the planet to circle the sun.He also has little patience with accounting sleight-of-hand that pro-duces impressive year-end numbers but little real value. Instead, he re-lies on a few timeless financial principles:• Focus on return on equity, not earnings per share.• Calculate “owner earnings” to get a true reflection of value.• Look for companies with high profit margins.• For every dollar retained, has the company created at least a dol-lar of market value?RETURN ON EQUITYCustomarily, analysts measure annual company performance by lookingat earnings per share. Did they increase over the preceding year? Arethey high enough to brag about? For his part, Buffett considers earnings110 THE WARREN BUFFETT WAYper share a smoke screen. Since most companies retain a portion of theirprevious year’s earnings to increase their equity base, he sees no reasonto get excited about record earnings per share. There is nothing spec-tacular about a company that increases earnings per share by 10 percentif at the same time it is growing its equity base by 10 percent. That’s nodifferent, he explains, from putting money in a savings account and let-ting the interest accumulate and compound.The test of economic performance, Buffett believes, is whether acompany achieves a high earnings rate on equity capital (“without undueleverage, accounting gimmickry, etc.”), not whether it has consistentgains in earnings per share.1To measure a company’s annual perfor-mance, Buffett prefers return on equity—the ratio of operating earningsto shareholders’ equity.To use this ratio, though, we need to make several adjustments. First,all marketable securities should be valued at cost and not at market value,because values in the stock market as a whole can greatly influence thereturns on shareholders’ equity in a particular company. For example, ifthe stock market rose dramatically in one year, thereby increasing the networth of a company, a truly outstanding operating performance wouldbe diminished when compared with a larger denominator. Conversely,falling prices reduce shareholders’ equity, which means that mediocreoperating results appear much better than they really are.Second, we must also control the effects that unusual items may haveon the numerator of this ratio. Buffett excludes all capital gains andlosses as well as any extraordinary items that may increase or decreaseoperating earnings. He is seeking to isolate the specific annual perfor-mance of a business. He wants to know how well management accom-plishes its task of generating a return on the operations of the businessgiven the capital it employs. That, he says, is the single best measure ofmanagement’s economic performance.Furthermore, Buffett believes that a business should achieve goodreturns on equity while employing little or no debt. W e know thatcompanies can increase their return on equity by increasing their debt-to-equity ratio. Buffett is aware of this, but the idea of adding a coupleof points to Berkshire Hathaway’s return on equity simply by taking onmore debt does not impress him. “Good business or investment deci-sions,” he says, “will produce quite satisfactory economic results withno aid from leverage.”2Furthermore, highly leveraged companies arevulnerable during economic slowdowns.Investing Guidelines: Financial Tenets 111Buffett does not give us any suggestions as to what debt levels are ap-propriate or inappropriate for a business. Different companies, dependingon their cash flows, can manage different levels of debt. What Buffettdoes tell us is that a good business should be able to earn a good return onequity without the aid of leverage. Investors should be wary of companiesthat can earn good returns on equity only by employing significant debt.Coca-ColaIn “Strategy for the 1980s,” his plan for revi talizing the company,Goizueta pointed out that Coca-Cola would divest any business that nolonger generated acceptable returns on equity. Any new business ven-ture must have sufficient real growth potential to justify an investment.Coca-Cola was no longer interested in battling for share in a stagnantmarket. “Increasing earnings per share and effecting increased returnon equity are still the name of the game,” Goizueta announced.3Hiswords were followed by actions. Coca-Cola’s wine business was sold toSeagram’s in 1983.Although the company earned a respectable 20 percent return onequity during the 1970s, Goizueta was not impressed. He demandedbetter returns and the company obliged. By 1988, Coca-Cola’s returnon equity had increased to 31.8 percent (see Figure 7.1).Figure 7.1 The Coca-Cola Company return on equity and pretax margins.112 THE WARREN BUFFETT WAYBy any measurement, Goizueta’s Coca-Cola was doubling andtripling the financial accomplishments of the previous CEO. The resultscould be seen in the market value of the company. In 1980, Coca-Colahad a market value of $4.1 billion. By the end of 1987, even after thestock market crash in October, the market value had risen to $14.1 bil-lion (see Figure 7.2). In seven years, Coca-Cola’s market value rose at anaverage annual rate of 19.3 percent.The Washington Post CompanyWhen Buffett purchased stock in the Washington Post in 1973, its re-turn on equity was 15.7 percent. This was an average return for mostnewspapers and only slightly better than the Standard & Poor’s Indus-trial Index. But within five years, the Post’s return on equity doubled.By then, it was twice as high as the S&P Industrials and 50 percenthigher than the average newspaper. Over the next ten years, the PostCompany maintained its supremacy, reaching a high of 36.3 percent re-turn on equity in 1988.These above-average returns are more impressive when you observethat the company has, over time, purposely reduced its debt. In 1973,long-term debt to shar eholder’s equity stood at 37.2 percent, the secondhighest ratio in the newspaper group. Astonishingly, by 1978, KatherineFigure 7.2 The Coca-Cola Company market value.Investing Guidelines: Financial Tenets 113Graham had reduced the company’s debt by 70 percent. In 1983, long-term debt to equity was a low 2.7 percent—one-tenth the newspapergroup average—yet the Post generated a return on equity 10 percenthigher than these same companies.“OWNER EARNINGS”Investors, Buffett warns, should be aware that accounting earnings pershare represent the starting point for determining the economic value ofa business, not the ending point. “The first point to understand,” he says,“is that not all earnings are created equal.”4Companies with high assetsto profits, he points out, tend to report ersatz earnings. Because inflationextracts a toll on asset-heavy businesses, the earnings of these businessestake on a miragelike quality. Hence, accounting earnings are useful to theanalyst only if they approximate the expected cash flow of the company.But even cash flow, Buffett warns, is not a perfect tool for measur-ing value; often it misleads investors. Cash flow is an appropriate wayto measure businesses that have large investments in the beginning andsmaller outlays later on, such as real estate, gas fields, and cable com-panies. On the other hand, companies that require ongoing capital ex-penditures, such as manufacturers, are not accurately valued using onlycash flow.A company’s cash flow is customarily defined as net income aftertaxes plus depreciation, depletion, amortization, and other noncashcharges. The problem with this definition, Buffett explains, is that itleaves out a critical economic fact: capital expenditures. How much ofthe year’s earnings must the company use for new equipment, plant up-grades, and other improvements to maintain its economic position andunit volume? According to Buffett, approximately 95 percent of U.S.businesses require capital expenditures that are roughly equal to theirdepreciation rates. Y ou can defer capital expenditures for a year or so, hesays, but if over a long period, you don’t make the necessary improve-ments, your business will surely decline. These capital expenditures areas much an expense to a company as are labor and utility costs.Popularity of cash-flow numbers heightened during the leveragedbuyout period of the 1980s because the exorbitant prices paid for busi-nesses were justified by a company’s cash flow. Buffett believes thatcash-flow numbers “are frequently used by marketers of business and114 THE WARREN BUFFETT WAYsecurities to justify the unjustifiable and thereby sell what should be un-salable. When earnings look inadeq uate to service debt of a junk bondor justify a foolish stock price, how convenient it becomes to focus oncash flow.”5But you cannot focus on cash flow, Buffett cautions, un-less you are willing to subtract the necessary capital expenditures.Instead of cash flow, Buffett prefers to use what he calls “ownerearnings”—a company’s net income plus depreciation, depletion, andamortization, less the amount of capital expenditures and any addi-tional working capital that might be needed. It is not a mathematicallyprecise measure, Buffett admits, for the simple reason that calculatingfuture capital expenditures often requires rough estimates. Still, quot-ing Keynes, he says, “I would rather be vaguely right than preciselywrong.”Coca-ColaIn 1973, “owner earnings” (net income plus depreciation minus capitalexpenditures) were $152 million. By 1980, owner earnings were $262million, an 8 percent annual compounded growth rate. Then from 1981through 1988, owner earnings grew from $262 million to $828 million,a 17.8 percent average annual compounded growth rate (see Figure 7.3).The growth in owner earnings is reflected in the share price ofCoca-Cola. In the ten-year period from 1973 to 1982, the total returnof Coca-Cola grew at a 6.3 percent average annual rate. Over the nextten years, from 1983 to 1992, the total return grew at an average an-nual rate of 31.1 percent.PROFIT MARGINSLike Philip Fisher, Buffett is aware that great businesses make lousy in-vestments if management cannot convert sales into profits. In his expe-rience, managers of high-cost operations tend to find ways thatcontinually add to overhead, whereas managers of low-cost operationsare always finding ways to cut expenses.Buffett has little patience for managers who allow costs to esca-late. Frequently these same managers have to initiate a restructuringprogram to bring down costs in line with sales. Each time a companyInvesting Guidelines: Financial Tenets 115announces a cost-cutting program, he knows this company has not fig-ured out what expenses can do to a company’s owners. “The reallygood manager,” Buffett says, “does not wake up in the morning andsay, ‘This is the day I’m going to cut costs,’ any more than he wakes upand decides to practice breathing.”6Buffett understands the right size staff for any business operationand believes that for every dollar of sales there is an appropriate level ofexpenses. He has singled out Carl Reichardt and Paul Hazen at W ellsFargo for their relentless attack on unnecessary expenses. They “abhorhaving a bigger head count than is needed,” he says, “and ‘Attack costsas vigorously when profits are at record levels as when they are underpressure.’”7Buffett himself can be tough when it comes to costs and unnecessaryexpenses, and he is very sensitive about Berkshire’s profit margins. Ofcourse, Berkshire Hathaway is a unique corporation. The corporate staffat Kiewit Plaza would have difficulty fielding a softball team. BerkshireHathaway does not have a legal department, a public or investor rela-tions department. There are no strategic planning departments staffedwith MBA-trained workers plotting mergers and acquisitions. Thecompany’s aftertax overhead corporate expense runs less than 1 percentof operating earnings. Compare this, says Buffett, with other companiesFigure 7.3 The Coca-Cola Company net income and “owner earnings.”116 THE WARREN BUFFETT WAYthat have similar earnings but 10 percent corporate expenses; shar ehold-ers lose 9 percent in the value of their holdings simply because of corpo-rate overhead.The Pampered ChefAs mentioned, Doris Christopher founded her company with $3,000borrowed against her family’s life insurance policy and she never tookon further debt. Today her company has over $700 million in sales.Customers pay for products before delivery so the company is a cash-positive business. Alan Luce, presi dent of Luce & Associ ates in Orlando,Florida, a direct selling consulting firm, has estimated pretax profit mar-gins at above 25 percent.Coca-ColaIn 1980, Coca-Cola’s pretax profit margins were a low 12.9 percent.Margins had been falling for five straight years and were substantiallybelow the company’s 1973 margins of 18 percent. In Goizueta’s firstyear, pretax margins rose to 13.7 percent; by 1988, when Buffett boughthis Coca-Cola shares, margins had climbed to a record 19 percent.The Washington Post CompanySix months after the Post Company went public in 1971, KatherineGraham met with Wall Street security analysts. The first order of busi-ness, she told them, was to maximize profits from the company’s exist-ing operations. Profits continued to rise at the television stations andNewsweek, but profitability at the newspaper was leveling off. The pri-mary reason, she said, was high production costs, namely wages.After the Post purchased the Times-Herald, profits at the companyhad surged. Each time the unions struck the paper (1949, 1958, 1966,1968, 1969), management had opted to pay their demands rather thanrisk a shutdown. During this time, Washington, DC, was still a three-newspaper town. Throughout the 1950s and 1960s, increasing wage costsdampened profits. This problem, Mrs. Graham told the analysts, wasgoing to be solved.As union contracts began to expire in the 1970s, Mrs. Graham en-listed labor negotiators who took a hard line with the unions. In 1974,Investing Guidelines: Financial Tenets 117the company defeated a strike by the Newspaper Guild and, after lengthynegotiations, the printers settled on a new contract.In the early 1970s, Forbes had written, “The best that could be saidabout The Washington Post Company’s performance was it rated a gen-tleman’s C in profitability.”8Pretax margins in 1973 were 10.8 per-cent—well below the company’s historical 15 percent margins earnedin the 1960s. After the successful renegotiation of the union contracts,the Post’s fortunes improved. By 1978, profit margins had leaped to19.3 percent—an 80 percent improvement within five years.Buffett’s bet had paid off. By 1988, the Post’s pretax margin reacheda high of 31.8 percent, which compared favorably with its newspapergroup average of 16.9 percent and the Standard & Poor’s Industrial aver-age of 8.6 percent. Although the company’s margins have declined some-what in recent years, they remain substantially higher than the industryaverage.THE ONE-DOLLAR PREMISEBuffett’s goal is to select companies in which each dollar of retainedearnings is translated into at least one dollar of market value. This testcan quickly identify companies whose managers, over time, have beenable to optimally invest their company’s capital. If retained earnings areinvested in the company and produce above-average return, the proofwill be a proportionally greater rise in the company’s market value.In time, that is. Although the stock market will track business valuereasonably well over long periods, in any one year, prices can gyratewidely for reasons other than value. The same is true for retained earn-ings, Buffett explains. If a company uses retained earnings unproduc-tively over an extended period, eventually the market, justifiably, willprice its shares disappointingly. Conversely, if a company has been ableto achieve above-average returns on augmented capital, the increasedstock price will reflect that success.Buffett believes that if he has selected a company with favorable long-term economic prospects run by able and shar ehold er-oriented managers,the proof will be reflected in the increased market value of the company.And he uses a quick test: The increased market value should at the veryleast match the amount of retained earnings, dollar for dollar. If the value118 THE WARREN BUFFETT WAYgoes higher than the retained earnings, so much the better. All in all, ex-plains Buffett, “within this gigantic auction arena, it is our job to s elect abusiness with economic characteristics allowing each dollar of retainedearnings to be translated into at least a dollar of market value.”9Coca-ColaSince 1988, when Buffett began buying its stock, the price performanceof Coca-Cola has been extraordinary. From $10 per share, the stockreached $45 in 1992. During this same period, Coca-Cola trounced theperformance of the Standard & Poor’s 500 Index.Between 1989 and 1999, the market value of Coca-Cola rose from$25.8 billion to $143.9 billion. To put this growth in other terms, con-sider this: A $100 investment in its common stock on December 31,1989, with dividends reinvested, grew in pretax value to $681 ten yearslater—an average annual compound return of 21 percent. In that sameten-year period, the company produced $26.9 billion in profits, paidout $10.5 billion in dividends to shar eholders, and retained $16.4 bil-lion for reinvestment. For every dollar the company retained, it created$7.20 in market value.At year-end 2003, Berkshire’s original $1.023 billion investment inCoca-Cola was worth more than $10 billion.GilletteFrom 1988, when Buffett first became involved with the company, to1992, the market value of Gillette increased by $9.3 billion. During thistime, the company earned $1.6 billion, distributed $582 million to share-holders, and retained $1.011 billion for reinvestment. For every dollar itretained, the market value of the company increased $9.21./tile3Looking deep into a company’s financial structure is no easy task, andfor anyone who is not Warren Buffett, it is virtually impossible to learnall these facts when the company is privately held. Nonetheless, Buffettwould tell us, the effort is always worthwhile, for it reveals significantinformation.Investing Guidelines: Financial Tenets 119As we have learned of one accounting scandal after another, it hasbecome even more critical for investors to delve into these financialareas. There is no guarantee that through this effort you will fully un-cover the truth, but you will have much greater chance of spottingphony numbers than if you do nothing. As Buffett rema rks, “Managersthat always promise to ‘make the numbers’ will at some point make upthe numbers.”10Y our goal is to begin to learn to tell the difference.