15710Managing YourPortfolioUp to this point, we have studied Warren Buffett’s approach tomaking investment decisions, which is built on timeless principlescodified into twelve tenets. W e watched over his shoulder as heapplied those principles to buy stocks and bonds, and to acquire com-panies. And we took the time to understand the insights from othersthat helped shape his philosophy about investing.But as every investor knows, deciding which stocks to buy is onlyhalf the story. The other half is the ongoing process of managing theportfolio and learning how to cope with the emotional roller coasterthat inevitably accompanies such decisions.It is no surprise that here, too, the leadership of Warren Buffett willshow us the way./tile3Hollywood has given us a visual cliché of what a money manager lookslike: talking into two phones at once, frantically taking no tes while try-ing to keep an eye on computer screens that blink and blip at him fromall directions, tearing at his hair whenever one of those computer blinksshows a minuscule drop in stock price.Warren Buffett is about as far from that kind of frenzy as anythingimaginable. He moves with the calm that comes of great confidence. He158 THE WARREN BUFFETT WAYhas no need to watch a dozen computer screens at once, for the minute-by-minute changes in the market are of no interest to him. WarrenBuffett doesn’t think in minutes, days, or months, but years. He doesn’tneed to keep up with hundreds of companies, because his investmentsare focused in just a select few. This approach, which he calls “fo cus in-vesting,” greatly simplifies the task of portfolio management.STATUS QUO: A CHOICE OF TWOThe current state of portfolio management, as practiced by ever yoneelse, appears to be locked into a tug-of-war between two competingstrategies—active portfolio management and index investing.Active portfolio managers are constantly at work buying and sellinga great number of common stocks. Their job is to try to keep theirclients satisfied. That means consistently outperforming the market sothat on any given day should a client apply the obvious measuringstick—how is my portfolio doing compared with the market overall—the answer will be positive and the client will leave her money in thefund. To keep on top, active managers try to predict what will happenwith stocks in the coming six months and continually churn the portfo-lio, hoping to take advantage of their predictions.Index investing, on the other hand, is a buy-and-hold passive ap-proach. It involves assembling, and then holding, a broadly diversifiedportfolio of common stocks deliberately designed to mimic the behaviorof a specific benchmark index, such as the Standard & Poor’s 500. Thesimplest and by far the most common way to achieve this is through anindexed mutual fund.Proponents of both approaches have long waged combat to provewhich one will ultimately yield the higher investment return.“W e just focus on a few outstanding companies. W e’re focusinvestors.”1WARREN BUFFETT , 1994Managing Your Portfolio 159Active portfolio managers argue that, by virtue of their superiorstock-picking skills, they can do better than any index. Index strate-gists, for their part, have recent history on their side. In a study thattracked results in a twenty-year period, from 1977 through 1997, thepercentage number of equity mutual funds that have been able to beatthe Standard & Poor’s 500 Index dropped dramatically, from 50 per-cent in the early years to barely 25 percent in the final four years. Andas of November 1998, 90 percent of actively managed funds were un-derperforming the market (averaging 14 percent lower than the S&P500), which means that only 10 percent were doing better.2Active portfolio management as commonly practiced today stands avery small chance of outperforming the index. For one thing, it isgrounded in a very shaky premise: Buy today whatever we predict canbe sold soon at a profit, regardless of what it is. The fatal flaw in thatlogic is that given the complexity of the financial universe, predictionsare impossible. Second, this high level of activity comes with transac-tion costs that diminish the net returns to investors. When we factor inthese costs, it becomes apparent that the active money managementbusiness has created its own downfall.Indexing, because it does not trigger equiva lent expens es, is betterthan actively managed portfolios in many respects. But even the bestindex fund, operating at its peak, will only net you exactly the returnsof the overall market. Index investors can do no worse than the market,and also no better.Intelligent investors must ask themselves: Am I satisfied with aver-age? Can I do better?A NEW CHOICEGiven a choice between active and index approaches, Warren Buffettwould unhesitatingly pick indexing. This is especially true for investorswith a very low tolerance for risk, and for people who know very littleabout the economics of a business but still want to participate in thelong-term benefits of investing in common stocks.“By periodically investing in an index fund,” he says in inimitableBuffett style, “the know-nothing investor can actually outperform mostinvestment professionals.”3Buffett, however, would be quick to point160 THE WARREN BUFFETT WAYout that there is a third alternative—a very different kind of active port-folio strategy that significantly increases the odds of beating the index.That alternative is focus investing.FOCUS INVESTING: THE BIG PICTUREReduced to its essence, focus investing means this: Choose a few stocksthat are likely to produce above-average returns over the long haul,concentrate the bulk of your investments in those stocks, and have thefortitude to hold steady during any short-term market gyrations.The following sections describe the separate elements in the process.“Find Outstanding Companies”Over the years, Warren Buffett has developed a way of determiningwhich companies are worthy places to put his money; it rests on a no-tion of great common sense: If the company is doing well and is man-aged by smart people, eventually its stock price will reflect its inherentvalue. Buffett thus devotes most of his attention not to tracking shareprice but to analyzing the economics of the underlying business and as-sessing its management.The Buffett tenets, described in earlier chapters, can be thought of asa kind of tool belt. Each tenet is one analytical tool, and in the aggregateTHE FOCUS INVESTOR’S GOLDEN RULES1. Concentrate your investments in outstanding companiesrun by strong management.2. Limit yourself to the number of companies you can trulyunderstand. Ten to twenty is good, more than twenty isasking for trouble.3. Pick the very best of your good companies, and put thebulk of your investment there.4. Think long-term: five to ten years, minimum.5. V olatility happens. Carry on.Managing Your Portfolio 161they provide a method for isolating the companies with the best chancefor high economic returns. Buffett uses his tool belt to find companieswith a long history of superior performance and a stable management,and that stability means they have a high probability of performing inthe future as they have in the past. And that is the heart of focus invest-ing: concentrating your investments in companies with the highestprobability of above-average performance.“Less Is More”Remember Buffett’s advice to a know-nothing investor—to stay withindex funds? What is more interesting for our purposes is what hesaid next:“If you are a know-something inv estor, able to understand busi-ness economics and to find five to ten sensibly priced companies thatpossess important long-term competitive advantages, conventionaldiversification (broadly based active portfolios) makes no sense foryou.”4What’s wrong with conventional diversification? For one thing, itgreatly increases the chances that you will buy something you don’tknow enough about. Philip Fisher, who was known for his focus port-folios, although he didn’t use the term, profoundly influenced Buffett’sthinking in this area. Fisher always said he preferred owning a smallnumber of outstanding companies that he understood well to a largenumber of average ones, many of which he understood poorly.“Know-something” inv estors, applying the Buffett tenets, woulddo better to focus their attention on just a few companies. How manyis a few? Even the high priests of modern finance have discovered that,on average, just fifteen stocks gives you 85 percent diversification.5Forthe average investor, a legitimate case can be made for ten to twenty.Focus investing falls apart if it is applied to a large portfolio with dozensof stocks.“Put Big Bets on High-Probability Events”Phil Fisher’s influence on Buffett can also be seen in another way—hisbelief that the only reasonable course when you encounter a strong op-portunity is to make a large investment. Warren Buffett echoes that162 THE WARREN BUFFETT WAYthinking: “With each investment you make, you should have the courageand the conviction to place at least ten percent of your net worth in thatstock.”6Y ou can see why Buffett says the ideal portfolio should contain nomore than ten stocks, if each is to receive 10 percent. Yet focus invest-ing is not a simple matter of finding ten good stocks and dividing yourinvestment pool equally among them. Even though all the stocks in afocus portfolio are high-probability events, some will inevitably behigher than others, and they should be allocated a greater proportion ofthe investment.Blackjack players understand this intuitively: When the odds arestrongly in your favor, put down a big bet.Think back for a moment to Buffett’s decision to buy AmericanExpress for the limited partnership, described in Chapter 1. Whenthreat of scandal caused the company’s share price to drop by almosthalf, Buffett invested a whopping 40 percent of the partnership’s assetsin this one company. He was convinced that, despite the controversy,the company was solid and eventually the stock price would return toits proper level; in the meantime, he recognized a terrific opportunity.But was it worth almost half of his total assets? It was a big bet that paidoff handsomely: Two years later, he sold the much-appreciated sharesfor a profit of $20 million.“Be Patient”Focus investing is the antithesis of a broadly diversified high-turnoverapproach. Although focus investing stands the best chance among all ac-tive strategies of outperforming an index return over time, it requiresI can’t be involved in 50 or 75 things. That’s a Noah’s Arkway of investing—you end up with a zoo. I like to put mean-ingful amounts of money in a few things.7WARREN BUFFETT , 1987Managing Your Portfolio 163investors to patiently hold their portfolio even when it appears thatother strategies are winning.How long is long enough? As you might imagine, there is no hard-and-fast rule ( although Buffett would probably say that anything lessthan five years is a fool’s theory). The goal is not zeroturnover (neverselling anything); that’s foolish in the oppos ite direction, for it wouldprevent you from taking advantage of something bet ter when it comesalong. As a general rule of thumb, we should aim for a turnover rate be-tween 20 and 10 percent, which means holding the stock for some-where between five and ten years.“Don’t Panic over Price Changes”Focus investing pursues above -average results, and there is strong evi-dence, both in academic research and actual case histories, that the pur-suit is successful. There can be no doubt, however, that the ride isbumpy, for price volatility is a necessary by-product of the focus ap-proach. Focus investors tolerate the bumpiness because they know thatin the long run the underlying economics of the companies will morethan compensate for any short-term price fluctuations.Buffett is a master bump-ignorer. So is his partner, CharlieMunger, who once calculated, using a compound interest table and les-sons learned playing poker, that as long as he could handle the pricevolatility, owning as few as three stocks would be p lenty. “I knew Icould handle the bumps psychologically, because I was raised by peoplewho believe in handling bumps.”8Maybe you also come from a long line of people who can handlebumps. But even if you were not born so lucky, you can acquire some oftheir traits. It is a matter of consciously deciding to change how youthink and behave. Acquiring new habits and thought patterns does nothappen overnight, but gradually teaching yourself not to panic and actrashly in response to the vagaries of the market is doable—and necessary.BUFFETT AND MODERN PORTFOLIO THEORYWarren Buffett’s faith in the fundamental ideas of focus investing putshim at odds with many other financial gurus, and also with a package164 THE WARREN BUFFETT WAYof concepts that is collectively known as modern portfolio theory. Be-cause this is a book about Buffett’s thinking, and because Buffett him-self does not subscribe to this theory, we will not spend much timedescribing it. But as you continue to learn about investing, you willhear about this theory, and so it is important to cover its basic elements.Then we’ll give Buffett a chance to weigh in on each.Modern portfolio theory is a combination of three seminal ideasabout finance from three powerful minds. Harry Markowitz, a graduatestudent in economics at the University of Chicago, first quantified therelationship between return and risk. Using a mathematical tool calledcovariance, he measured the combined movement of a group of stocks,and used that to determine the riskiness of an entire portfolio.Markowitz conc luded that investment risk is not a function of howmuch the price of any individual stock changes, but how much a groupof stocks changes in the same direction. If they do so, there is a goodchance that economic shifts will drive them all down at the same time.The only reasonable protection, he said, was diversification.About ten years later, another graduate student, Bill Sharpe fromthe University of California-Los Angeles, dev eloped a mathematicalprocess for measuring volatility that simplified Markowitz’s approach.He called it the Capital Asset Pricing Model.So in the space of one decade, two academicians had defined twoimportant elements of what we would later come to call modern port-folio theory: Markowitz with his idea that the proper reward/risk bal-ance depends on diversification, and Sharpe with his definition ofrisk. A third piece—the efficient market theory (EMT)—came froma young assistant professor of finance at the University of Chicago,Eugene Fama.Fama began studying the changes in stock prices in the early 1960s.An intense reader, he absorbed all the written work on stock market be-havior then available and concl uded that stock prices are not predictablebecause the market is too efficient. In an efficient market, as informa-tion becomes available, a great many smart people aggressively apply thatinformation in a way that causes prices to adjust instantaneously, beforeanyone can profit. At any given moment, stock prices reflect all availableinformation. Predictions about the future therefore have no place in anefficient market, because the share prices adjust too quickly.Managing Your Portfolio 165Buffett’s View of RiskIn modern portfolio theory, the volatility of the share price defines risk.But throughout his career, Buffett has always perceived a drop in shareprices as an opportunity to make money. In his mind, then, a dip in priceactually reduces risk. He points out, “For owners of a business—andthat’s the way we think of shar eholders—the academics’ definition ofrisk is far off the mark, so much so that it produces absurdities.”9Buffett has a different def inition of risk: the possibility of harm.And that is a factor of the intrinsic value of the business, not the pricebehavior of the stock. Financial harm comes from misjudging the fu-ture profits of the business, plus the uncontrollable, unpredictable effectof taxes and inflation.Furthermore, Buffett sees risk as inextricably linked to an investor’stime horizon. If you buy a stock today, he explains, with the intentionof selling it tomorrow, then you have entered into a risky transaction.The odds of predicting whether share prices will be up or down in ashort period are the same as the odds of predicting the toss of a coin;you will lose half of the time. However, says Buffett, if you extend yourtime horizon out to several years (always assuming that you have madea sensible purchase), then the odds shift meaningfully in your favor.Buffett’s View of DiversificationBuffett’s view on risk drives his diversification strategy, and here, too,his thinking is the polar opposite of modern portfolio theory. Accord-ing to that theory, the primary benefit of a broadly diversified portfo-lio is to mitigate the price volatility of the individual stocks. But if youare unconcerned with price volatility, as Buffett is, then you will alsosee portfolio diversification in a different light.He knows that many so-called pundits would say the Berkshirestrategy is riskier, but he is not swayed. “W e believe that a policy ofportfolio concentration may well decrease risk if it raises, as it should,both the intensity with which an investor thinks about a business andthe comfort level he must feel with its economic characteristics beforebuying into it.”10By purposely focusing on just a few select companies,you are better able to study them closely and understand their intrinsic166 THE WARREN BUFFETT WAYvalue. The more knowledge you have about your company, the less riskyou are likely taking.“Diversification serves as protection against ignorance,” explainsBuffett. “If you want to make sure that nothing bad happens to you rel-ative to the market, you should own everything. There is nothing wrongwith that. It’s a perfectly sound approach for somebody who doesn’tknow how to analyze businesses.”11Buffett’s View of the Efficient Market TheoryBuffett’s problem with the EMT rests on a central point: It makes noprovision for investors who analyze all the available information, asBuffett urges them to do, which gives them a competitive advantage.Nonetheless, EMT is still religiously taught in business schools, afact that gives Warren Buffett no end of satisfaction. “Naturally thedisservice done students and gullible investment professionals whohave swallowed EMT has been an extraordinary service to us andother followers of Graham,” Buffett wryly observed. “From a selfishstandpoint, we should probably endow chairs to ensure the perpetualteaching of EMT.”12/tile3In many ways, modern portfolio theory protects investors who havelimited knowledge and understanding on how to value a business. Butthat protection comes with a price. According to Buffett, “Modernportfolio theory tells you how to be average. But I think almost any-body can figure out how to do average in the fifth grade.”13THE SUPERINVESTORS OF BUFFETTVILLEOne of the greatest investment books of all time came out in 1934, dur-ing the height of the Great Depression. Security Analysis, by BenjaminGraham and David Dodd, is universally acclaimed a classic, and is stillin print after five editions and sixty-five years. It is impossible to over-state its influence on the modern world of investing.Managing Your Portfolio 167Fifty years after its original publication, the Columbia BusinessSchool sponsored a seminar marking the anniversary of this seminal text.Warren Buffett, one of the school’s best-known alumni and the most fa-mous modern-day proponent of Graham’s value approach, addressed thegathering. He titled his speech “The Superinvestors of Graham-and-Doddsville,” and in its own way, it has become as much a classic as thebook it honored.14He began by recapping the central argument of modern portfoliotheory—that the stock market is efficient, all stocks are priced correctly,and therefore anyone who beats the market year af ter year is simplylucky. Maybe so, he said, but I know some folks who have done it, andtheir success can’t be explained away as simply random chance.And he proceeded to lay out the evidence. The examples he pre-sented that day were all people who had managed to beat the marketconsistently over time, not because of luck, but because they followedprinciples learned from the same source: Ben Graham. They all reside,he said, in the “intellectual village” of Graham-and-Doddsville.Nearly two decades later, I thought it might be interesting to takean updated look at a few people who exemplify the approach definedby Graham and who also share Buffett’s belief in the value of a focusedportfolio with a small number of stocks. I think of them as the Super-investors of Buffettville: Charlie Munger, Bill Ruane, Lou Simpson,and of course Buffett. From their performance records, there is muchwe can learn.Charlie MungerAlthough Berkshire Hathaway’s investment performance is usually tiedto its chairman, we should never forget that vice chairman CharlieMunger is an outstanding investor. Shar eholders who have attendedBerkshire’s annual meeting or read Charlie’s thoughts in OutstandingInvestor Digest realize what a fine intellect he has.“I ran into him in about 1960,” said Buffett, “and I told him law wasfine as a hobby but he could better.”15As you may recall, Munger at thetime had a thriving law practice in Los Angeles, but gradually shifted hisenergies to a new investment partnership bearing his name. The resultsof his talents can be found in Table 10.1.168 THE WARREN BUFFETT WAY“His portfolio was concentrated in very few securities and there-fore, his record was much more volatile,” Buffett explained, “but itwas based on the same discount-from-value approach.” In making in-vestment decisions for his partnership, Charlie followed the Grahammethodology and would look only at companies that were sellingbelow their intrinsic value. “He was willing to accept greater peaksand valleys in performance, and he happens to be a fellow whose psy-che goes toward concentration.”16Notice that Buffett does not use the word riskin describingCharlie’s performance. Using the conventional definition of risk(price volatility), we would have to say that over its thirteen-year his-tory Charlie’s partnership was extremely risky, with a standard devia-tion almost twice that of the market. But beating the average annualreturn of the market by 18 points over those same thirteen years wasnot the act of a risky man, but of an astute investor.Table 10.1 Charles Munger PartnershipAnnual Percentage ChangeOverall Dow JonesYear Partnership (%) Industrial Average (%)1962 30.1 −7.61963 71.7 20.61964 49.7 18.71965 8.4 14.21966 12.4 −15.81967 56.2 19.01968 40.4 7.71969 28.3 −11.61970 −0.1 8.71971 25.4 9.81972 8.3 18.21973 −31.9 −13.11974 −31.5 −23.11975 73.2 44.4Average Return 24.3 6.4Standard Deviation 33.0 18.5Minimum −31.9 −23.1Maximum 73.2 44.4Managing Your Portfolio 169Bill RuaneBuffett first met Bill Ruane in 1951, when both were taking Ben Gra-ham’s Security Analysis class at Columbia. The two classmates stayed incontact, and Buffett watched Ruane’s investment performance over theyears with admiration. When Buffett closed his investment partnershipin 1969, he asked Ruane if he would be willing to handle the funds ofsome of the partners, and that was the beginning of the Sequoia Fund.It was a difficult time to set up a mutual fund. The stock marketwas splitting into a two-tier market, with most of the hot money gyrat-ing toward the so-called Nifty-Fifty (the big-name companies like IBMand Xerox), leaving the “value” stocks far behind. Ruane was unde-terred. Later Buffett commented, “I am happy to say that my partners,to an amazing degree, not only stayed with him but added money, withhappy results.”17Sequoia Fund was a true pioneer, the first mutual fund run on theprinciples of focus investing. The public record of Sequoia’s holdingsdemonstrates clearly that Bill Ruane and Rick Cuniff, his partner inRuane, Cuniff & Company, managed a tightly focused, low-turnoverportfolio. On average, well over 90 percent of the fund was concentratedbetween six and ten companies. Even so, the economic diversity of theportfolio was, and continues to be, broad.Bill Ruane’s point of view is in many ways unique among moneymanagers. Generally speaking, most managers begin with some precon-ceived notion about portfolio management and then fill in the portfoliowith various stocks. At Ruane, Cuniff & Company, the partners beginwith the idea of selecting the b est possible stocks and then let the port-folio form around these selections.Selecting the b est possible stocks, of course, requires a high level ofresearch, and here again Ruane, Cuniff & Company stands apart fromthe rest of the industry. The firm eschews Wall Street’s broker-fed re-search reports and instead relies on its own intensive company investi-gations. “W e don’t go in much for titles at our firm,” Ruane oncesaid, “[but] if we did, my business card would read Bill Ruane, Re-search Analyst.”18How well has this unique approach served their shar eholders?Table 10.2 outlines the investment performance of Sequoia Fund from1971 through 2003. During this period, Sequoia earned an average170Table 10.2 Sequoia Fund, Inc.Annual Percentage ChangeSequoia S&P 500Year Fund Index1971 13.5 14.31972 3.7 18.91973 −24.0 −14.81974 −15.7 −26.41975 60.5 37.21976 72.3 23.61977 19.9 −7.41978 23.9 6.41979 12.1 18.21980 12.6 32.31981 21.5 −5.01982 31.2 21.41983 27.3 22.41984 18.5 6.11985 28.0 31.61986 13.3 18.61987 7.4 5.21988 11.1 16.51989 27.9 31.61990 −3.8 −3.11991 40.0 30.31992 9.4 7.61993 10.8 10.01994 3.3 1.41995 41.4 37.51996 21.7 22.91997 42.3 33.41998 35.3 28.61999 −16.5 21.02000 20.1 −9.12001 10.5 −11.92002 −2.6 −22.12003 17.1 28.7Average Return 18.0 12.9Standard Deviation 20.2 17.7Minimum −24.0 −26.4Maximum 72.3 37.5Managing Your Portfolio 171annual return of 18 percent, compared with the 12.9 percent of theStandard & Poor’s 500 Index.Lou SimpsonAbout the time Warren Buffett began acquiring the stock of the Gov-ernment Employees Insurance Company (GEICO) in the late 1970s, healso made another acquisition that would have a direct benefit on theinsurance company’s financial he alth. His name was Lou Simpson.Simpson, who earned a master’s degree in economics from Prince-ton, worked for both Stein Roe & Farnham and W estern Asset Manage-ment before Buffett lured him to GEICO in 1979. He is now CEO ofCapital Operations for the company. Recalling his job interview, Buf-fett remembers that Lou had “the ideal temperament for investing.”19Lou, he said, was an independent thinker who was confident of his ownresearch and “who derived no particular pleasure from operating withor against the crowd.”Simpson, a voracious reader, ignores Wall Street research and in-stead pores over annual reports. His common stock selection proc ess issimilar to Buffett’s. He purchases only high-return businesses that arerun by able management and are available at reasonable prices. Lou alsohas something else in common with Buffett. He focuses his portfolio ononly a few stocks. GEICO’s billion-dollar equity portfolio customarilyowns fewer than ten stocks.Between 1980 and 1996, GEICO’s portfolio achieved an averageannual return of 24.7 percent, compared with the market’s return of17.8 percent (see Table 10.3). “These are not only terrific figures,” saysBuffett, “but, fully as important, they have been achieved in the rightway. Lou has consistently invested in undervalued common stocks that,individually, were unlikely to present him with a permanent loss andthat, collectively, were close to risk free.”20It is important to note that the focus strategy sometimes means en-during several weak years. Even the Superinvestors—undeniably skilled,undeniably successful—faced periods of short-term underperformance. Alook at Table 10.4 shows that they would have struggled through severaldifficult periods.What do you think would have happened to Munger, Simpson, andRuane if they had been rookie managers starting their careers today inan environment that can only see the value of one year’s, or even one172 THE WARREN BUFFETT WAYquarter’s, performance? They would probably have been canned, totheir clients’ profound loss.MAKING CHANGES IN YOUR PORTFOLIODon’t be lulled into thinking that just because a focus portfolio lags thestock market on a price basis from time to time, you are excused fromthe ongoing responsibility of performance scrutiny. Granted, a focus in-vestor should not become a slave to the stock market’s whims, but youshould always be acutely aware of all economic stirrings of the com-panies in your portfolio. There will be times when buying something,selling something else, is exactly the right thing to do.Table 10.3 Lou Simpson, GEICOAnnual Percentage ChangeGEICOYear Equities (%) S&P 500 (%)1980 23.7 32.31981 5.4 −5.01982 45.8 21.41983 36.0 22.41984 21.8 6.11985 45.8 31.61986 38.7 18.61987 −10.0 5.11988 30.0 16.61989 36.1 31.71990 −9.1 −3.11991 57.1 30.51992 10.7 7.61993 5.1 10.11994 13.3 1.31995 39.7 37.61996 29.2 37.6Average Return 24.7 17.8Standard Deviation 19.5 14.3Minimum −10.0 −5.0Maximum 57.1 37.6Managing Your Portfolio 173The Decision to Buy: An Easy GuidelineWhen Buffett considers adding an investment, he first looks at what healready owns to see whether the new purchase is any better. “WhatBuffett is saying is something very useful to practically any inv estor,”Charlie Munger stresses. “For an ordinary individual, the best thingyou already have should be your measuring stick.”What happens next is one of the most critical but widely over-looked secrets to increasing the value of your portfolio. “If the newthing you are considering purchasing is not better than what you al-ready know is available,” says Charlie, “then it hasn’t met your thresh-old. This screens out 99 percent of what you see.”21The Decision to Sell: Two Good Reasons to Move SlowlyFocus investing is necessarily a long-term approach to investing. If wewere to ask Buffett what he considers an ideal holding period, he wouldanswer “forever”—so long as the company continues to generate above-average economics and management allocates the earnings of the com-pany in a rational manner. “Inactivity strikes us as intelligent behavior,”he explains.22If you own a lousy company, you require turnover because other-wise you end up owning the economics of a subpar business for a longtime. But if you own a superior company, the last thing you want to dois to sell it.This slothlike approach to portfolio management may appear quirkyto those accustomed to actively buying and selling stocks on a regularbasis, but it has two important economic benefits, in addition to grow-ing capital at an above-average rate:Table 10.4 The Superinvestors of BuffettvilleNumber ofNumber of Number of Consecutive UnderperformanceYears of Years of Years of Years as a PercentPerformance Underperformance Underperformance of All YearsMunger 14 5 3 36Ruane 29 11 4 37Simpson 17 4 1 24174 THE WARREN BUFFETT WAY1.It works to reduce transaction costs. This is one of those com-monsense dynamics that is so obvious it is easily overlooked.Every time you buy or sell, you trigger brokerage costs thatlower your net returns.2.It increases aftertax returns. When you sell a stock at a profit,you will be hit with capital gain taxes, eating into your profit.The solution: Leave it be. If you leave the gain in place (this isreferred to as unrealized gain), your money compounds moreforcefully. Overall, investors have too often underestimated theenormous value of this unrealized gain—what Buffett calls an“interest-free loan from the Treasury.”To make his point, Buffett asks us to imagine what happens if youbuy a $1 investment that doubles in price each year. If you sell the in-vestment at the end of the first year, you would have a net gain of $.66(assuming you’re in the 34 percent tax bracket). Now you reinvest the$1.66, and it doubles in value by year-end. If the investment continuesto double each year, and you continue to sell, pay the tax, and reinvestthe proceeds, at the end of twenty years you would have a net gain of$25,200 after paying taxes of $13,000. If, on the other hand, you pur-chased a $1 investment that doubled each year and never sold it until theend of twenty years, you would gain $692,000 after paying taxes of ap-proximately $356,000.The best strategy for achieving high aftertax returns is to keep youraverage portfolio turnover ratio somewhere between 0 and 20 percent.Two strategies lend themselves best to low turnover rates. One is tostick with an index mutual fund; they are low turnover by definition.Those who prefer a more active style of investing will turn to the sec-ond strategy: a focus portfolio.THE CHALLENGE OF FOCUS INVESTINGMy goal so far has been to lay out the argument for adopting the focusinvesting approach that Warren Buffett uses with such great success. Iwould be doing you less than full service if I did not also make it plainthat an unavoidable consequence of this approach is heightened volatil-ity. When your portfolio is focused on just a few companies, a priceManaging Your Portfolio 175change in any one of them is all the more noticeable and has greateroverall impact.The ability to withstand that volatility without undue second-guessing is crucial to your peace of mind, and ultimately to yourfinancial success. Coming to terms with it is largely a matter of un-derstanding the emotional side effects of investing, which is the topicof Chapter 11.Money matters are about the most emotional issues of all, and thatwill never change. But at the same time, you need not be constantly atthe mercy of those emotions, to the point that sensible action is handi-capped. The key is to keep your emotions in appropriate perspective,and that is much easier if you understand something of the basic psy-chology involved.THE CHALLENGE OF SUCCESSWarren Buffett’s challenge is not psychology; he understands the emo-tional side of investing as well as anyone and bet ter than most. His chal-lenge is maintaining the level of returns that others have come to expectfrom him. Two factors are involved: First, in very recent years, Buffetthasn’t found very many stocks that meet his price criteria. That’s a prob-lem of the market. Second, when you’re driving a $100 billion company,it takes a significant level of economic return to move the needle. That’sa problem of size.Buffett explains it this way: “Some years back, a good $10 millionidea could do wonders for us. Today, the combination of tensuch ideasand a triple in the value of eachwould increase the net worth of Berk-shire by only one quarter of one percent. W e need ‘elephants’ to makesignificant gains now—and they are hard to find.” 23That was in early2002. Berkshire’s net worth has continued to grow since then, and, pre-sumably, these elephants are even harder to find today.The good news for most investors is that they can put their elephantguns away. The other good news is that, regardless of the size of theirpocketbook, the fundamentals of focus investing still apply. No matterhow much money you have to work with, you will want to do thesame thing Buffett does: When you find a high-probability event, putdown a big bet.