414Buying a BusinessBerkshire Hathaway, Inc., is complex but not complicated. It owns(at the moment) just shy of 100 separate businesses—the insurancecompanies described in the previous chapter, and a wide varietyof noninsurance businesses acquired through the income stream fromthe insurance operation. Using that same cash stream, it also purchasesbonds and stocks of publicly traded companies. Running through it all isWarren Buffett’s down-to-earth way of looking at a business: whetherit’s one he’s considering buying in its entirety or one he’s evaluating forstock purchase.There is no fundamental difference, Buffett believes, between thetwo. Both make him an owner of the business, and therefore both deci-sions should, in his view, spring from this owner’s point of view. This isthe single most important thing to understand about Buffett’s investmentapproach: Buying stocks means buying a business and requires the samediscipline. In fact, it has always been Buffett’s preference to directly owna company, for it permits him to influence what he considers the mostcritical issue in a business: capital allocation. But when stocks represent abetter value, his choice is to own a portion of a company by purchasingits common stock.In either case, Buffett follows the same strategy: He looks for com-panies he understands, with consistent earnings history and favorablelong-term prospects, showing good return on equity with little debt,that are operated by honest and competent people, and, importantly, are42 THE WARREN BUFFETT WAYavailable at attractive prices. This owner-oriented way of looking at po-tential investments is bedrock to Buffett’s approach.Because he operates from this owner’s perspective, wherein buyingstock is the same as buying companies, it is also true that buying com-panies is the same as buying stock. The same principles apply in bothcases, and therefore both hold important lessons for us.Those principles are described in some detail in Chapters 5 through8. Collectively, they make up what I have called the “Warren BuffettWay,” and they are applied, almost subconsciously, every time he consid-ers buying shares of a company, or acquiring the entire company. In thischapter, we take a brief background tour of some of these purchases, sothat we may better understand the lessons they offer.A MOSAIC OF MANY BUSINESSESBerkshire Hathaway, Inc., as it exists today, is best understood as aholding company. In addition to the insurance companies, it also ownsa newspaper, a candy company, an ice cream/hamburger chain, an en-cyclopedia publisher, several furniture stores, a maker of W estern boots,jewelry stores, a supplier of custom picture framing material, a paintcompany, a company that manufactures and distributes uniforms, a vac-uum cleaner business, a public utility, a couple of shoe companies, anda household name in underwear—among others.Some of these companies, particularly the more recent acquisitions,are jewels that Buffett found in a typically Buffett-like way: He adver-tised for them in the Berkshire Hathaway annual reports.His criteria are straightforward: a simple, understandable businesswith consistent earning power, good return on equity, little debt, andAll we want is to be in businesses that we understand, run bypeople whom we like, and priced attractively relative to theirfuture prospects.1WARREN BUFFETT , 1994Buying a Business 43good management in place. He is interested in companies in the $5 bil-lion to $20 billion range, the larger the better. He is not interested inturnarounds, hostile takeovers, or tentative situations where no askingprice has been determined. He promises complete confidentiality and aquick response.In Berkshire Hathaway’s annual reports and in remarks to share-holders, he has often described his acquisition strategy this way: “It’svery scientific. Charlie and I just sit around and wait for the phone toring. Sometimes it’s a wrong number.”1The strategy works. Through this public announcement, and alsothrough referrals from managers of current Berkshire companies, Buf-fett has acquired an amazing string of successful businesses. Some ofthem have been B erkshire companies for decades, and their stories havebecome part of the Buffett lore.See’s Candy Shops, for example, has been a Berkshire subsidiarysince 1972. It is noteworthy because it represents the first time Buffettmoved away from Ben Graham’s dictum to buy only undervalued com-panies. The net purchase price—$30 million—was three times bookvalue. Without doubt, it was a good decision. In 2003 alone, See’s pre-tax earnings were $59 million—almost exactly twice the original pur-chase price.At Berkshire’s annual meeting in 1997, 25 years after the See’s pur-chase, Charlie Munger recalled, “It was the first time we paid for qual-ity.” To which Buffett added, “If we hadn’t bought See’s, we wouldn’thave bought Coke.”3Later on in this chapter, the full significance of thatcomment becomes apparent.Another company well known to Berkshire followers is NebraskaFurniture Mart. This enormous retail operation began in Omaha,Buffett’s hometo wn, in 1937 when a Russian immigrant named RoseBlumkin, who had been selling furniture from her basement, put up$500 to open a small store. In 1983, Buffett paid Mrs. B, as she wasuniversally known, $55 million for 80 percent of her store.Today the Nebraska Furniture Mart, which comprises three retailunits to taling 1.2 million square feet on one large piece of real estate,sells more home furnishings than any other store in the country. Run-ning a close second is the second Mart, opened in 2002 in Kansas City. Inhis 2003 letter to shar eholders, Buffett linked the succ ess of this 450,000-square-foot operation to the legendary Mrs. B., who was still at work44 THE WARREN BUFFETT WAYuntil the year she died at the age of 104. “One piece of wisdom she im-parted,” Buffett wrote, “was ‘if you have the lowest price, customers willfind you at the bottom of a river.’ Our store serving greater Kansas City,which is located in one of the area’s more sparsely populated parts, hasproved Mrs. B’s point. Though we have more than 25 acres of parking,the lot has at times overflowed.”4In January 1986, Buffett paid $315 million in cash for the Scott &Fetzer Company, a conglomerate of twenty-one separate companies, in-cluding the makers of Kirby vacuum cleaners and World Book encyclo-pedia. It was one of Berkshire’s largest business acquisitions up to thatpoint, and has since exceeded Buffett’s own optimistic expectations. It isa model of an organization that creates a large return on equity withvery little debt—and that is one of Buffett’s favorite traits. In fact, hecalculates that Scott Fetzer’s return on equity would easily place itamong the top 1 percent of the Fortune 500.Scott Fetzer’s various companies make a range of rather specialized(some would say boring) industrial products, but what they really makeis money for Berkshire Hathaway. Since Buffett bought it, Scott Fetzerhas distributed over 100 percent of its earnings back to Berkshire whilesimultaneously increasing its own earnings.In recent years, Warren Buffett has turned more and more of his at-tention to buying companies instead of shares. The story of how Buffettcame to acquire these diverse businesses is interesting in itself. Perhapsmore to the point, the stories collectively give us valuable insight intoBuffett’s way of looking at companies. In this chapter, we have spacefor an abbreviated visit to just three of these acquisitions, but that is byno means all. To illustrate the wide range of industries within Berk-shire, here are a few examples of recent acquisitions:• Fruit of the Loom, which produces one-third of the men’s andboys’ underwear sold in the United States. Purchased in 2002 for$835 million, which, after accounting for the earned interest onassumed debt, was a net of $730 million.• Garan, which makes children’s clothing, including the popularGaranimals line. Purchased in 2002 for $270 million.• MiTek, which produces structural hardware for the building in-dustry. Purchased in 2001 for $400 million. An interesting as-pect of this deal is that Berkshire now owns only 90 percent ofBuying a Business 45the company. The other 10 percent is owned by 55 managerswho love their company and wanted to be part owners; this en-trepreneurial spirit among management is one of the qualitiesBuffett looks for.• Larson-Juhl, the leading supplier of framing materials to customframing shops. Purchased in 2001 for $225 million.•CORT Business Services, which leases quality furniture to officesand corporate-owned apartments. Purchased in 2000 for $467million, including $83 million of debt.• Ben Bridge Jeweler, a W est Coast chain owned and operated bythe same family for four generations. A requirement of the pur-chase was that the Bridge family remain to manage the company.Purchased in 2000 for a price not disclosed publicly.•Justin Industries, which makes W estern boots ( Justin, Tony Lama,and other brands) and, under the Acme brand name, bricks. Pur-chased in 2000 for $600 million.• Benjamin Moore, which has been making paint for 121 years.Purchased in 2000 for $1 billion.•Shaw Industries, the largest manufacturer of carpeting in theworld. Purchased 87 percent of the company in 2000 and the re-mainder in early 2002, for a total of $2 billion. Currently, Shaw is,except for insurance, Berkshire’s largest business, with 2003 earn-ings of $436 million.CLAYTON HOMESIn 1966, James Clayton, the son of a Tennessee sharecropper, started amobile home busin ess with $25,000 of borrowed money. Within fouryears, Clayton Homes was selling 700 units annually. Clayton is nowone of the largest makers of manufactured homes in the United States,with about $1.2 billion in sales in 2003. Home models range frommodest (500 square feet, priced at $10,000) to luxury ($100,000 for1,500 square feet, with hardwood floors, stainless steel appliances, andisland kitchens).Clayton has about 976 retailers in the United States, including 302company-owned stores, 86 company-owned community sales offices,and 588 manufactured housing communities in 33 states. It also owns46 THE WARREN BUFFETT WAYand operates financing, loan-servicing, and insurance subsidiaries. Thecompany went public in 1983, and Berkshire Hathaway acquired it inAugust 2003 for $1.7 billion.James Clayton gained his experience and education the hard way.Determined to pull himself out of the backbreaking work his parentsendured (his father picked cotton and his mother worked in a shirtfactory), Clayton financed his education at the University of Tennesseeby playing guitar on the radio. He eventually became a part-time hoston Startime, a weekly variety program on Knoxville TV and sangalong with people like Dolly Parton. Then, while in college, he starteda used car business with his fraternity brothers but the business wentbankrupt in 1961 when the bank called his loan. “My parents thoughtfor sure that we were going to jail and I made a pact with myself that Ihaven’t violated: I was never going to be vulnerable to a bank again.”5The acquisition of Clayton Homes is a typical Buffett story—meaning that it is atypical compared with the rest of the business world.The first aspect of the story is that Buffett had some hands-on ex-perience with the industry. In 2002, Berkshire had purchased junkbonds from Oakwood Homes, another mobile home manufacturer. AsBuffett has freely admitted, at the time he was not fully aware of the“atrocious consumer financing practices” that were common in theindustry. “But I learned,” he added. “Oakwood rather promptly wentbankrupt.”6Fast forward to February 2003. Al Auxier, a professor of finance atthe University of Tennessee, brought a group of MBA students toOmaha to meet with Buffett for what Buffett describes as “two hours ofgive-and-take.” It was the fifth time Auxier had made the trip, and it hadbecome traditional for the visiting students to bring a thank-you gift forBuffett. This time, the gift was the autobiography of James Clayton, whohad located his company in Knoxville, home of his alma m ater.After he finished reading the book, Buffett phoned James Clayton’sson Kevin, who is now CEO. “As I talked with Kevin, it became clearthat he was both able and a straight-shooter. Soon thereafter, I made anoffer for the business based solely on Jim’s book, my evaluation ofKevin, the public financials of Clayton and what I had learned from theOakwood experience.”7Two weeks later, Berkshire announced its ac-quisition of Clayton Homes. “I made the deal over the phone,” Buffettsaid, “without ever seeing it.”8Buying a Business 47In the fall of 2003, Buffett was invited to attend the University ofTennessee’s MBA Symposium. He recounted the Clayton story, andthen presented all the students who had started the ball rolling withhonorary PhDs (for Phenomenal, hard-working Dealmaker) from theUniversity of Berkshire Hathaway. Each student was also given one classB share of Berkshire, and their teacher, Al Auxier, was presented with anA share.MCLANE COMPANYIn 1894, Robert McLane, escaping the post-Civil War poverty of SouthCarolina, moved to Cameron, Texas, and started a small grocery store.Over the years, he developed it into a wholesale grocery and distributionbusiness. His son, Robert D. McLane, known by his middle name ofDrayton, joined the company in 1921. Drayton’s son, Drayton Jr., beganworking in the family business at the age of nine, and spent many teenageSaturdays sweeping floors in the war ehouse. Af ter college, he joined thecompany full time.Eventually Drayton Jr. convinced his father to move the companyclose to an interstate highway and then in 1962 to automate the businesswith computers. In 1990, he sold the company to his tennis pal Sam Wal-ton, and McLane became a Wal-Mart subsidiary, supplying Wal-Martand Sam’s Club stores, as well as convenience stores and fast-food restau-rants across the nation with ever ything from peanuts to pepperoni.By 2003, McLane had become the largest distributor in the UnitedStates to corner and convenience stores. McLane’s innovative softwaresystems for pricing, freight, delivery, and point-of-sales processing andits excellent delivery service had made the company a lean and efficientfull-service delivery company.An efficient, well-run company built on strong principles and show-ing consistent profitability is just what Warren Buffett likes to see. InMay 2003, Berkshire announced it had acquired McLane for $1.45 bil-lion in cash, and assumed an additional $1.2 billion in liabilities.The acquisition positioned McLane for even greater growth, as itfreed the company to pursue distribution contracts with supermarketchains and with Wal-Mart competitors, such as Target and Dollar Gen-eral. “In the past some retailers had shunned McLane,” wrote Buffett in48 THE WARREN BUFFETT WAYhis 2003 shar eholder letter, “because it was owned by their major com-petitor. But Grady Rosier, McLane’s superb CEO, has already landedsome of these accounts—he was in full stride the day the deal closed—and more will come.”9THE PAMPERED CHEFIn 1980, Doris Christopher, a former teacher of home economics and astay-at- home mom, was looking for part-time work with flexible hoursthat would add to the family income but still allow her time with hertwo young daughters. She decided to leverage what she knew—cookingand teaching—and that led her to the idea of selling kitchenware with in-home demonstrations. So she borrowed $3,000 against her l ife insurancepolicy, went shopping at the wholesale mart and bought $175 worth ofproducts she admired, then asked a friend to host a demonstration party.Christopher was a nervous wreck before the first party, but it wasa resounding success. Not only did ever yone have a gr eat time, severalguests suggested they’d like to host a party themselves. That was thebeginning of the Pampered Chef, a company that markets gourmetkitchenware through direct sales and in-home parties.The 34-year-old Christopher, who had no business background,started the company in the basement of her Chicago home with the$3,000 loan. The first year, working with her husband, she had sales of$50,000 and never looked back. In 1994, the Pampered Chef wasamong Inc.magazine’s 500 fastest-growing privately held companies inthe United States, and Christopher has been recognized by WorkingWoman magazine as one of the top 500 women busin ess owners.Doris Christopher started her business with a passionate belief thatsitting down together at mealtime brings families together in a way thatfew other experiences can match. That philosophy has shaped andguided the Pampered Chef from the beginning, and it is at the core ofthe sales approach: a friendly, hands-on pitch to housewives that linksthe quality of family life to the quality of kitchen products.Many of the company’s “kitchen consultants,” as they are called, arestay-at-home moms, and most of the sales are conducted in their homesat “kitchen shows.” These are cooking demonstrations where guests seeproducts and recipes in action, learn quick and easy food preparationtechniques, and receive tips on how to entertain with style and ease. TheBuying a Business 49products are professional-quality kitchen tools and pantry food items;some 80 percent of the products are exclusive to the company or canonly be bought from TPC representatives.Today, the Pampered Chef has 950 employees in the United States,Germany, the United Kingdom, and Canada, and its products are soldby over 71,000 independent consultants during in-home demonstra-tions. Over one million kitchen shows were held throughout the UnitedStates in 2002, producing sales of $730 million. And the only debt thecompany has ever incurred is the original $3,000 seed money.In 2002, Doris Christopher realized that in case she either k eeledover or decided to slow down, the Pampered Chef needed a backupplan. So, on the advice of her bankers at Goldman Sachs, she approachedWarren Buffett. That August, Christopher and her then CEO, SheilaO’Connell Cooper, met with Buffett at his headquarters in Omaha. Amonth later, Berkshire announced it had bought the company, for a pricethought to be approximately $900 million.Recalling that August meeting, Buffett wrote to Berkshire share-holders, “It took me about ten seconds to decide that these were twomanagers with whom I wished to partner, and we promptly made adeal. I’ve been to a TPC party and it’s easy to see why this business is asuccess. The company’s products, in large part propri etary, are well-styled and highly useful, and the consultants are knowledgeable and en-thusiastic. Everyone has a good time.”10/tile3Buffett is often asked what types of companies he will purchase in thefuture. First, he says, I will avoid commodity businesses and managersthat I have little confidence in. He has three touchstones: It must be thetype of company that he understands, possessing good economics, andrun by trustworthy managers. That’s also what he looks for in stocks—and for the same reasons.INVESTING IN STOCKSIt is patently obvious that few of us are in a position to buy whole com-panies, as Buffett does. Their stories are included in this chapter becausethey give us such crisp insight into Buffett’s way of thinking.50 THE WARREN BUFFETT WAYThat same chain of thinking also applies to his decisions about buy-ing stocks, and that does pre sent some examples that ordinary mortalsmight follow. W e may not be able to buy shares on the same scale asWarren Buffett, but we can profit from watching what he does.At the end of 2003, Berkshire Hathaway’s common stock portfoliohad a total market value of more than $35 billion (see Table A.27 in theAppendix)—an increase of almost $27 billion from the original pur-chase prices. In that portfolio, Berkshire Hathaway owns, among oth-ers, 200 million shares of Coca-Cola, 96 million shares of the GilletteCompany, and 56-plus million shares of W ells Fargo & Company. Softdrinks, razor blades, neighborhood banks—products and services thatare familiar to us all. Nothing esoteric, nothing high-tech, nothinghard to understand. It is one of Buffett’s most strongly held beliefs: Itmakes no sense to invest in a company or an industry you don’t under-stand, because you won’t be able to figure out what it’s worth or totrack what it’s doing.The Coca-Cola CompanyCoca-Cola is the world’s largest manufacturer, marketer, and distribu-tor of carbonated soft drink concentr ates and syrups. The company’ssoft drink product, first sold in the United States in 1886, is now sold inmore than 195 countries worldwide.Buffett’s relationship with Coca-Cola dates back to his childhood.He had his first Coca-Cola when he was five years old. Soon afterward,he started buying six Cokes for 25 cents from his grandfather’s grocerystore and reselling them in his neighborhood for 5 cents each. For thenext fifty years, Buffett admits, he observed the phenomenal growth ofCoca-Cola, but he purchased textile mills, department stores, and wind-mill and farming equipment manufacturers. Even in 1986, when he for-mally announced that Cherry Coke would become the official softdrink of Berkshire Hathaway’s annual meetings, Buffett had still notpurchased a share of Coca-Cola. It was not until two years later, in thesummer of 1988, that Buffett purchased his first shares of Coca-Cola.The strength of Coca-Cola is not only its brand-name products, butalso its unmatched worldwide distribution system. Today, internationalsales of Coca-Cola products account for 69 percent of the company’stotal sales and 80 percent of its profits. In addition to Coca-Cola Amatil,Buying a Business 51the company has equity interests in bottlers located in Mexico, SouthAmerica, Southeast Asia, Taiwan, Hong Kong, and China. In 2003, thecompany sold more than 19 billion cases of beverage products.The best business to own, says Buffett, is one that over time canemploy large amounts of capital at very high rates of return. This de-scription fits Coca-Cola perfectly. It is easy to understand why Buffettconsiders Coca-Cola, the most widely recognized brand name aroundthe world, to be the world’s most valuable franchise.Because of this financial strength, and also because the product is sowell known, I use Coca-Cola as the primary example in Chapters 5through 8, which detail the tenets of the Warren Buffett Way.The Gillette CompanyGillette is an international consumer products company that manufac-tures and distributes blades and razors, toiletries and cosmetics, stationeryproducts, electric shavers, small household applianc es, and oral care appli-ances and products. It has manufacturing operations in 14 countries anddistributes its products in over 200 countries and territories. Foreign op-erations account for over 63 percent of Gillette’s sales and earnings.King C. Gillette founded the company at the turn of the twentiethcentury. As a young man, Gillette spent time strategizing how he wouldmake his fortune. A friend suggested that he should invent a productthat consumers would use once, throw away, and replace with another.While working as a salesperson for Crown Cork & Seal, Gillette hit onthe idea of a disposable razor blade. In 1903, his fledgling companybegan selling the Gillette safety razor with 25 disposable blades for $5.Today, Gillette is the world’s leading manufacturer and distributorof blades and razors. Razor blades account for approximately one-thirdof the company’s sales but two-thirds of its profits. Its global share ofI buy businesses, not stocks, businesses I would be willing toown forever.11WARREN BUFFETT , 199852 THE WARREN BUFFETT WAYmarket is 72.5 percent, almost six times greater than the nearest com-petitor. The company has a 70 percent market share in Europe, 80 per-cent in Latin America. Sales are just beginning to grow in EasternEurope, India, and China. For every one blade that Gillette sells in theUnited States, it sells five overseas. In fact, Gillette is so dominantworldwide that in many languages its name has become the word for“razor blade.”Buffett became interested in Gillette in the 1980s. Wall Street ob-servers had begun to see the company as a mature, slow-growing con-sumer company ripe for a takeover. Profit margins hovered between9 percent and 11 percent, return on equity flattened out with no sign ofimprovement, and income growth and market value were anemic (seeFigures 4.1 and 4.2). In short, the company appeared stagnant.CEO Colman Mockler fought off four takeover attempts duringthis time, culminating in a hotly contested battle against Coniston Part-ners in 1988. Gillette won—barely—but in so doing obligated itself tobuy back 19 million shares of Gillette stock at $45 per share. Between1986 and 1988, the company replaced $1.5 billion in equity with debt,and for a short period Gillette had a negative net worth.At this point Buffett called his friend Joseph Sisco, a member ofGillette’s board, and proposed that Berkshire invest in the company.“Gillette’s business is very much the kind we like,” Buffett said.Figure 4.1 The Gillette Company return on equity.Buying a Business 53“Charlie and I think we understand the company’s economics andtherefore believe we can make a reasonably intelligent guess about itsfuture.”12Gillette issued $600 million in convertible preferred stock toBerkshire in July 1989 and used the funds to pay down debt. Buffett re-ceived a 8.75 percent convertible preferred security with a mandatoryredemption in ten years and the option to convert into Gillette com-mon at $50 per share, 20 percent higher than the then-current price.In 1989, Buffett joined Gillette’s board of directors. That same year,the company introduced a highly successful new product, the Sensor. Itwas the beginning of a turnaround. With Sensor sales, Gillette’s pros-perity magnified. Earnings per share began growing at a 20 percent an-nual rate. Pretax margins increased from 12 to 15 percent and return onequity reached 40 percent, twice its return in the early 1980s.In February 1991, the company announced a 2-for-1 stock split.Berkshire converted its preferred stock and received 12 million com-mon shares or 11 percent of Gillette’s shares outstanding. In less thantwo years, Berkshire’s $600 million investment in Gillette had grownto $875 million. Buffett’s next step was to calculate the value of those12 million shares; in Chapter 8, we’ll see how he went about it.Gillette’s razor blade business is a prime beneficiary of globaliza-tion. Typically, Gillette begins with low-end blades that have lowermargins and over time introduces improved shaving systems with higherFigure 4.2 The Gillette Company market value.54 THE WARREN BUFFETT WAYmargins. The company stands to benefit not only from increasing unitsales but from steadily improving profit margins as well. Gillette’s fu-ture appears bright. “It’s pleasant to go to bed every night,” says Buffett,“knowing there are 2.5 billion males in the world who will have toshave in the morning.”13The Washington Post CompanyThe Washington Post Company today is a media conglomerate withoperations in newspaper publishing, television broadcasting, cable tele-vision systems, magazine publishing, and the provision of educationalservices. The newspaper division publishes the Washington Post, theEverett (Washington) Herald, and the Gazette Newspapers, a group of39 weekly papers. The t elevision broadcasting division owns six t elevi-sion stations located in Detroit, Miami, Orlando, Houston, San Anto-nio, and Jacksonville, Florida. The cable t elevision systems divisionprovides cable and digital video services to more than 1.3 billion sub-scribers. The magazine division publishes Newsweek, with domesticcirculation of over 3 million and over 600,000 internationally.In addition to the four major divisions, the Washington Post Com-pany owns the Stanley H. Kaplan Educational Centers, a large networkof schools that prepare students for college admission tests and profes-sional licensing exams. Best known for its original program that helpshigh school students do well on Scholastic Aptitude Tests, Kaplan hasaggressively expanded its operations in recent years. It now includesafter-school classes for grades K-12, the world’s only accredited onlinelaw school, test-prep materials for engineers and CFAs, and campus-based schools with programs in business, finance, technology, he alth,and other professions. In 2003, Kaplan’s sales totaled $838 million,making it a significant element in the P ost Company.The company owns 28 percent of Cowles Media, which publishesthe Minneapolis Star Tribune, several military newspapers, and 50 per-cent of the Los Angeles-Washington News Service.Today, the Washington Post Company is an $8 billion companygenerating $3.2 billion in annual sales. Its accomplishments are espe-cially impressive when you consider that seventy years ago, the com-pany was in one business—publishing a newspaper.In 1931, the Washington Post was one of five dailies competing forreaders. Two years later, the Post, unable to pay for its newsprint, wasBuying a Business 55placed in receivership. That summer, the company was sold at auctionto satisfy creditors. Eugene Meyer, a millionaire financier, bought thepaper for $825,000. For the next two decades, he supported the opera-tion until it turned a profit.Management of the paper passed to Philip Graham, a brilliantHarvard-educated lawyer who had married Meyer’s daughter Kather-ine. In 1954, Phil Graham convinced Eugene Meyer to purchase a rivalnewspaper, the Times-Herald. Later, Graham purchased Newsweekmagazine and two television stations before his tragic death in 1963. Itis Phil Graham who is credited with transforming the Washington Postfrom a single newspaper into a media and communications company.After Phil Graham’s death, control of the Washington Post passedto his wife, Katherine. Although she had no experience managing amajor corporation, she quickly distinguished herself by confronting dif-ficult business issues.Katherine Graham realized that to be successful the company wouldneed a decision maker not a caretaker. “I quickly learned that thingsdon’t stand still,” she said. “Y ou have to make decisions.”14Two deci-sions that had a pronounced impact on the Washington Post were hiringBen Bradlee as managing editor of the newspaper and then invitingWarren Buffett to become a director of the company. Bradlee encour-aged Katherine Graham to publish the Pentagon Papers and to pursuethe Watergate investigation, which earned the Washington Post a repu-tation for prizewinning journalism. Buffett taught Katherine Grahamhow to run a successful business.Buffett first met Katherine Graham in 1971. At that time, Buffettowned stock in the New Yorker. Hearing that the magazine might befor sale, he asked Katherine Graham whether the Washington Postwould be interested in purchasing it. Although the sale never materi-alized, Buffett came away very much impressed with the publisher ofthe Washington Post.That same year, Katherine Graham decided to take the WashingtonPostpublic. Two classes of stock were created. Class A common stockelected a majority of the board of directors, thus effectively controllingthe company. Class A stock was, and still is, held by the Graham family.Class B stock elected a minority of the board of directors. In June 1971,the Washington Post issued 1,354,000 shares of class B stock. Remark-ably, two days later, despite threats from the federal government, Kather-ine Graham gave Ben Bradlee permission to publish the Pentagon Papers.56 THE WARREN BUFFETT WAYFor the next two years, while business at the paper was improving,the mood on Wall Street was turning gloomy. In early 1973, the DowJones Industrial Average began to slide. The Washington Post share pricewas slipping as well; by May, it was down 14 points to $23. That samemonth, IBM stock declined over 69 points, gold broke through $100 anounce, the Federal Reserve boosted the discount rate to 6 percent, andthe Dow fell 18 points—its biggest loss in three years. And all the while,Warren Buffett was quietly buying shares in the Washington Post (seeFigure 4.3). By June, he had purchased 467,150 shares at an averageprice of $22.75, worth $10,628,000.Katherine Graham was initially unnerved at the idea of a nonfamilymember owning so much Post stock, even though the stock was non-controlling. Buffett assured her that Berkshire’s purchase was for invest-ment purposes only. To further reassure her, he offered to give her sonDon, slated to take over the company someday, a proxy to vote Berk-shire’s shares. That clinched it. Katherine Graham res ponded by invit-ing Buffett to join the board of directors in 1974 and soon made himchairman of the finance committee.Katherine Graham died in July 2001, after a fall in which she sus-tained severe head injuries. Warren Buffett was one of the ushers at herfuneral services at Washington’s National Cathedral.Figure 4.3 The Washington Post Company price per share, 1972–1975.Buying a Business 57Donald E. Graham, son of Phil and Katherine, is chairman ofthe board of the Washington Post Company. Don Graham graduatedmagna cum laude from Harvard in 1966, having majored in English his-tory and literature. After graduation, he served two years in the army.Knowing that he would eventually lead the Washington Post, Grahamdecided to get better acquainted with the city. He took the unusual pathof joining the metropolitan police force of Washington, DC, and spentfourteen months as a patrolman walking the beat in the ninth precinct.In 1971, Graham went to work at the Washington Post as a Metro re-porter. Later, he spent ten months as a reporter for Newsweek at the LosAngeles bureau. Graham returned to the Postin 1974 and became theassistant managing sports editor. That year, he was added to the com-pany’s board of directors.Buffett’s role at the Washington Post is widely documented. Hehelped Katherine Graham persevere during the labor strikes of the1970s, and he also tutored Don Graham in business, helping him un-derstand the role of management and its responsibility to its owners.“In finance,” Don Graham says, “he’s the smartest guy I know. I don’tknow who is second.”15Looking at the story from the reverse side, it’s also clear that the Posthas played a major role for Buffett as well. Finance journalist AndrewKilpatrick, who has followed Buffett’s career for years, believes that theWashington Post Company investment “locked up Buffett’s reputationas a master investor.”16Berkshire has not sold any of its Washington Poststock since the original purchase in 1973. In 2004, the Class B stock wasselling for more than $900 a share, making it the second most expensivestock on the New Y ork Stock Exchange. Berkshire’s holdings are nowworth more than $1 billion, and Buffett’s original investment has in-creased in value more than fiftyfold.17Wells Fargo & CompanyIn October 1990, Berkshire Hathaway announced it had purchased 5million shares of W ells Fargo & Company at an average price of $57.88per share, a total investment of $289 million. With this purchase, Berk-shire became the largest shar eholder of the b ank, owning 10 percent ofthe shares outstanding.It was a controversial move. Earlier in the year, the share pricetraded as high as $86, then dropped sharply as investors abandoned58 THE WARREN BUFFETT WAYCalifornia banks in droves. At the time, the W est Coast was in thethroes of a severe recession and some speculated that banks, with theirloan portfolios stocked full of commercial and residential mortgages,were in trouble. W ells Fargo, with the most commercial real estate ofany California bank, was thought to be particularly vulnerable.In the months following Berkshire’s announcement, the battle forW ells Fargo resembled a heavyweight fight. Buffett, in one corner, wasthe bull, betting $289 million that W ells Fargo would increase in value.In the other corner, short sellers were the bears, betting that W ells Fargo,already down 49 percent for the year, was destined to fall further. Therest of the investment world decided to sit back and watch.Twice in 1992, Berkshire acquired more shares, bringing the totalto 63 million by year-end. The price crept over $100 per share, butshort sellers were still betting the stock would lose half its value. Buffetthas continued to add to his position, and by year-end 2003, Berkshireowned more than 56 million shares, with a market value of $4.6 billionand a total accumulated purchase cost of $2.8 billion. In 2003, Moody’sgave W ells Fargo a AAA credit rating, the only bank in the countrywith that distinction.THE INTELLIGENT INVESTORThe most distinguishing trait of Buffett’s investment philosophy is theclear understanding that by owning shares of stocks he owns businesses,not pieces of paper. The idea of buying stocks without understandingthe company’s operating functions—its products and services, labor re-lations, raw material expenses, plant and equipment, capital reinvest-ment requirements, inventories, receivables, and needs for workingcapital—is unconscionable, says Buffett. This men tality reflects the at-titude of a business owner as opposed to a stock owner, and is the onlymentality an inv estor should have. In the summation of The IntelligentInvestor, Benjamin Graham wrote, “Investing is most intelligent whenit is most businesslike.” Those are, says Buffett, “the nine most impor-tant words ever written about investing.”A person who holds stocks has the choice to become the owner of abusiness or the bearer of tradable securities. Owners of common stockswho perceive that they merely own a piece of paper are far removedBuying a Business 59from the company’s financial statements. They behave as if the market’sever-changing price is a more accurate reflection of their stock’s valuethan the business’s balance sheet and income statement. They draw ordiscard stocks like playing cards. For Buffett, the activities of a commonstock holder and a business owner are intimately connected. Bothshould look at ownership of a business in the same way. “I am a betterinvestor because I am a businessman,” Buffett says, “and a better busi-nessman because I am an investor.”18THE WARREN BUFFETT WAYBusiness Tenets1. Is the business simple and understandable?2. Does the business have a consistent operating history?3. Does the business have favorable long-term prospects?Management Tenets4. Is management rational?5. Is management candid with its shareholders?6. Does management resist the institutional imperative?Financial Tenets7. What is the return on equity?8. What are the company’s “owner earnings”?9. What are the profit margins?10. Has the company created at least one dollar of marketvalue for every dollar retained?Value Tenets11. What is the value of the company?12. Can it be purchased at a significant discount to its value?