1218Investing GuidelinesValue TenetsAll the principles embodied in the tenets described so far lead toone decision point: buying or not buying shares in a company.At that point, any investor must weigh two factors: Is this com-pany a good value, and is this a good time to buy it—that is, is theprice favorable?The stock market establishes price. The investor determines valueafter weighing all the known information about a company’s business,management, and financial traits. Price and value are not necessarilyequal. As Warren Buffett often remarks, “Price is what you pay. Valueis what you get.”If the stock market were truly effic ient, prices would instanta-neously adjust to all available information. Of course, we know thisdoes not occur. Stock prices move above and below company values fornumerous reasons, not all of them logical.It’s bad to go to bed at night thinking about the price of astock. W e think about the value and company results; Thestock market is there to serve you, not instruct you.1WARREN BUFFETT , 2003122 THE WARREN BUFFETT WAYTheoretically, investors make their decisions based on the differ-ences between price and value. If the price is lower than its per sharevalue, a rational investor will decide to buy. If the price is higher thanvalue, any reasonable investor will pass.As the company moves through its economic life cycle, a savvy in-vestor will periodically reassess the company’s value in relation to mar-ket price and will buy, sell, or hold shares accordingly.In sum, then, rational investing has two com ponents:1. Determine the value of the business.2. Buy only when the price is right—when the business is selling ata significant discount to its value.CALCULATE WHAT THE BUSINESS IS WORTHThrough the years, financial analysts have used many formulas for de-termining the intrinsic value of a company. Some are fond of variousshorthand methods: low price-to-earnings ratios, low price-to-bookvalues, and high dividend yields. But the best system, according to Buf-fett, was determined more than sixty years ago by John Burr Williams(see Chapter 2). Buffett and many others use Williams’s dividend dis-count model, presented in his book The Theory of Investment Value,as the best way to determine the value of a security.Paraphrasing Williams, Buffett tells us that the value of a business isthe total of the net cash flows (owner earnings) expected to occur overthe life of the business, discounted by an appropriate interest rate. Heconsiders it simply the most appropriate yardstick with which to mea-sure a basket of different investment types: government bonds, corpo-rate bonds, common stocks, apartment buildings, oil wells, and farms.The mathematical exercise, Buffett tells us, is similar to valuing abond. The bond market each day adds up the future coupons of abond and discounts those coupons at the prevailing interest rate; thatdetermines the value of the bond. To determine the value of a busi-ness, the investor estimates the “coupons” that the business will gener-ate for a period into the future and then discounts all these couponsback to the present. “So valued,” Buffett says, “all businesses, fromInvesting Guidelines: Value Tenets 123manufacturers of buggy whips to operators of cellular tele phones, be-come economic equals.”2To summarize, then, calculating the current value of a businessmeans, first, estimating the total earnings that will likely occur over thelife of the business; and then discounting that total backward to today.(Keep in mind that for “earnings” Buffett uses owner earnings—netcash flow adjusted for capital expenditures, as described in Chapter 7.)To estimate the total future earnings, we would apply all we hadlearned about the company’s business characteristics, its financialhealth, and the quality of its managers, using the analysis principles de-scribed thus far. For the second part of the formula, we need only de-cide what the discount rate should be—more on that in a moment.Buffett is firm on one point: He looks for companies whose futureearnings are as predictable, as certain, as the earnings of bonds. If thecompany has operated with consistent earnings power andif the busi-ness is simple and understandable, Buffett believes he can determine itsfuture earnings with a high degree of certainty. If he is unable to proj-ect with confidence what the future cash flows of a business will be, hewill not attempt to value the company. He’ll simply pass.This is the distinction of Buffett’s approach. Although he admitsthat Microsoft is a dynamic company and he regards Bill Gates highlyas a manager, Buffett confesses he hasn’t a clue how to estimate the fu-ture cash earnings of this company. This is what he means by “the cir-cle of competence”; he does not know the technology industry wellTo properly value a business, you should ideally take all theflows of money that will be distributed between now and judg-ment day and discount them at an appropriate discount rate.That’s what valuing businesses is all about. Part of the equationis how confident you can be about those cash flows occurring.Some businesses are easier to predict than others. W e try tolook at businesses that are predictable.3WARREN BUFFETT , 1988124 THE WARREN BUFFETT WAYenough to project the long-term earnings potential of any companywithin it.This brings us to the second element in the formula: What is theappropriate discount rate? Buffett’s answer is simple: the rate thatwould be considered risk-free. For many years, he used the rate thencurrent for long-term government bonds. Because the certainty that theU.S. government will pay its coupon over the next thirty years is virtu-ally 100 percent, we can say that this is a risk-free rate.When interest rates are low, Buffett adjusts the discount rate up-ward. When bond yields dipped below 7 percent, Buffett upped his dis-count rate to 10 percent, and that is what he commonly uses today. Ifinterest rates work themselves higher over time, he has successfullymatched his discount rate to the long-term rate. If they do not, he hasincreased his margin of safety by three additional points.Some academicians argue that no company, regardless of itsstrengths, can assure future cash earnings with the same certainty as abond. Therefore, they insist, a more appropriate discount factor would bethe risk-free rate of return plusan equity risk premium, added to reflectthe uncertainty of the company’s future cash flows. Buffett does not adda risk premium. Instead, he relies on his single-minded focus on com-panies with consistent and predictable earnings and on the margin ofsafety that comes from buying at a substantial discount in the first place.“I put a heavy weight on certainty,” Buffett says. “If you do that, thewhole idea of a risk factor doesn’t make any sense to me.”4Coca-ColaWhen Buffett first purchased Coca-Cola in 1988, people asked:“Where is the value in Coke?” Why was Buffett willing to pay fivetimes book value for a company with a 6.6 percent earning yield? Be-cause, as he continuously reminds us, price tells us nothing about value,and he believed Coca-Cola was a good value.To begin with, the company was earning 31 percent return on eq-uity while employing relatively little in capital investment. More im-portant, Buffett could see the difference that Roberto Goizueta’smanagement was making. Because Goizueta was selling off the poor-performing businesses and reinvesting the proceeds back into thehigher-performing syrup business, Buffett knew the financial returnsInvesting Guidelines: Value Tenets 125of Coca-Cola were going to improve. In addition, Goizueta was buyingback shares of Coca-Cola in the market, thereby increasing the eco-nomic value of the business even more. All this went into Buffett’svalue calculation. Let’s walk through the calculation with him.In 1988, owner earnings of Coca-Cola equaled $828 million. Thethirty-year U.S. Treasury Bond (the risk-free rate) at that time tradednear a 9 percent yield. So Coca-Cola’s 1988 owner earnings, discountedby 9 percent, would produce an intrinsic value of $9.2 billion. WhenBuffett purchased Coca-Cola, the market value was $14.8 billion, 60percent higher, which led some observers to think he had overpaid. But$9.2 billion represents the discounted value of Coca-Cola’s then-current owner earnings. If Buffett was willing to pay the higher price,it had to be because he perceived that part of the value of Coca-Colawas its future growth opportunities.When a company is able to grow owner earnings without addi-tional capital, it is appropriate to discount owner earnings by the differ-ence between the risk-free rate of return and the expected growth ofowner earnings. Analyzing Coca-Cola, we find that owner earningsfrom 1981 through 1988 grew at a 17.8 percent annual rate—fasterthan the risk-free rate of return. When this occurs, analysts use a two-stage discount model. This model is a way of calculating future earningswhen a company has extraordinary growth for a certain number ofyears and then a period of constant growth at a slower rate.W e can use this two-stage process to calculate the 1988 pre sentvalue of the company’s future cash flows (see Table 8.1). First, assumethat starting in 1988, Coca-Cola would be able to grow owner earningsat 15 percent per year for ten years. This is a reasonable assumption,since that rate is lower than the company’s previous seven-year average.By the tenth year, the $828 million owner earnings that we startedwith would have increased to $3.349 billion. Let’s further assume thatstarting in the eleventh year, growth rate will slow to 5 percent a year.Using a discount rate of 9 percent (the long-term bond rate at thetime), we can back-calculate the intrinsic value of Coca-Cola in 1988:$48.377 billion (see Notes section at the end of this book for details ofthis calculation).5But what happens if we decide to be more conservative, and usedifferent growth rate assumptions? If we assume that Coca-Cola cangrow owner earnings at 12 percent for ten years followed by 5 percent126Table 8.1 The Coca-Cola Company Discounted Owner Earnings Using a T wo-Stage “Dividend” Discount Model (first stage is ten years)Year123456789 1 0Prior year cash flow $828 $0,952 $ 1,095 $1,259 $ 1,448 $1,665 $1,915 $2,202 $2,532 $2,912Growth rate (add) 15% 15% 15% 15% 15% 15% 15% 15% 15% 15%Cash flow $952 $1,095 $ 1,259 $1,448 $ 1,665 $1,915 $2,202 $2,532 $2,912 $3,349Discount factor (multiply) 0.9174 0.8417 0.7722 0.7084 0.6499 0.5963 0.5470 0.5019 0.4604 0.4224Discounted value per annum $873 $ 922 $ 972 $1,026 $ 1,082 $1,142 $1,204 $1,271 $1,341 $1,415Sum of present value of cash flows $11,248Residual ValueCash flow in year 10 $ 3,349Growth rate ( g) (add) 5%Cash flow in year 11 $ 3,516Capitalization rate ( k-g)4 %Value at end of year 10 $87,900Discount factor at end of year 10 (multiply) 0.4224Present Value of Residual 37,129Market Value of Company $48,377Notes: Assumed first-stage growth rate =15.0%; assumed second-stage growth rate =5.0%; k=discount rate =9.0%.Dollar amounts are in millions.Investing Guidelines: Value Tenets 127growth, the present value of the company discounted at 9 percentwould be $38.163 billion. At 10 percent growth for ten years and 5percent thereafter, the value of Coca-Cola would be $32.497 billion.And if we assume only 5 percent throughout, the company would stillbe worth at least $20.7 billion [$828 million divided by (9 −5 percent)].GilletteBerkshire, as mentioned in Chapter 4, bought $600 million worth ofconvertible preferred stock in July 1989. After a 2-for-1 stock split inFebruary 1991, Berkshire converted its preferred stock and received 12million common shares, 11 percent of Gillette’s shares outstanding.Now that Berkshire owned Gillette common yielding 1.7 percentversus the convertible preferred yielding 8.75 percent, its investment inGillette was no longer a fixed-income security with appreciation po-tential but a straight equity commitment. If Berkshire were to retain itscommon stock, Buffett needed to be convinced that Gillette was a goodinvestment.W e already know that Buffett understood the company and that thecompany’s long-term prospects were favorable. Gillette’s financial char-acteristics, including return on equity and pretax margins, were improv-ing. The ability to increase prices thereby boosting return on equity toabove-average rates signaled the company’s growing economic good-will. CEO Mockler was purposefully reducing Gillette’s long-term debtand working hard to increase shareholder value.In short, the company met all the prerequisites for purchase. Whatremained for Buffett was to determine the company’s value, to assurethat Gillette was not overpriced.Gillette’s owner earnings at year-end 1990 were $275 million andhad grown at a 16 percent annual rate since 1987. Although this is tooshort a period to fully judge a company’s growth, we can begin tomake certain assumptions. In 1991, Buffett compared Gillette to Coca-Cola. “Coca-Cola and Gillette are two of the best companies in theworld,” he wrote, “and we expect their earnings to grow at hefty ratesin the years ahead.”6In early 1991, the thirty-year U.S. government bond was trading atan 8.62 percent yield. To be conservative, we can use a 9 percent dis-count rate to value Gillette. But like Coca-Cola, Gillette’s potential128 THE WARREN BUFFETT WAYgrowth of earnings exceeds the discount rate, so again we must use thetwo-stage discount model. If we assume a 15 percent annual growth forten years and 5 percent growth thereafter, discounting Gillette’s 1990owner earnings at 9 percent, the approximate value of Gillette is $16billion. If we adjust the future growth rate downward to 12 percent,the value is approximately $12.6 billion; at 10 percent growth, thevalue would be $10.8 billion. At a very conservative 7 percent growthin owner earnings, the value of Gillette is at least $8.5 billion.The Washington Post CompanyIn 1973, the total market value for the Washington Post was $80 million.Yet Buffett claims that “most security analysts, media brokers, and mediaexecutives would have estimated WPC’s intrinsic value at $400 to $500million.”7How did Buffett arrive at that estimate? Let us walk throughthe numbers, using Buffett’s reasoning.W e’ll start by calculating owner earnings for that year: Net income($13.3 million) plus depreciation and amortization ($3.7 million) minuscapital expenditures ($6.6 million) yields 1973 owner earnings of $10.4million. If we divide these earnings by the long-term U.S. governmentbond yield at the time (6.81 percent), the value of the Washington Postreaches $150 million, almost twice the market value of the company butwell short of Buffett’s estimate.Buffett tells us that, over time, the capital expenditures of a news-paper will equal depreciation and amortization charges, and thereforenet income should approximate owner earnings. Knowing this, we cansimply divide net income by the risk-free rate and thus reach a valuationof $196 million.If we stop here, the assumption is that the increase in owner earn-ings will equal the rise in inflation. But we know that newspapers haveunusual pricing power: Because most are monopolies in their commu-nity, they can raise their prices at rates higher than inflation. If wemake one last assumption—that the Washington Post has the ability toraise real prices by 3 percent—the value of the company is closer to$350 million. Buffett also knew that the company’s 10 percent pretaxmargins were below its 15 percent historical average margins, and heknew that Katherine Graham was determined that the Post would onceInvesting Guidelines: Value Tenets 129again achieve these margins. If pretax margins improved to 15 percent,the present value of the company would increase by $135 million,bringing the total intrinsic value to $485 million.Wells FargoThe value of a bank is the function of its net worth plus its projectedearnings as a going concern. When B erkshire Hathaway began purchas-ing W ells Fargo in 1990, the company in the previous year had earned$600 million. The average yield on the thirty-year U.S. governmentbond that year was approximately 8.5 percent. To remain conservative,we can discount W ells Fargo’s 1989 $600 million earnings by 9 percentand value the bank at $6.6 billion. If the bank never earned anotherdime over $600 million a year for the next thirty years, it was worth atleast $6.6 billion. When Buffett purchased W ells Fargo in 1990, he paid$58 per share for its stock. With 52 million shares outstanding, this wasequivalent to paying $3 billion for the company—a 55 percent discountto its value.The debate in investment circles at the time centered on whetherW ells Fargo, after taking into consideration all its loan problems, evenhad earnings power. The short sellers said it no; Buffett said yes. Heknew full well that ownership of W ells Fargo carried some risk, but hefelt confident in his analysis. His step-by-step thinking is a good modelfor everyone weighing the risk factor of an investment.He started with what he already knew. Carl Reichardt, then chair-man of W ells Fargo, had run the bank since 1983, with impressive re-sults. Under his leadership, growth in earnings and return on equitywere both above average and operating efficiencies were among thehighest in the country. Reichardt had also built a solid loan portfolio.Next, Buffett envisioned the events that would endanger the in-vestment and came up with three possibilities, then tried to imaginethe likelihood that they would occur. It is, in a real sense, an exercise inprobabilities.The first possible risk was a major earthquake, which would“wreak havoc” on borrowers and in turn on their lenders. The secondrisk was broader: a “systemic business contraction or financial panic sosevere it would endanger almost every highly leveraged institution, no130 THE WARREN BUFFETT WAYmatter how intelligently run.” Neither of those two could be ruled outentirely, of course, but Buffett concluded, based on b est evidence, thatthe probability of either one was low.The third risk, and the one getting the most attention from themarket at the time, was that real estate values in the W est would tumblebecause of overbuilding and “deliver huge losses to banks that have fi-nanced the expansion.”8How serious would that be?Buffett reasoned that a meaningful drop in real estate values shouldnot cause major problems for a well-managed bank like W ells Fargo.“Consider some mathematics,” he explained. Buffett knew that W ellsFargo earned $1 billion pretax annually after expensing an average$300 million for loan losses. He figured if 10 percent of the bank’s $48billion in loans—not just commercial real estate loans but all the bank’sloans—were problem loans in 1991 and produced losses, including in-terest, averaging 30 percent of the principal value of the loan, W ellsFargo would still break even.In Buffett’s judgment, the possibility of this occurring was low. Buteven if W ells Fargo earned no money for a year, but merely broke even,Buffett would not flinch. “A year like that—which we consider only alow-level possibility, not a likelihood—would not distress us.”9The attraction of Wells Fargo intensified when Buffett was able topurchase shares at a 50 percent discount to their value. His bet paid off.By the end of 1993, W ells Fargo’s share price reached $137 per share,nearly triple what Buffett originally paid.BUY AT ATTRACTIVE PRICESFocusing on businesses that are understandable, with enduring eco-nomics, run by sharehold er-oriented managers—all those characteris-tics are important, Buffett says, but by themselves will not guaranteeinvestment success. For that, he first has to buy at sensible prices, andthen the company has to perform to his business expectations. The sec-ond is not always easy to control, but the first is: If the price isn’t satis-factory, he passes.Buffett’s basic goal is to identify businesses that earn above-averagereturns, and then to purchase these businesses at prices below their Investing Guidelines: Value Tenets 131indicated value. Graham taught Buffett the importance of buying astock only when the difference between its price and its value repre sentsa margin of safety. Today, this is still his guiding principle, even thoughhis partner Charlie Munger has encouraged him toward occasionallypaying more for outstanding companies.The margin-of-safety principle assists Buffett in two ways. First, itprotects him from downside price risk. If he calculates that the value ofa business is only slightly higher than its per share price, he will not buythe stock. He reasons that if the company’s intrinsic value were to dipeven slightly, eventually the stock price would also drop, perhaps belowwhat he paid for it. But when the margin between price and value islarge enough, the risk of declining value is less. If Buffett is able to pur-chase a company at 75 percent of its intrinsic value (a 25 percent dis-count) and the value subsequently declines by 10 percent, his originalpurchase price will still yield an adequate return.The margin of safety also provides opportunities for extraordinarystock returns. If Buffett correctly identifies a company with above-average economic returns, the value of its stock over the long term willsteadily march upward. If a company consistently earns 15 percent onequity, its share price will appreciate more each year than that of a com-pany that earns 10 percent on equity. Additionally, if Buffett, by usingthe margin of safety, is able to buy this outstanding business at a signifi-cant discount to its intrinsic value, Berkshire will earn an extra bonuswhen the market corrects the price of the business. “The market, like theLord, helps those who help themselves,” says Buffett. “But unlike theLord, the market does not forgive those who know not what they do.”11(Text continues on page 134.)Great investment opportunities come around when excel lentcompanies are surrounded by unusual circumstances that causethe stock to be misappraised.10WARREN BUFFETT , 1988132CASE IN POINTLARSON -JUHL, 2001Late in 2001, Warren Buffett made a handshake deal to buyLarson-Juhl, wholesale supplier of custom picture-framingmaterials, for $223 million in cash. It was Buffett’s favoritescenario: a solid company, with good economics, strong man-agement, and an excellent reputation in its industry, but expe-riencing a short-term slump that created an attractive price.The business was owned 100 percent by Craig Ponzio, atalented designer with an equal talent for busin ess. While incollege, he worked for one of the manufacturing facilities ofLarson Picture Frame, then ended up buying the company in1981. Seven years later, he bought competitor Juhl-Pacific, cre-ating the company now known as Larson-Juhl. When Ponziobought Larson in 1981, its annual sales were $3 million; in2001, Larson-Juhl’s sales were more than $300 million.That is the kind of performance that Buffett admires.He also admires the company’s operating structure. Larson-Juhl manufactures and sells the materials that custom framingshops use: fancy moldings for frames, matboard, glass, and as-sorted hardware. The local shops display samples of all theframe moldings available, but keep almost none of it in inven-tory. When a customer picks out a frame style, the shop mustorder the molding stock. And this is where Larson-Juhl shines.Through its network of twenty-three manufacturing and dis-tribution facilities scattered across the United States, it is ableto fill orders in record time. In the great majority of cases—in-dustry analysts say as much as 95 percent of the time—materi-als are received the next day.With that extraordinary level of service, very few shops aregoing to change suppliers, even if the prices are higher. Andthat gives Larson-Juhl what Buffett calls a moat—a clear andsustainable edge over competitors.133Further strengthening that moat, Larson-Juhl is widelyknown as the class act in molding. Frame shop operators ordermolding material in one-foot increments, and then cut it to theexact size needed for the customer’s project. If the moldingsplits or does not cut cleanly, they cannot achieve the tight cor-ners that they pride themselves on. Larson-Juhl molding, theysay, makes perfect corners every time. That reputation forquality has made Larson-Juhl not only the largest but also themost prestigious company in its industry.Larson-Juhl sells thousands of framing styles and finishes toits more than 18,000 customers. The leading supplier in theUnited States, it also operates thirty-three facilities in Europe,Asia, and Australia. In sum, Larson-Juhl has many of the qualities Buffett looksfor. The business is simple and understandable, and the com-pany has a long and consistent history; one of the original com-ponent companies d ates back 100 years. It also has a predictablefuture, with favorable long-term prospects. The ingredients ofcustom framing—molding, glass, mats—are not likely to bemade obsolete by changes in technology, nor is customer de-mand for special treatment of favorite art likely to disappear.What piqued Buffett’s interest at this particular time, how-ever, was the opportunity to acquire the company at an attrac-tive price, triggered by a dip in profitability that he believedwas temporary.In fiscal 2001 (which ended in August), Larson-Juhl had$314 million in net sales and $30.8 million in cash from opera-tions. That was down somewhat from prior years: $361 millionsales and $39.1 million cash in 2000; $386 million in sales in1999. Knowing Buffett’s general approach to calculating value,we can make a good guess at his financial analysis of Larson-Juhl. Using his standard 10 percent dividend discount rate, ad-justed for a very reasonable 3 percent growth rate, the companywould have had a value of $440 million in 2001 ($30.8 million(Continued)134 THE WARREN BUFFETT WAYCoca-ColaFrom the time that Roberto Goizueta took control of Coca-Cola in1980, the company’s stock price had increased every year. In the fiveyears before Buffett purchased his first shares, the price increased an av-erage of 18 percent every year. The company’s fortunes were so goodthat Buffett was unable to purchase any shares at distressed prices. Still,he charged ahead. Price, he reminds us, has nothing to do with value.In June 1988, the price of Coca-Cola was approximately $10 pershare (split-adjusted). Over the next ten months, Buffett acquired93,400,000 shares, at an average price of $10.96—fifteen times earnings,twelve times cash flow, and five times book value. He was willing to dothat because of Coke’s extraordinary level of economic goodwill, and be-cause he believed the company’s intrinsic value was much higher.The stock market’s value of Coca-Cola in 1988 and 1989, duringBuffett’s purchase period, averaged $15.1 billion. But Buffett was con-vinced its intrinsic value was higher—$20 billion (assuming 5 percentgrowth), $32 billion (assuming 10 percent growth), $38 billion (at 12percent growth), perhaps even $48 billion (if 15 percent growth). There-fore Buffett’s margin of safety—the discount to intrinsic value—couldbe as low as a conservative 27 percent or as high as 70 percent. At thedivided by [10 minus 3 percent]). So the $223 million purchaseprice represented a very good value. Also, Buffett was con-vinced the fundamental economics of the company were sound,and that the lower numbers were a short-term response to thedepressed economy at the time.As is so often the case, Larson-Juhl approached Berkshire,not the other way around. Buffett describes the conversation:“Though I had never heard of Larson-Juhl before Craig’s call, afew minutes talk with him made me think we would strike adeal. He was straightforward in describing the business, caredabout who bought it, and was realistic as to price. Two dayslater, Craig and Steve McKenzie, his CEO, came to Omaha andin ninety minutes we reached an agreement.”12From first con-tact to signed contract, the deal took just twelve days.Investing Guidelines: Value Tenets 135same time, his conviction about the company had not changed: Theprobabilities of Coca-Cola’s share price beating the market rate of returnwere going up, up, and up (see Figure 8.1)So what did Buffett do? Between 1988 and 1989, Berkshire Hath-away purchased more than $1 billion of Coca-Cola stock, representing35 percent of Berkshire’s common stock portfolio. It was a bold move.It was Buffett acting on one of his guiding principles: When the proba-bilities of success are very high, make a big bet.GilletteFrom 1984 through 1990, the average annual gain in Gillette’s sharewas 27 percent. In 1989, the share price gained 48 percent and in 1990,the year before Berkshire converted its preferred stock to common,Gillette’s share price rose 28 percent (see Figure 8.2). In February1991, Gillette’s share price reached $73 per share (presplit), then arecord high. At that time, the company had 97 million shares outstand-ing. When Berkshire converted, total shares increased to 109 million.Gillette’s stock market value was $8.03 billion.Depending on your growth assumptions for Gillette, at the time ofconversion the market price for the company was at a 50 percent discountFigure 8.1 Common stock price of the Coca-Cola Company compared to the S&P 500Index (indexed to $100 at start date).136 THE WARREN BUFFETT WAYto value (15 percent growth in owner earnings), a 37 percent discount(12 percent growth), or a 25 percent discount (10 percent growth).The Washington Post CompanyEven the most conservative calculation of value indicates that Buffettbought the Washington Post Company for at least half of its intrinsicvalue. He maintains that he bought the company at less than one-quarter of its value. Either way, Buffett satisfied Ben Graham’s premisethat buying at a discount creates a margin of safety.The Pampered ChefIt is reported that Buffett bought a majority stake in the Pampered Cheffor somewhere between $800,000 and $900,000. With pretax marginsof 20 to 25 percent, this means that the Pampered Chef was bought at amultiple of 4.3 times to 5 times pretax income and 6.5 times to 7.5times net income, assuming full taxable earnings.With revenue growth of 25 percent or above and net income thatconverts into cash at anywhere from a high fraction of earnings to amultiple of earnings, and with a very high return on capital, there is nodoubt that the Pampered Chef was purchased at a significant discount.(Text continues on page 138.)Figure 8.2 Common stock price of the Gillette Company compared to the S&P 500Index (indexed to $100 at start date).137CASE IN POINTFRUIT OF THE LOOM, 2002In 2001, while Fruit of the Loom was operating under the su-pervision of the bankruptcy court, Berkshire Hathaway offeredto purchase the apparel part of the company (its core business)for $835 million in cash. As part of its bankruptcy agreement,Fruit of the Loom was required to conduct an auction for com-petitive offers. In January 2002, the court announced that Berk-shire was the successful bidder, with the proceeds of the sale togo to creditors.At the time of Berkshire’s offer, Fruit of the Loom had atotal debt of about $1.6 billion—$1.2 billion to secured lendersand bondholders and $400 million to unsecured bondholders.Under the terms of the agreement, secured creditors receivedan estimated 73 cents on the dollar for their claims, unsecuredcreditors about 10 cents.Just before filing for bankruptcy in 1999, the company had$2.35 billion in assets, then lost money during reorganization.As of October 31, 2000, assets were $2.02 billion.So, in simplified terms, Buffett bought a company with $2billion in assets for $835 million, which went to pay the out-standing debt of $1.6 billion.But there was a nice kicker. Soon after Fruit of the Loomwent bankrupt, Berkshire bought its debt (both bonds and bankloans) for about 50 percent of face value. Throughout the bank-ruptcy period, interest payments on senior debt continued, earn-ing Berkshire a return of about 15 percent. In effect, Buffett hadbought a company that owed him money, and repaid it. AsBuffett explained it, “Our holdings grew to 10 percent of Fruit’ssenior debt, which will probably end up returning us about70 percent of face value. Through this investment, we indirectlyreduced our purchase price for the whole company by a smallamount.”13(Continued)138 THE WARREN BUFFETT WAYClayton HomesBerkshire’s purchase of Clayton was not all smooth sailing; a legal bat-tle erupted over the selling price.At $12.50 per share, Buffett’s April 2003 offer for Clayton was atthe low end of the $11.49 to $15.58 range that bankers had assigned tothe shares a month earlier. Clayton management argued that the dealwas fair considering the industry’s slump at the time. But Claytonshareholders mounted a battle in the courts, saying that B erkshire’s offerwas far below the real value of Clayton’s shares. James J. Dorr, generalcounsel for Orbis Investment Management Ltd., which voted its 5.4percent stake against the merger, grumbled, “The fact that it’s WarrenBuffett who wants to buy from you should tell you that you shouldn’tsell, at least not at his price.”15For a value investor, that is probably avery high compliment.Warren Buffett defended his offer. At the time of the shareholdervote, he wrote, “the mobile home business was in bad shape and com-panies such as Clayton, which needs at least $1 billion of financingeach year and faces declining sales, would continue to have a hard timefinding funds.” Clayton’s board apparently agreed. Then, as evidenceof his commitment to Clayton, Buffett added that he had advancedthe company $360 million of financing since his offer.16Buffett andClayton management ended up winning the shareholder battle by anarrow margin.Warren Buffett is one of the few people who could charac-terize $105 million as a “small amount,” but, in fact, after tak-ing into account these interest payments, the net purchase pricefor the company was $730 million.At the time Berkshire’s offer was being reviewed by thebankruptcy court, a reporter for the Omaha World-Heraldasked Travis Pascavis, a Morningstar analyst, about the deal. Henoted that companies like Fruit of the Loom usually sell fortheir book value, which in this case would have been $1.4 bil-lion. So with a bid of $835 million (ultimately, $730 million),Berkshire would be getting the company for a bargain price.14Investing Guidelines: Value Tenets 139PUTTING IT ALL TOGETHERWarren Buffett has said more than once that investing in stocks is reallysimple: Find great companies that are run by honest and competentpeople and are selling for less than they are intrinsically worth. Nodoubt many who have heard and read that remark over the years havethought to themselves, “Sure, simple if you’re Warren Buffett. Not sosimple for me.”Both sentiments are true. Finding those great companies takes timeand effort, and that is never easy. But the next step—determining theirreal value so you can decide whether the price is right—is a simple mat-ter of plugging in the right variables. And that is where the investmenttenets described in these chapters will serve you well:• The business tenets will keep you focused on companies that arerelatively predictable. If you stick to those with a consistent op-erating history and favorable prospects, producing basically thesame products for the same markets, you will develop a sense ofhow they will do in the future. The same is true if you concen-trate on businesses that you understand; if not, you won’t be ableto interpret the impact of new developments.• The management tenets will keep you focused on companies thatare well run. Excel lent managers can make all the difference in acompany’s future success.• Together, the business and management tenets will give a goodsense of the company’s future earnings potential.• The financial tenets will reveal the numbers you need to make adetermination of the company’s real value.• The value tenets will take you through the mathematics neces-sary to come up with a final answ er: Based on ever ything youhave learned, is this a good buy?The two value tenets are crucial. But don’t worry too much if youare unable to address the other ten fully. Don’t let yourself become par-alyzed by too much information. Do the best you can, get started, andkeep moving forward.