112The Education ofWarren BuffettVery few people can come close to Warren Buffett’s investmentrecord, and no one can top it. Through four decades of marketups and downs, he has continued on a steady course with un-matched success. What he does is not flashy, even at times very muchout of favor, and yet over and over, he has prevailed over others whoseexploits gave them temporary, flash-in-the-pan stardom. He watches,smiles, and continues on his way.How did Buffett come to his investment philosophy? Who influ-enced his thinking, and how has he integrated their teachings into ac-tion? To put the question another way, how is it that this particulargenius turned out so differently?Warren Buffett’s approach to investing is uniquely his own, yet itrests on the bedrock of philosophies absorbed from four powerful fig-ures: Benjamin Graham, Philip Fisher, John Burr Williams, and CharlesMunger. Together, they are responsible for Buffett’s financial education,both formal and informal. The first three are educators in the classicsense, and the last is Buffett’s partner, alter ego, and pal. All have had amajor influence on Buffett’s thinking; they have much to offer modern-day investors as well.12 THE WARREN BUFFETT WAYBENJAMIN GRAHAMGraham is considered the dean of financial analysis. He was awardedthat distinction because “before him there was no [financial analysis]profession and after him they began to call it that.”1Graham’s two mostcelebrated wo rks are Security Analysis, coauthored with David Dodd,and originally published in 1934; and The Intelligent Investor, origi-nally published in 1949.Security Analysis appeared just a few years after the 1929 stockmarket crash and in the depths of the nation’s worst depression. Whileother academicians sought to explain this economic phenomenon,Graham helped people regain their financial footing and proceed with aprofitable course of action.Graham began his career on Wall Street as a messenger at the bro-kerage firm of Newburger, Henderson & Loeb, posting bond and stockprices on a blackboard for $12 a week. From messenger, he rose towriting research reports and soon was awarded a partnership in thefirm. By 1919, he was earning an annual salary of $600,000; he wastwenty-five years old.In 1926, Graham formed an investment partnership with JeromeNewman. It was this partnership that hired Buffett some thirty yearslater. Graham-Newman survived the 1929 crash, the Great Depression,World War II, and the Korean War before it dissolved in 1956.From 1928 through 1956, while at Graham-Newman, Grahamtaught night courses in finance at Columbia. Few people know thatGraham was financially ruined by the 1929 crash. For the second time inhis life—the first being when his father died, leaving the family finan-cially unprotected—Graham set about rebuilding his fortune. The havenof academia allowed him the opportunity for reflection and reevaluation.With the counsel of David Dodd, also a professor at Columbia, Grahamproduced what became the classic treatise on conservative investing: Se-curity Analysis. Between them, Graham and Dodd had over fifteen yearsof investment experience. It took them four years to complete the book.The essence of Security Analysis is that a well-chosen diversifiedportfolio of common stocks, based on reasonable prices, can be a soundinvestment. Step by careful step, Graham helps the investor see the logicof his approach.The Education of Warren Buffett 13The first problem that Graham had to contend with was the lack of auniversal definition for investment that would distinguish it from specu-lation. Considering the complexities of the issue, Graham proposed hisown definition. “An investment operation is one which, upon thoroughanalysis, promises safety of principal and a satisfactory return. Operationsnot meeting these requirements are speculative.”2What did he mean by “thorough analysis”? Just this: “the carefulstudy of available facts with the attempt to draw conclusions therefrombased on established principles and sound logic.”3The next part of Graham’s definition is critical: A true investmentmust have two qualities—some degree of safety of principal and a satis-factory rate of return. Safety, he cautions, is not absolute; unusual orimprobable occurrences can put even a safe bond into default. Rather,investors should look for som ething that would be considered safe fromloss under reasonable conditions.Satisfactory return—the second necessity—includes not only in-come but also price appreciation. Graham notes that “satisfactory” is asubjective term. Return can be any amount, however low, as long as theinvestor acts with intelligence and adheres to the full definition ofinvestment.Had it not been for the bond market’s poor performance, Graham’sdefinition of investing might have been overlooked. But when, between1929 and 1932, the Dow Jones Bond Average declined from 97.70 to65.78, bonds could no longer be mindlessly lab eled pure investments.Like stocks, not only did bonds lose considerable value but many issuerswent bankrupt. What was needed, therefore, was a process that coulddistinguish the investment characteristics of both stocks and bonds fromtheir speculative counterparts.Graham reduced the concept of sound investing to a motto hecalled the “margin of safety.” With this motto, he sought to unite allsecurities, stocks, and bonds in a singular approach to investing.In essence, a margin of safety exists when securities are selling—forwhatever reason—at less than their real value. The notion of buyingundervalued securities regardless of market levels was a novel idea in the1930s and 1940s. Graham’s goal was to outline such a strategy.In Graham’s view, establishing a margin-of-safety concept for bondswas not too difficult. It wasn’t necessary, he said, to accurately determine14 THE WARREN BUFFETT WAYthe company’s future income, but only to note the difference betweenearnings and fixed charges. If that margin was large enough, the investorwould be protected from an unexpected decline in the company’s in-come. If, for example, an analyst reviewed the operating history of acompany and discovered that, on average, for the past five years the com-pany was able to earn annually five times its fixed charges, then thatcompany’s bonds possessed a margin of safety.The real test was Graham’s ability to adapt the concept for commonstocks. He reasoned that if the spread between the price of a stock andthe intrinsic value of a company was large enough, the margin-of-safetyconcept could be used to select stocks.For this strategy to work systematically, Graham admitted, investorsneeded a way to identify undervalued stoc ks. And that meant theyneeded a technique for determ ining a company’s intrinsic value. Gra-ham’s definition of intrinsic value, as it appeared in Security Analysis,was “that value which is determined by the facts.” These facts includeda company’s assets, its earnings and dividends, and any future definiteprospects.Graham acknowledged that the single most important factor in de-termining a company’s value was its future earnings power, a calculationthat is bound to be imprecise. Simply stated, a company’s intrinsic valuecould be found by estimating the earnings of the company and multiply-ing the earnings by an appropriate capitalization factor. The company’sstability of earnings, assets, dividend policy, and financial health influ-enced this capitalization factor, or multiplier.Graham asked us to accept that intrinsic value is an elusive concept.It is distinct from the market’s quotation price. Originally, intrinsicvalue was thought to be the same as a company’s book value, or the sumof its real assets minus obligations. This notion led to the early belief thatintrinsic value was definite. However, analysts came to know that thevalue of a company was not only its net real assets but also the value ofthe earnings that these assets produced. Graham proposed that it was notessential to determine a company’s exact intrinsic value; instead, in-vestors should accept an approximate measure or range of value. Even anapproximate value, compared against the selling price, would be suffi-cient to gauge margin of safety.There are two rules of investing, said Graham. The first rule is don’tlose.The second rule is don’t forget rule number one. This “don’t lose”The Education of Warren Buffett 15philosophy steered Graham toward two approaches for selecting commonstocks that, when applied, adhered to the margin of safety. The first ap-proach was buying a company for less than two-thirds of its net assetvalue, and the second was focusing on stocks with low price-to-earnings(P/E) ratios.Buying a stock for a price that is less than two-thirds of its net assetsfit neatly into Graham’s sense of the present and satisfied his desire forsome mathematical expectation. Graham gave no weight to a company’splant, property, and equipment. Furthermore, he deducted all the com-pany’s short- and long-term liabilities. What remained would be the netcurrent assets. If the stock price was below this per share value, Grahamreasoned that a margin of safety existed and a purchase was warranted.Graham considered this to be a foolproof method of investing, buthe acknowledged that waiting for a market correction before making aninvestment might be unreasonable. He set out to design a second ap-proach to buying stocks. He focused on stocks that were down in priceand that sold at a low P/E ratio. Additionally, the company must havesome net asset value; it must owe less than its worth.Over the years, many other investors have searched for similar short-cuts for determining intrinsic value. Low P/E ratios—Graham’s firsttechnique—was a general favorite. W e have learned, however, that mak-ing decisions on P/E ratios alone is not enough to ensure profitablereturns. Today, most investors rely on John Burr Williams’s classic defi-nition of value, described later in this chapter: The value of any invest-ment is the discounted present value of its future cash flow.Both of Graham’s approaches—buying a stock for less than two-thirds of net asset value and buying stocks with low P/E multiples—hada common characteristic. The stocks that Graham s elected based onThe basic ideas of investing are to look at stocks as businesses,use market fluctuations to your advantage, and seek a marginof safety. That’s what Ben Graham taught us. A hundred yearsfrom now they will still be the cornerstones of investing.4WARREN BUFFETT , 199416 THE WARREN BUFFETT WAYthese methods were deeply out of favor with the market. Some macro-or microevent caused the market to price these stocks below their value.Graham felt strongly that these stocks, priced “unjustifiably low,” wereattractive purchases.Graham’s conviction rested on certain assumptions. First, he be-lieved that the market frequently mispriced stocks, usually because of thehuman emotions of fear and greed. At the height of optimism, greedmoved stocks beyond their intrinsic value, creating an overpriced mar-ket. At other times, fear moved prices below intrinsic value, creating anundervalued market. His second assumption was based on the statisticalphenomenon known as “reversion to the mean,” although he did not usethat term. More eloquently, he quoted the poet Horace: “Many shall berestored that now are fallen, and many shall fall that now are in honor.”However stated, by statistician or poet, Graham believed that an investorcould profit from the corrective forces of an inefficient market.PHILIP FISHERWhile Graham was writing Security Analysis, Philip Fisher was begin-ning his career as an investment counselor. After graduating from Stan-ford’s Graduate School of Business Administration, Fisher began work asan analyst at the Anglo London & Paris National Bank in San Francisco.In less than two years, he was made head of the bank’s statistical depart-ment. It was from this perch that he witnessed the 1929 stock marketcrash. After a brief and unproductive career with a local brokeragehouse, Fisher decided to start his own investment counseling firm. OnMarch 1, 1931, Fisher & Company began soliciting clients.Starting an investment counseling firm in the early 1930s might haveappeared foolhardy, but Fisher figured he had two advantages. First, anyinvestors who had any money left after the crash were probably very un-happy with their existing broker. Second, in the midst of the Great De-pression, businesspeople had plenty of time to sit and talk with Fisher.At Stanford, one of Fisher’s business classes had required him to ac-company his professor on periodic visits to companies in the San Fran-cisco area. The professor would get the business managers to talk abouttheir operations, and often helped them solve an immediate problem.Driving back to Stanford, Fisher and his professor would recap what theyThe Education of Warren Buffett 17observed about the companies and managers they visited. “That houreach week,” Fisher said, “was the most useful training I ever received.”5From these experiences, Fisher came to believe that people couldmake superior profits by (1) investing in companies with above-averagepotential and (2) aligning themselves with the most capable manage-ment. To isolate these exceptional companies, Fisher developed a pointsystem that qualified a company by the characteristics of its business andits management.As to the first—companies with above-average potential—the char-acteristic that most impressed Fisher was a company’s ability to growsales over the years at rates greater than the industry average.6Thatgrowth, in turn, usually was a combination of two factors: a significantcommitment to research and development, and an effective sales organi-zation. A company could develop outstanding products and services butunless they were “expertly merchandised,” the research and develop-ment effort would never translate into revenues.In Fisher’s view, however, market potential alone is only half thestory; the other half is consistent profits. “All the sales growth inthe world won’t produce the right type of investment vehicle if, overthe years, profits do not grow correspondingly,” he said.7Accordingly,Fisher examined a company’s profit margins, its dedication to main-taining and improving those margins and, finally, its cost analysis andaccounting controls.No company, said Fisher, will be able to sustain its profitability un-less it is able to break down the costs of doing business while simultane-ously understanding the cost of each step in the manufacturing process.To do so, he explained, a company must instill adequate accountingcontrols and cost analysis. This cost information, Fisher noted, enables acompany to direct its resources to those products or services with thehighest economic potential. Furthermore, accounting controls will helpidentify snags in a company’s operations. These snags, or inefficiencies,act as an early warning device aimed at protecting the company’s over-all profitability.Fisher’s sensitivity about a company’s profitability was linked withanother concern: a company’s ability to grow in the future without re-quiring equity financing. If a company is able to grow only by sellingstocks, he said, the larger number of shares outstanding will cancel outany benefit that stockholders might realize from the company’s growth.18 THE WARREN BUFFETT WAYA company with high profit margins, explained Fisher, is better able togenerate funds internally and thus sustain growth without diluting ex-isting shareholders’ ownership.Fisher’s second touchstone for identifying outstanding companies wasthe quality of management. Superior managers, he believed, are deter-mined to develop new products and services that will continue to spursales growth long after current products or services are largely exploited.Management should be establishing policies to ensure consistent gains forten to twenty years, even at the cost of subordinating immediate profits.Subordinate, he emphasized, not sacrifice. The above-average managercan implement the company’s long-range plans while simultaneously fo-cusing on daily operations.Another trait that Fisher considered critical: Does the business havea management of unquestionable integrity and honesty? Do the man-agers behave as if they are trustees for the stockholders or are they con-cerned only with their own well-being?One way to determine their intention, Fisher confided, is to ob-serve how managers communicate with shar eholders. All businesses,good and bad, will experience periods of unexpected difficulties. Com-monly, when business is good, management talks freely; but when busi-ness declines, some managers clam up. How management res ponds todifficulties, Fisher noted, tells a lot about the company.For a business to be successful, he argued, management must also de-velop good working relations with all its employe es. Employees shouldgenuinely feel that their company is a good place to work. Blue-collaremployees should feel that they are treated with respect and decency. Ex-ecutive employees should feel that promotion is based on ability, notfavoritism.Fisher also considered the depth of management. Has the chief ex-ecutive officer a talented team, he asked, and is the CEO able to dele-gate authority to run parts of the business?Finally, Fisher examined the specific business and managementcharacteristics of a company and compared it with other businesses inthe same industry. In this search, Fisher tried to uncover clues thatmight help him understand the superiority of a company in relation toits competitors.He argued that reading only the financial reports of a company is notenough to justify an investment. The essential step in prudent investing,The Education of Warren Buffett 19he explained, is to uncover as much about a company as possible fromthose individuals who are familiar with the company. Fisher admittedthis was a catchall inquiry that he called “scuttlebutt.” Today we mightcall it the business grapevine. If handled properly, Fisher claimed, scut-tlebutt could provide the investor with substantial clues to identify out-standing investments.Fisher’s scuttlebutt investigation led him to interview as manysources as possible. He talked with customers and vendors. He soughtout former employees as well as consultants who had worked for thecompany. He contacted research scientists in universities, governmentemployees, and trade association executives. He also interviewed com-petitors. Although executives may sometimes hesitate to disclose toomuch about their own company, Fisher found that they never lack anopinion about their competitors.Most investors are unwilling to commit the time and energy Fisherfelt was necessary for understanding a company. Developing a scuttle-butt network and arranging interviews are time consuming; replicatingthe scuttlebutt process for each company under consideration can beexhausting. Fisher found a simple way to reduce his workload—he re-duced the number of companies he owned. He always said he wouldrather own a few outstanding companies than a large number of averagebusinesses. Generally, his portfolios included fewer than ten companies,and often three to four companies represented 75 percent of his entireequity portfolio.Fisher believed that, to be successful, investors ne eded to do just a fewthings well. One was investing only in companies that were within theircircle of competence. Fisher himself made that mistake in the beginning.“I began investing outside the industries which I believed I thoroughlyunderstood, in completely different spheres of activity; situations where Idid not have comparable background knowledge.”8JOHN BURR WILLIAMSJohn Burr Williams graduated from Harvard University in 1923 andwent on to Harvard Business School, where he got his first taste of eco-nomic forecasting and security analysis. After Harvard, he worked as asecurity analyst at two well-known Wall Street firms. He was there20 THE WARREN BUFFETT WAYthrough the heady days of the 1920s and the disastrous crash of 1929 andits aftermath. That experience convinced him that to be a good investor,one also needs to be a good economist.9So, in 1932 at the age of 30 and already a good investor, he enrolledin Harvard’s Graduate School of Arts and Sciences. Working from afirm belief that what happened in the economy could affect the value ofstocks, he had decided to earn an advanced degree in economics.When it came time to choose a topic for his doctoral dissertation,Williams asked advice from Joseph Schumpeter, the noted Austrianeconomist best known for his theory of creative destruction, who wasthen a member of the economics faculty. Schumpeter suggested thatWilliams look at the “intrinsic value of a common stock,” saying itwould fit Williams’s background and experience. Williams later com-mented that perhaps Schumpeter had a more cynical motive: Thetopic would keep Williams from “running afoul” of the rest of thefaculty, “none of whom would want to challenge my own ideas on in-vestments.”10Nonetheless, Schumpeter’s suggestion was the impetusfor Williams’s famous doctoral dissertation, which, as The Theoryof Investment Value, has influenced financial analysts and investorsever since.Williams finished writing his dissertation in 1937. Even though hehad not yet defended it—and to the great indignation of several profes-sors—he submitted the work to Macmillan for publication. Macmillandeclined. So did McGraw-Hill. Both decided that the book had toomany algebraic symbols. Finally, in 1938, Williams found a publisher inHarvard University Press, but only after he agreed to pay part of theprinting cost. Two years later, Williams took his oral exam and, aftersome intense arguments over the causes of the Great Depression, passed.The Theory of Investment Value is a genuine classic. For sixtyyears, it has served as the foundation on which many famous econo-mists—Eugene Fama, Harry Markowitz, and Franco Modigliani, toname a few—have based their own work. Warren Buffett calls it one ofthe most important investment books ever written.Williams’s theory, known today as the dividend discount model, ordiscounted net cash-flow analysis, provides a way to put a value on astock or a bond. Like many important ideas, it can be reduced to a verysimple precept: To know what a security is worth today, estimate all theThe Education of Warren Buffett 21cash it will earn over its lifetime and then discount that total back to apresent value. It is the underlying methodology that Warren Buffettuses to evaluate stocks and companies.Buffett condensed Williams’s theory as: “The value of a business isdetermined by the net cash flows expected to occur over the life of thebusiness discounted at an appropriate interest rate.” Williams describedit this way: “A cow for her milk; a hen for her eggs; and a stock, byheck, for her dividends.”11Williams’s model is a two-step process. First it measures cash flowsto determine a company’s current and future worth. How to estimatecash flows? One quick measure is dividends paid to shar eholders. Forcompanies that do not distribute dividends, Williams believed that intheory all retained earnings should eventually turn into dividends.Once a company reaches its mature stage, it would not need to reinvestits earnings for growth so the management could start distributing theearnings in the form of dividends. Williams wrote, “If earnings notpaid out in dividends are all successfully reinvested, then these earningsshould produce dividends later; if not, then they are money lost. Inshort, a stock is worth only what you can get out of it.”12The second step is to discount those estimated cash flows, to allowfor some uncertainty. W e can never be exactly sure what a company willdo, how its products will sell, or what management will do or not do toimprove the business. There is always an element of risk, particularly forstocks, even though Williams’s theory applies equally well to bonds.What, then, should we use as a discount rate? Williams himself isnot explicit on this point, apparently believing his readers could deter-mine for themselves what would be appropriate. Buffett’s measuringstick is very straightforward: He uses either the interest rate for long-term (meaning ten-year) U.S. bonds, or when interest rates are very low,he uses the average cumulative rate of return of the overall stock market.By using what amounts to a risk-free rate, Buffett has modifiedWilliams’s original thesis. Because he limits his purchases to those withBen Graham’s margin of safety, Buffett ensures that the risk is coveredin the transaction itself, and therefore he believes that using a risk-freerate for discounting is appropriate.Peter Bernstein, in his book Capital Ideas, writes that Graham’ssystem is a set of rules, whereas Williams’s dividend discount model is a22 THE WARREN BUFFETT WAYtheory; but “both approaches end up recommending the same kinds ofstocks for purchase.”13Warren Buffett has used both, with stellar success.CHARLES MUNGERWhen Warren Buffett began his investment partnership in Omaha in1956, he had just over $100,000 in capital to work with. One early task,therefore, was to persuade additional investors to sign on. He was mak-ing his usual careful, detailed pitch to neighbors Dr. and Mrs. EdwinDavis, when suddenly Dr. Davis interrupted him and abruptly an-nounced they’d give him $100,000. When Buffett asked why, Davisreplied, “Because you remind me of Charlie Munger.”14Charlie who?Even though both men grew up in Omaha and had many acquain-tances in common, they did not actually meet until 1959. By that time,Munger had moved to southern California, but he returned to Omahafor a visit when his father died. Dr. Davis decided it was time the twoyoung men met and brought them together at a dinner in a local restau-rant. It was the beginning of an extraordinary partnership.Munger, the son of a lawyer and grandson of a federal judge, had es-tablished a successful law practice in the Los Angeles area, but his inter-est in the stock market was already strong. At that first dinner, the twoyoung men found much to talk about, including securities. From thenon, they communicated often, with Buffett frequently urging Mungerto quit law and to concentrate on investing. For a while, he did both. In1962, he formed an investment partnership much like Buffett’s, whilemaintaining his law practice. Three very successful years later, he leftthe law altogether, although to this day he has an office in the firm thatbears his name.Munger’s investment partnership in Los Angeles, and Buffett’s inOmaha, were similar in approach; both sought to purchase some dis-count to underlying value. (They also enjoyed similar r esults, both ofthem outperforming the Dow Jones Industrial Average by impressivemargins.) It is not surprising, then, that they bought some of the samestocks. Munger, like Buffett, began buying shares of Blue Chip Stamps inthe late 1960s, and eventually he became chairman of its board. WhenThe Education of Warren Buffett 23Berkshire and Blue Chip Stamps merged in 1978, he became Berkshire’svice chairman, a position he still holds.The working relationship between Munger and Buffett was notformalized in an official partnership agreement, but it has evolved overthe years into something perh aps even closer, more symbiotic. Even be-fore Munger joined the Berkshire board, the two made many invest-ment decisions together, often conferring daily; gradually their businessaffairs became more and more interlinked.Today Munger continues as vice chairman of Berkshire Hathawayand also serves as chairman of W esco Financial, which is 80 percentowned by Berkshire and holds many of the same investments. In everyway, he functions as Buffett’s acknowledged comanaging partner andalter ego. To get a sense of how closely the two are aligned, we haveonly to count the number of times Buffett reports “Charlie and I” didthis, or decided that, or believe this, or looked into that, or think this—almost as if “Charlie-and-I” were the name of one person.To their working relationship, Munger brought not only financialacumen but the foundation of business law. He also brought an intel-lectual perspective that is quite different from Buffett’s. Munger is pas-sionately interested in many areas of knowledge—science, history,philosophy, psychology, mathematics—and believes that each of thosefields holds important concepts that thoughtful people can, and should,apply to all their endeavors, including investment decisions. He callsthem “the big ideas,” and they are the core of his well-known notionof “latticework of mental models” for investors.15All these threads together—financial knowledge, background inthe law, and appreciation of lessons from other disciplines—producedin Munger a somewhat different investment philosophy from that ofBuffett. Whereas Buffett was still searching for opportunities at bar-gain prices, Munger believed in paying a fair price for quality com-panies. He can be very persuasive.It’s far better to buy a wonderful company at a fair price thana fair company at a wonderful price.16WARREN BUFFETT24 THE WARREN BUFFETT WAYIt was Munger who convinced Buffett that paying three timesbook value for See’s Candy was actually a good deal (see Chapter 4for the full story). That was the beginning of a plate-tectonic shift inBuffett’s thinking, and he happily acknowledges that it was Charliewho pushed him in a new direction. Both would quickly add thatwhen you find a quality company that also happens to be available at adiscounted price, then you’ve struck oil—or, in Berkshire’s case, thenext best thing: Coca-Cola (see Chapter 4).One reason Buffett and Munger fit so well is that both men possessan uncompromising attitude toward commonsense business principles.Like Buffett, who endured poor returns in the insurance industry andfor a time refused to write policies, Charlie, in his function as CEO ofW esco, refused to make loans when confronted with an unruly savingsand loan industry. Both exhibit managerial qualities necessary to runhigh-quality businesses. Berkshire Hathaway’s shar eholders are blessed inhaving managing partners who look after their interest and help themmake money in all economic environments. With Buffett’s policy onmandatory retirement—he does not believe in it—Berkshire’s shar ehold-ers will continue to benefit not from one mind but two long into thefuture.A BLENDING OF INFLUENCESShortly after Graham’s death in 1976, Buffett became the designatedsteward of Graham’s value approach to investing. Indeed, Buffett’s namebecame synonymous with value investing. It is easy to see why. He wasthe most famous of Graham’s dedicated students, and Buffett nevermissed an opportunity to acknowledge the intellectual debt he owed toGraham. Even today, Buffett considers Graham to be the one individ-ual, after his father, who had the most influence on his investment life.17How, then, does Buffett reconcile his intellectual indebtedness toGraham with stock purchases like the Washington Post Company (1973)and the Coca-Cola Company (1988)? Neither passed Graham’s strictfinancial test for purchase, yet Buffett made significant investmentsin both.As early as 1965, Buffett was becoming aware that Graham’s strategyof buying cheap stocks was not ideal.18Following his mentor’s approachThe Education of Warren Buffett 25of searching for companies that were selling for less than their net work-ing capital, Buffett bought some genuine losers. Several companies thathe had bought at a cheap price (hence they met Graham’s test for pur-chase) were cheap because their underlying businesses were suffering.From his earliest investment mistakes, Buffett began moving awayfrom Graham’s strict teachings. “I evolved,” he admitted, “but I didn’tgo from ape to human or human to ape in a nice even manner.”19Hewas beginning to appreciate the qualitative nature of certain companies,compared with the quantitative aspects of others. Despite that, however,he still found himself searching for bargains, sometimes with horrible re-sults. “My punishment,” he confessed, “was an education in the econom-ics of short-line farm implementation manufacturers (Dempster MillManufacturing), third-place department stores (Hochschild-Kohn), andNew England textile manufacturers (Berkshire Hathaway).”20Buffett’sevolution was delayed, he admitted, because what Graham taught himwas so valuable.When evaluating stocks, Graham did not think about the specifics ofthe businesses. Nor did he ponder the capabilities of management. Helimited his research investigation to corporate filings and annual reports.If there was a mathematical probability of making money because theshare price was less than the assets of the company, Graham purchasedthe company, regardless of its business or its management. To increasethe probability of success, he purchased as many of these statistical equa-tions as possible.If Graham’s teachings were limited to these precepts, Buffett wouldhave had little regard for him. But the margin-of-safety theory thatGraham emphasized was so important to Buffett that he could overlookall other current weaknesses of Graham’s methodology. Even today,Buffett continues to embrace Graham’s primary idea, the theory ofmargin of safety. “Forty-two years after reading that,” Buffett noted,“I still think those are the three right words.”21The key lesson thatBuffett took from Graham was that successful investing involved pur-chasing stocks when their market price was at a significant discount tothe underlying business value.In addition to the margin-of-safety theory, which became theintellectual framework of Buffett’s thinking, Graham helped Buffettappreciate the folly of following stock market fluctuations. Stocks havean investment characteristic and a speculative characteristic, Graham26 THE WARREN BUFFETT WAYtaught, and the speculative characteristics are a consequence of people’sfear and greed. These emotions, present in most investors, cause stockprices to gyrate far above and, more important, far below a company’sintrinsic value, thus presenting a margin of safety. Graham taught Buf-fett that if he could insulate himself from the emotional whirlwinds ofthe stock market, he had an opportunity to exploit the irrational behav-ior of other investors, who purchased stocks based on emotion, not logic.From Graham, Buffett learned how to think independently. If hereached a logical conclusion based on sound judgment, Graham coun-seled Buffett, he should not be di ssuaded just because others disagree.“Y ou are neither right or wrong because the crowd disagrees with you,”he wrote. “Y ou are right because your data and reasoning are right.”22Phil Fisher in many ways was the exact opposite of Ben Graham.Fisher believed that to make sound decisions, investors needed to becomefully informed about a business. That meant they needed to investigateall aspects of the company. They needed to look beyond the numbers andlearn about the business itself because that information mattered a greatdeal. They also needed to study the attrib utes of the company’s manage-ment, for management’s abilities could affect the value of the underlyingbusiness. They should learn as much as they could about the industry inwhich the company operated, and about its competitors. Every source ofinformation should be exploited.From Fisher, Buffett learned the value of scuttlebutt. Throughoutthe years, Buffett has developed an extensive network of contacts whoassist him in evaluating businesses.Appearing on the PBS show Money World in 1993, Buffettwas asked what investment advice he would give a moneymanager just starting out. “I’d tell him to do exactly what I did40-odd years ago, which is to learn about every company inthe United States that has publicly traded securities.”Moderator Adam Smith protested, “But there’s 27,000public companies.”“W ell,” said Buffett, “start with the A’s.”23The Education of Warren Buffett 27Finally, Fisher t aught Buffett the benefits of focusing on just a fewinvestments. He believed that it was a mistake to teach investors that put-ting their eggs in several baskets reduces risk. The danger in purchasingtoo many stocks, he felt, is that it becomes impossible to watch all theeggs in all the baskets. In his view, buying shares in a company withouttaking the time to develop a thorough understanding of the busin ess wasfar more risky than having limited diversification.John Burr Williams provided Buffett with a methodology for cal-culating the intrinsic value of a business, which is a cornerstone of hisinvesting approach.The differences between Graham and Fisher are apparent. Graham,the quantitative analyst, emphasized only those factors that could be mea-sured: fixed assets, current earnings, and dividends. His investigative re-search was limited to corporate filings and annual reports. He spent notime interviewing customers, competitors, or managers.Fisher’s approach was the antithesis of Graham. Fisher, the qualita-tive analyst, emphasized those factors that he believed increased the valueof a company: principally, future prospects and management capability.Whereas Graham was interested in purchasing only cheap stocks, Fisherwas interested in purchasing companies that had the potential to increasetheir intrinsic value over the long term. He would go to great lengths,including conducting extensive interviews, to uncover bits of informa-tion that might improve his selection proc ess.Although Graham’s and Fisher’s investment approach differ, notesBuffett, they “parallel in the investment world.”24Taking the liberty ofrephrasing, I would say that instead of paralleling, in Warren Buffettthey dovetail: His investment approach combines qualitative under-standing of the business and its management (as taught by Fisher) and aquantitative understanding of price and value (as t aught by Graham).Warren Buffett once said, “I’m 15 percent Fisher and 85 percentBenjamin Graham.”25That remark has been widely quoted, but it is im-portant to remember that it was made in 1969. In the intervening years,Buffett has made a gradual but definite shift toward Fisher’s philosophyof buying a select few good businesses and owning those businesses forseveral years. My hunch is that if he were to make a similar statementtoday, the balance would come pretty close to 50/50.Without question, it was Charlie Munger who was most responsi-ble for moving Buffett toward Fisher’s thinking.28 THE WARREN BUFFETT WAYIn a real sense, Munger is the active embodiment of Fisher’s quali-tative theories. From the start, Charlie had a keen appreciation of thevalue of a better business, and the wisdom of paying a reasonable pricefor it. Through their years together, Charlie has continued to preachthe wisdom of paying up for a good business.In one important respect, however, Munger is also the present-dayecho of Ben Graham. Years earlier, Graham had taught Buffett the two-fold significance of emotion in investing—the mistakes it triggers forthose who base irrational decisions on it, and the opportunities it thuscreates for those who can avoid falling into the same traps. Munger,through his readings in psychology, has continued to develop that theme.He calls it the “psychology of misjudgment,” a notion we look at morefully in Chapter 11; and through persistent emphasis, he keeps it an inte-gral part of Berkshire’s decision making. It is one of his most importantcontributions./tile3Buffett’s dedication to Ben Graham, Phil Fisher, John Burr Williams,and Charlie Munger is understandable. Graham gave Buffett the intel-lectual basis for investing, the margin of safety, and helped Buffett learnhow to master his emotions to take advantage of market fluctuations.Fisher gave Buffett an updated, workable methodology that enabled himto identify good long-term investments and manage a portfolio over thelong term, and taught the value of focusing on just a few good com-panies. Williams gave him a mathematical model for calculating truevalue. Munger helped Buffett appreciate the economic returns that comefrom buying and owning great businesses. The frequent confusion sur-rounding Buffett’s investment actions is easily understood when we ac-knowledge that Buffett is the synthesis of all four men.“It is not enough to have good intelligence,” Descartes wrote; “theprincipal thing is to apply it well.” It is the application that separatesBuffett from other investment managers. Many of his peers are highlyintelligent, disciplined, and dedicated. Buffett stands above them all be-cause of his formidable ability to integrate the strategies of the fourwise men into a single cohesive approach.