816Investing GuidelinesManagement TenetsWhen considering a new investment or a business acquisition,Buffett looks very hard at the quality of management. He tellsus that the companies or stocks Berkshire purchases must beoperated by honest and competent managers whom he can admire andtrust. “W e do not wish to join with managers who lack admirable qual-ities,” he says, “no matter how attractive the prospects of their business.W e’ve never succeeded in making a good deal with a bad person.”1When he finds managers he admires, Buffett is generous with hispraise. Year after year, readers of the Chairman’s Letter in Berkshire’sannual reports find Buffett’s warm words about those who manage thevarious Berkshire companies.He is just as thorough when it comes to the management of com-panies whose stock he has under consideration. In particular, he looksfor three traits:1. Is management rational?2. Is management candid with the shareholders?3. Does management resist the institutional imperative?The highest compliment Buffett can pay a manager is that he or sheunfailingly behaves and thinks like an owner of the company. Managers82 THE WARREN BUFFETT WAYwho behave like owners tend not to lose sight of the company’s primeobjective—increasing shareholder value—and they tend to make rationaldecisions that further that goal. Buffett also greatly admires managerswho take seriously their responsibility to report fully and genuinely toshareholders and who have the courage to resist what he has termed theinstitutional imperative —blindly following industry peers.All this has taken on a new level of urgency, as shocking discoveriesof corporate wrongdoings have come to light. Buffett has always insistedon doing business only with people of the highest integrity. Sometimesthat stance has put him at odds with other well-known names in thecorporate world. It has not always been fashionable in business circles tospeak of integrity, honesty, and trustworthiness as qualities to be ad-mired. In fact, at times such talk might have been disparaged as naiveand out of touch with business reality. It is a particularly sweet bit ofpoetic justice that Buffett’s stand on corporate integrity now seems tobe a brilliant strategy. But his motivation is not strategic: It comes fromhis own unshakable value system. And no one has ever seriously accusedWarren Buffett of being naive.Later in this chapter, we look more deeply into Buffett’s responses tothese issues of ethical corpor ate behavior, particularly excessive executivecompensation, stock options, director independence and accountability,and accounting trickery. He tells us what he thinks must be changed toprotect shareholder interests and gives us id eas on how investors can eval-uate managers to determine whether they are trustworthy.RATIONALITYThe most important management act, Buffett believes, is allocation ofthe company’s capital. It is the most important because allocation of(Text continues on page 85.)When you have able managers of high character running busi-nesses about which they are passionate, you can have a dozen ormore reporting to you and still have time for an afternoon nap.2WARREN BUFFETT , 198683CASE IN POINTSHAW INDUSTRIES , 2000–2002In late 2000, Warren Buffett’s Berkshire Hathaway group agreedto acquire 87 percent of Shaw Industries, the world’s largest car-pet manufacturer, for $19 per share, or approximately $2 billion.Although the price was a 56 percent premium over the tradingprice of $12.19, Shaw’s share price had been a good deal highera year earlier. Buffett paid the premium because the companyhad so many of the qualities he likes to see: The business wassimple and understandable, had a consistent operating history,and exhibited favorable long-term prospects.Carpet manufacturing is not simplistic, given the gargantuanand complicated machines that spin, dye, tuft, and weave, butthe basic premise is simple and understandable: to make the bestcarpets possible and sell them profitably. Shaw now producesabout 27,000 styles and colors of tufted and woven carpet forhomes and commercial use. It also sells f looring and projectmanagement services. It has more than 100 manufacturing plantsand distribution centers and makes more than 600 millionsquare yards of carpet a year and employs about 30,000 workers.Buffett clearly believed that people would need carpets andflooring for a long time to come and that Shaw would be there toprovide them. That translates to excellent long-term prospects,one of Buffett’s requirements.What really attracted Buffett, however, was the company’ssenior management. In his 2000 annual report to shar eholders,he commented about the Shaw transaction. “A key feature ofthe deal was that Julian Saul, president, and Bob Shaw, CEO,were to continue to own at least 5 percent of Shaw. This leavesus associated with the best in the business as shown by Bob andJulian’s record: Each built a large, successful carpet business be-fore joining forces in 1998.”3From 1960 to 1980, the company delivered a 27 percent av-erage annual return on investment. In 1980, Bob Shaw predicted(Continued)84that his company would quadruple its $214 million in sales inten years; he did it in eight years.Clearly, Bob Shaw managed his company well, and in away that fits neatly with Buffett’s approach. “Y ou have togrow from earnings,” Shaw said. “If you use that as your phi-losophy—that you grow out of earnings rather than by borrow-ing—and you manage your balance sheet, then you never getinto serious trouble.”4This type of thinking is right up Buffett Alley. He believesthat management’s most important act is the allocation of capi-tal and that this allocation, over time, will determine share-holder value. In Buffett’s mind, the issue is simple: If extra cashcan be reinvested internally and produce a return higher thanthe cost of capital, then the company should retain its earningsand reinvest them, which is exactly what Shaw did.It was not just that Bob Shaw made good financial deci-sions, he also made strong product and business decisions byadapting to changing market conditions. For example, Shawretrofitted all of its machines in 1986 when DuPont came outwith new stain-resistant fibers. “Selling is just meeting people,figuring out what they need, and supplying their needs,” Shawsaid. “But those needs are ever changing. So if you’re doingbusiness the same way you did it five years ago, or even twoyears ago—you’re doing it wrong.”5Shaw’s strong management is reflected in the company’sconsistent operating history. It has grown to the number onecarpet seller in the world, overcoming changing marketplaceconditions, changes in technology, and even the loss of majoroutlets. In 2002, Sears, one of Shaw’s largest vendors at the time,closed its carpet business. But the management appeared to seethose difficulties more as challenges to over come rather thanbarriers to success.In 2002, Berkshire bought the remaining portion of Shawthat it did not already own. By 2003, Shaw was bringing in$4.6 billion in sales. Except for the insurance segment, it isBerkshire’s largest company.Investing Guidelines: Management Tenets 85capital, over time, determines shareholder value. Deciding what to dowith the company’s earnings—reinvest in the business, or return moneyto shareholders—is, in Buffett’s mind, an exercise in logic and rational-ity. “Rationality is the quality that Buffett thinks distinguishes his stylewith which he runs Berkshire—and the quality he often finds lacking inother corporations,” writes Carol Loomis of Fortune.6The issue usually becomes important when a company reaches a cer-tain level of maturity, where its growth rate slows and it begins to gen-erate more cash than it needs for dev elopment and operating costs. Atthat point, the question arises: How should those earnings be allocated?If the extra cash, reinvested internally, can produce an above-averagereturn on equity—a return that is higher than the cost of capital—thenthe company should retain all its earnings and reinvest them. That is theonly logical course. Retaining earnings to reinvest in the company atlessthan the average cost of capital is completely irrational. It is alsoquite common.A company that provides average or below-average investment re-turns but generates cash in excess of its needs has three options: (1) Itcan ignore the problem and continue to reinvest at below-average r ates,(2) it can buy growth, or (3) it can return the money to shareholders. Itis at this crossroad that Buffett keenly focuses on management. It is herethat managers will behave rationally or irrationally.Generally, managers who continue to reinvest despite below-average returns do so in the belief that the situation is temporary. Theyare convinced that, with managerial prowess, they can improve theircompany’s profitability. Shareholders become mesmerized with man-agement’s forecast of improvements.If a company continually ignores this problem, cash will become anincreasingly idle resource and the stock price will decline. A companywith poor economic returns, a lot of cash, and a low stock price will at-tract corporate raiders, which often is the beginning of the end of cur-rent management tenure. To protect themselves, executives frequentlychoose the second option instead: purchasing growth by acquiring an-other company.Announcing acquisition plans excites shareholders and di ssuades cor-porate raiders. However, Buffett is skeptical of companies that need tobuy growth. For one thing, it often comes at an overvalued price. For(Text continues on page 89.)86CASE IN POINTFRUIT OF THE LOOM, 2002In 2002, Warren Buffett bought the core business (apparel) ofbankrupt Fruit of the Loom for $835 million in cash. With thepurchase, Berkshire acquired two strong assets: an outstandingmanager and one of the country’s best-known and best-lovedbrand names. It also acquired some $1.6 billion in debt, and abitter history of ill will among shar eholders, suppliers, retailers,and consumers.The company that sells one-third of all men’s and boys’ un-derwear in the United States started as a small Rhode Island millin 1851. Over the next century, it grew into the nation’s leadingmaker of underwear and T-shirts. It could not, however, escapethe economic struggles that increasingly threatened the apparelindustry, and in 1985 was snapped up by financier William Far-ley, known for acquiring financially troubled companies.Farley, often described as “flashy” and “flamboyant,”guided the company through a few years of growth and theninto a disastrous decline. Everything seemed to go wrong. Anaggressive $900 million acquisitions program left the companyover-leveraged—long-term debt was 128 percent of commonshareholders’ equity in 1996—without providing the expectedrise in revenues. Suppliers went unpaid and stopped shipping rawmaterials. Farley moved 95 percent of manufacturing operationsoffshore, closing more than a dozen U.S. plants and displacingsome 16,000 workers, only to find that the net result was seriousproblems of quality control and on-time delivery. To counteractthe delivery snafus, he parc eled out the manufacturing to con-tract firms, adding enormous layers of overtime costs. He createda holding company for Fruit of the Loom and moved its head-quarters to the Cayman Islands, avoiding U.S. taxes on foreignsales but triggering a massive public relations headache.The headache got worse when Farley, in a maneuver that isnow illegal, convinced his hand-picked board to guarantee a87personal bank loan of $65 million in case he defaulted—whichhe did. The board, which earlier had set his compensation atnearly $20 million and repriced stock options to significantlyfavor key executives, then forgave $10 million of the loan.In spite of the cost-cutting attempts, the company wassinking deeper into the red. In 1999, Fruit of the Loom postedlosses of $576 million, seven times larger than analysts’ expec-tations; and gross margins sagged to a paltry 2 percent, notenough to cover the $100 million interest expense n eeded toservice its $1.4 billion debt. That same year the Council of In-stitutional Investors listed Fruit of the Loom as one of the na-tion’s twenty most underperforming companies. Shar eholderscringed as the stock price plunged: From $44 a share in early1997 to just over $1 by the end of 1999; in that one year, 1999,the shares lost more than 90 percent of their value.Few were surprised, therefore, when the company filed forChapter 11 bankruptcy protection in December 1999. The com-pany’s shares sank even lower, and by October 2001 were downto $0.23.So why would Warren Buffett be interested? Two reasons:a very strong brand that offered growth potential under theright management, and the arrival of a man on a white horse.John B. Holland had been a hig hly respected executivewith Fruit of the Loom for more than twenty years, includingseveral years as president and CEO, when he retired in 1996. In2000, he was brought back as executive vice-president chargedwith revamping operations.Holland represents a perfect example of the managementqualities Buffett insists upon. Although publicly he remainedlargely silent about Farley, beyond a brief reference to “poormanagement,” Buffett has made no secret of his disdain for ex-ecutives who bully their boards into sweet compensation deals,and boards that allow it. In contrast, he is enthusiastically vocalabout his admiration for Holland.(Continued)88He explained his thinking to Berkshire shar eholders: “JohnHolland was responsible for Fruit’s operations in its most boun-tiful years. . . . [After the bankruptcy] John was rehired, and heundertook a major reworking of operations. Before John’s re-turn, deliveries were chaotic, costs soared, and relations with keycustomers deteriorated. ...H e’s been restoring the old Fruit ofthe Loom, albeit in a much more competitive environment. [Inour purchase offer] we insisted on a very unusual proviso: Johnhad to be available to continue serving as CEO after we tookover. To us, John and the brand are Fruit’s key assets.”7Since Holland took the reins, Fruit of the Loom has under-gone a massive restructuring to lower its costs. It slashed itsfreight costs, reduced overtime, and trimmed inventory levels. Itdisposed of sideline businesses, eliminated unprofitable productlines, found new efficiencies in manufacturing process, andworked to restore customer satisfaction by filling orders on time.Almost immediately, improvement was apparent. Earningsincreased, operating expenses decreased. In 2000, gross earningsrose by $160.3 million—a 222 percent increase—compared to1999, and gross margin increased 11 percentage points. Thecompany reported an operating loss in 2000 of $44.2 million,compared to the 1999 loss of $292.3 million. Even more reveal-ing of improvement are the fourth-quarter results—an operatingloss of $13.5 million (which included one-time consolidationcosts related to the closure of four U.S. plants) in 2000, com-pared to $218.6 million—more than sixteen times greater—justone year earlier.In 2001, the positive trend continued. Gross earnings grewanother $72.5 million, a 31 percent increase over 2000, and grossmargin increased 7.7 percentage points to 22.7 percent for theyear. That means the company ended 2001 with operating earn-ings of $70.1 million, compared to 2000’s $44.2 million loss.Of course monumental problems such as the company facedare not fully corrected overnight, and Fruit of the Loom muststill operate in a ferociously competitive industry environment,but so far Buffett is pleased with the company’s performance.Investing Guidelines: Management Tenets 89another, a company that must integrate and manage a new business is aptto make mistakes that could be costly to shareholders.In Buffett’s mind, the only reasonable and responsible course forcompanies that have a growing pile of cash that cannot be reinvested atabove-average rates is to return that money to the shareholders. For that,two methods are available: raising the dividend or buying back shares.With cash in hand from their dividends, shareholders have the oppor-tunity to look elsewhere for higher returns. On the surface, this seems tobe a good deal, and therefore many people view increased dividends as asign of companies that are doing well. Buffett believes that this is so onlyif investors can get more for their cash than the company could generateif it retained the earnings and reinvested in the company.Over the years, Berkshire Hathaway has earned very high returnsfrom its capital and has retained all its earnings. With such high returns,shareholders would have been ill served if they were paid a dividend.Not surprisingly, Berkshire does not pay a dividend. And that’s just fineLest a nyone still consider buying a de bt-ridden bankruptcompany a surprising move, there was also a third reason forBuffett’s decision, which should come as no surprise whatso-ever: He was able to acquire the company on very favorable fi-nancial terms. For details, see Chapter 8.Buying an underwear maker creates lots of opportunitiesfor corny jokes, and Buffett, an accomplished punster, made themost of it. At the 2002 shar eholders meeting, when asked theobvious question, he teased the audience with a half answer:“When I wear underwear at all, which I rarely do . . .” Leavingthe crowd to decide for themselves whether it’s boxers or briefsfor Buffett. He pointed out why there’s “a favorable bottomline” in underwear: “It’s an elastic market.” Finally, he dead-panned, Charlie Munger had given him an additional reason tobuy the company: “For years Charlie has been telling me,‘Warren, we have to get into women’s underwear.’ Charlie is78. It’s now or never.”890 THE WARREN BUFFETT WAYwith the shareholders. The ultim ate test of owners’ faith is allowingmanagement to reinvest 100 percent of earnings; Berkshire’s owners’faith in Buffett is high.If the real value of dividends is sometimes misunderstood, the secondmechanism for returning earnings to the shareholders—stock repur-chase—is even more so. The benefit to the owners is in many respectsless direct, less tangible, and less immediate.When management repurchases stock, Buffett feels that the reward istwofold. If the stock is selling below its intrinsic value, then purchasingshares makes good business sense. If a company’s stock price is $50 and itsintrinsic value is $100, then each time management buys its stock, theyare acquiring $2 of intrinsic value for every $1 spent. Such transactionscan be highly profitable for the remaining shar eholders.Furthermore, says Buffett, when executives actively buy the com-pany’s stock in the market, they are demonstrating that they have thebest interests of their owners at hand rather than a careless need to ex-pand the corporate structure. That kind of stance sends good signals tothe market, attracting other investors looking for a well-managed com-pany that increases shareholders’ we alth. Frequently, shar eholders are re-warded twice; first from the initial open market purchase and thensubsequently from the positive effect of investor interest on price.Coca-ColaGrowth in net cash flow has allowed Coca-Cola to increase its dividendto shareholders and also repurchase its shares in the open market. In1984, the company authorized its first-ever buyback, announcing itwould repurchase 6 million shares of stock. Since then, the company hasrepurchased more than 1 billion shares. This represented 32 percent ofthe shares outstanding as of January 1, 1984, at an average price per shareof $12.46. In other words, the company spent approximately $12.4 bil-lion to buy in shares that only ten years later would have a market valueof approximately $60 billion.In July 1992, the company announced that through the year 2000, itwould buy back 100 million shares of its stock, representing 7.6 percentof the company’s outstanding shares. Remarkably, because of its strongcash-generating abilities, the company was able to accomplish this whileit continued its aggressive investment in overseas markets.Investing Guidelines: Management Tenets 91American ExpressBuffett’s association with American Express dates back some fortyyears, to his bold purchase of its distressed stock in 1963, and the astro-nomical profits he quickly earned for his investment partners (seeChapter 1 for the full story). Buffett’s faith in the company has not di-minished, and he has continued to purchase its stock. A big buy in 1994can be traced to management decisions, both good and bad, about theuse of excess cash.The division of the company that issues the charge card and travel-ers’ checks, American Express Travel Related Services, contributes thelion’s share of profits. It has always generated substantial owner earn-ings and has easily funded its own growth. In the early 1990s, it wasgenerating more cash than it needed for operations—the very point atwhich management actions collide with Buffett’s acid test. In this case,American Express management did not do well.Then-CEO James Robinson decided to use excess cash to build thecompany into a financial services powerhouse by buying other relatedbusinesses. His first acquisition, IDS Financial Services, proved prof-itable. But then he bought Shearson Lehman, which did not. Overtime, Shearson needed more and more cash to carry its operations.When Shearson had swallowed up $4 billion, Robinson contacted Buf-fett, who agreed to buy $300 million worth of preferred shares. Untilthe company got back on track, he was not at all interested in buyingcommon stock.In 1992, Robinson abruptly resigned and was replaced by HarveyGolub. He set himself the immediate task of strengthening brandawareness. Striking a familiar tone with Buffett, he began using termssuch as franchise and brand value to describe the American ExpressCard. Over the next two years, Golub began to liquidate the company’sunderperforming assets and to restore profitability and high returns onequity. One of his first actions was to get rid of Shearson Lehman, withits massive capital needs.Soon American Express was showing signs of its old profitable self.The resources of the company were solidly behind Golub’s goal of build-ing the American Express Card into “the world’s most respected servicebrand,” and every communication from the company emphasized thefranchise value of the name “American Express.”92 THE WARREN BUFFETT WAYNext, Golub set financial targets for the company: to increase earn-ings per share by 12 to 15 percent a year and 18 to 20 percent return onequity. Before long, the company was again generating excess cash andhad more capital and more shares than it needed. Then, in September1994 the company announced that, subject to market conditions, itplanned to repurchase 20 million shares of its common stock. That wasmusic to Buffett’s ears.That summer, Buffett had converted Berkshire’s holdings in pre-ferred stock to common, and soon thereafter, he began to acquire evenmore. By the end of the year, Berkshire owned 27 million shares. InMarch 1995, Buffett added another 20 million shares; in 1997, another49.5 million; and 50.5 million more in 1998. At the end of 2003, Berk-shire owned more than 151 million shares of American Express stock,nearly 12 percent of the company, with a market value of more than $7billion—seven times what Buffett paid for it.The Washington Post CompanyThe Washington Post generates substantial cash flow for its owners, morethan can be reinvested in its primary businesses. So its management isconfronted with two rational choices: Return the money to shareholdersand/or profitably invest the cash in new investment opportunities. Aswe know, Buffett prefers to have companies return excess earnings toshareholders. The Washington P ost Company, while Katherine Grahamwas president, was the first newspaper company in its industry to repur-chase shares in large quantities. Between 1975 and 1991, the companybought an unbelievable 43 percent of its shares at an average price of $60per share.A company can also choose to return money to shareholders by in-creasing the dividend. In 1990, confronted with substantial cash reserves,the Washington Post voted to increase the annual dividend to its share-holders from $1.84 to $4.00, a 117 percent increase (see Figure 6.1).In addition to returning excess cash to its owners, the WashingtonPosthas made several profitable business purchases: cable properties fromCapital Cities, cellular tele phone compani es, and television stations. DonGraham, who now runs the company, is continually beset with offers. Tofurther his goal of developing substantial cash flows at favorable invest-ment costs, he has developed specific guidelines for evaluating thoseInvesting Guidelines: Management Tenets 93offers. He looks for a business that “has competitive barriers, does not re-quire extensive capital expenditures, and has reasonable pricing power.”Furthermore, he notes, “we have a strong preference for businesses weknow” and given the choice, “we’re more likely to invest in a handfulof big bets rather than spread our investment dollars around thinly.”9Graham’s acquisition approach mimics Buffett’s strategy at BerkshireHathaway.The dynamics of the newspaper business have changed in recentyears. Earlier, when the economy slowed and advertisers cut spending,newspapers could maintain profitability by raising lineage rates. Buttoday’s advertisers have found cheaper ways to reach their customers:cable television, direct mail, and newspaper inserts. Newspapers are nolonger monopolies; they have lost their pricing flexibility.Even so, Buffett is convinced that the Post is in better shape thanother media companies. There are two reasons for his optimism. First,the Post’s long-term debt was more than offset by its cash holdings.The Washington Post is the only public newspaper that is essentiallyfree of debt. “As a result,” explains Buffett, “the shrinkage in the valueof their assets has not been accentuated by the effects of leverage.”10Second, he notes, the Washington Post Company has been exception-ally well managed.Figure 6.1 The Washington Post Company dividend per share.94 THE WARREN BUFFETT WAYThe Pampered ChefDoris Christopher, the founder, chairman and CEO of the PamperedChef, has allocated her capital well—financing all expansion and growththrough internal earnings. She has reinvested virtually all her profitsin the company and the resulting expansion has brought tremendousgrowth in sales. Between 1995 and 2001, the Pampered Chef ’s businessgrew an astonishing 232 percent, with pretax profit margins above 25percent. And the only debt the company ever had was the original $3,000seed money that Christopher borrowed from her life insurance policy.From all appearances, Doris Christopher is a careful and profitablemanager, and she runs a tight ship. She displays keen management intu-ition by treating her representatives well but competitively. The Pam-pered Chef ’s direct marketers across the country are the bread and butterof the business and the company’s only direct contact with its over 12million customers. The sales force earns commissions of 18 to 20 percenton goods they sell, and 1 to 4 percent on the sales of kitchen consultantswhom they bring into the company.CANDORBuffett holds in high regard managers who report their companies’ fi-nancial performance fully and genuinely, who admit mistakes as well asshare successes, and who are in all ways candid with shar eholders. Inparticular, he respects managers who are able to communicate the per-formance of their company without hiding behind Generally AcceptedAccounting Principles (GAAP).Financial accounting standards only require disclosure of businessinformation classified by industry segment. Some managers exploit thisminimum requirement and lump together all the company’s businessesinto one industry segment, making it difficult for owners to understandthe dynamics of their separate business interests.“What needs to be reported,” Buffett insists, “is data—whetherGAAP, non-GAAP, or extra GAAP—that helps the financially literatereaders answer three key questions: (1) Approximately how much isthis company worth? (2) what is the likelihood that it can meet its fu-ture obligations? and (3) how good a job are its managers doing, giventhe hand they have been dealt?”11Investing Guidelines: Management Tenets 95Berkshire Hathaway’s own annual reports are a good example. Theymeet GAAP obligations, but they go much further. Buffett includes theseparate earnings of each of Berkshire’s businesses and any other addi-tional information that he feels owners would deem valuable when judg-ing a company’s economic performance. Buffett admires CEOs who areable to report to their shareholders in the same candid fashion.He also admires those with the courage to discuss failure openly.He believes that managers who confess mistakes publicly are morelikely to correct them. According to Buffett, most annual reports are asham. Over time, every company makes mistakes, both large and in-consequential. Too many managers, he believes, report with excess op-timism instead of honest explanation, serving perhaps their owninterests in the short term but no one’s interests in the long run.Buffett credits Charlie Munger with helping him understand thevalue of studying one’s mistakes instead of concentrating o nly on suc-cess. In his annual reports to Berkshire Hathaway shar eholders, Buffettis open about Berkshire’s economic and management performance,both good and bad. Through the years, he has admitted the difficultiesthat Berkshire encountered in both the textile and insurance businessesand his own management failures with these businesses.His self-criticism is blunt, and unstinting. The merger with GeneralRe reinsurance company in 1998 brought significant trouble, a gooddeal of which remained undiagnosed for several years, and came to lightonly in the wake of the World Trade Center bombing in 2001. At thetime of the merger, Buffett said later, he thought the reinsurance com-pany operated with the same discipline he demanded of other Berkshireinsurance companies. “I was dead wrong,” he admitted in 2002. “Therewas much to do at that company to get it up to snuff.”12The General Re problem was not limited to its insurance practices.The company also had a division that dealt in trading and derivatives, abusiness Buffett considered unattractive at the time of the merger (al-though, as part of the package, unavoidable) and financially disastrousseveral years later. In 2003, he wrote this straightforward apology toshareholders: “I’m sure I could have saved you $100 million or so, if I hadacted more promptly to shut down Gen Re Securities. Charlie wouldhave moved swiftly to close [it] down—no question about that. I, how-ever, dithered. As a consequence, our shareholders are paying a far higherprice than was necessary to exit this business.”1396 THE WARREN BUFFETT WAYCritics have argued that Buffett’s practice of publicly admitting hismistakes is made easier because, since he owns such a large share ofBerkshire’s common stock, he never has to worry about being fired.This is true. But it does not diminish the fundamental value of Buffett’sbelief that candor benefits the manager at least as much as it benefits theshareholder. “The CEO who misleads others in public,” he sa ys, “mayeventually mislead himself in private.”14Coca-ColaRoberto Goizueta’s strategy for strengthening Coca-Cola when he tookover as CEO pointedly included shareholders. “W e shall, during the nextdecade, remain totally committed to our shar eholders and to the protec-tion and enhancement of their investment,” he wrote. “In order to giveour shareholders an above-average total return on their investment, wemust choose businesses that generate returns in excess of inflation.”15Goizueta not only had to grow the business, which required capitalinvestment, he was also obliged to increase shareholder value. By in-creasing profit margins and return on equity, Coca-Cola was able to in-crease dividends while simultaneously reducing the dividend p ayoutratio. Dividends to shar eholders, in the 1980s, were increasing 10 per-cent per year while the payout ratio was declining from 65 percent to 40percent. This enabled Coca-Cola to reinvest a greater percentage of thecompany’s earnings to help sustain its growth rate without shortchang-ing shareholders.Coca-Cola is undeniably a superior company with an outstandinghistorical economic performance record. In the most recent years, how-ever, that level of growth has moderated. Where some shareholdersmight have panicked, Buffett did not. He did not, in fact, do an ything;he didn’t sell even one share. It is a clear testament to his belief in thecompany, and a clear illustration of staying true to his principles.THE INSTITUTIONAL IMPERATIVEIf management stands to gain wisdom and credibility by facing mistakes,why do so many annual reports trumpet only successes? If allocation ofcapital is so simple and logical, why is capital so poorly allocated? TheInvesting Guidelines: Management Tenets 97answer, Buffett has learned, is an unseen force he calls “the institutionalimperative”—the lemminglike tendency of corporate management toimitate the behavior of other managers, no matter how silly or irrationalthat behavior may be.He says it was the most surprising discovery of his business career.At school, he was taught that experienced managers were honest, intel-ligent, and automatically made rational business decisions. Once out inthe business world, he learned instead that “rationality frequently wiltswhen the institutional imperative comes into play.”16Buffett believes that the institutional imperative is responsible forseveral serious, but distressingly common, conditions: “(1) [The organi-zation] resists any change in its current direction; (2) just as work ex-pands to fill available time, corporate projects or acquisitions willmaterialize to soak up available funds; (3) any business craving of theleader, however foolish, will quickly be supported by detailed rate-of-return and strategic studies prepared by his troops; and (4) the behaviorof peer companies, whether they are expanding, acquiring, setting ex-ecutive compensation or whatever, will be mindlessly imitated.”17Buffett learned this lesson early. Jack Ringwalt, head of NationalIndemnity, which Berkshire acquired in 1967, helped Buffett discoverthe destructive power of the imperative. While the majority of insur-ance companies were writing insurance policies on terms guaranteed toproduce inadequate returns or worse, a loss, Ringwalt stepped awayfrom the market and refused to write new policies. (For the full story,refer to Chapter 3.) Buffett recognized the wisdom of Ringwalt’s deci-sions and followed suit. Today, Berkshire’s insurance companies stilloperate on this principle.What is behind the institutional imperative that drives so manybusinesses? Human nature. Most managers are unwilling to look fool-ish and expose their company to an embarrassing quarterly loss whenother “lemming” companies are still able to produce quarterly gains,even though they assuredly are heading into the sea. Shifting directionis never easy. It is often easier to follow other companies down the samepath toward failure than to alter the direction of the company.Admittedly, Buffett and Munger enjoy the same protected positionhere as in their freedom to be candid about bad news: They don’t have toworry about getting fired, and this frees them to make unconventionaldecisions. Still, a manager with strong communication skills should be98 THE WARREN BUFFETT WAYable to convince owners to accept a short-term loss in earnings and achange in the direction of their company if it means superior results overtime. Inability to resist the institutional imperative, Buffett has learned,often has less to do with the owners of the company than the willingnessof its managers to accept fundamental change.Even when managers accept the notion that their company mustradically change or face the possibility of shutting down, carrying outthis plan is too difficult for most managers. Many succumb to thetemptation to buy a new company instead of facing the financial facts ofthe current problem.Why would they do this? Buffett isolates three factors he feels mostinfluence management’s behavior. First, most managers cannot controltheir lust for activity. Such hyperactivity often finds its outlet in busi-ness takeovers. Second, most managers are constantly comparing thesales, earnings, and executive compensation of their business with othercompanies in and beyond their in dustry. These comparisons invariablyinvite corporate hyperactivity. Lastly, Buffett believes that most man-agers have an exaggerated sense of their own management capabilities.Another common problem is poor allocation skills. As Buffett pointsout, CEOs often rise to their position by excelling in other areas ofthe company, including administration, engineering, marketing, or pro-duction. Because they have little experience in allocating capital, mostCEOs instead turn to their staff members, consultants, or investmentbankers. Here the institutional imperative begins to enter the decision-making process. Buffett points out that if the CEO craves a potential ac-quisition requiring a 15 percent return on investment to justify thepurchase, it is amazing how smoothly his troops report back to him thatthe business can actually achieve 15.1 percent.The final justification for the institutional imperative is mindlessimitation. If companies A, B, and C are all doing the same thing, wellthen, reasons the CEO of company D, it must be all right for our com-pany to behave the same way.It is not venality or stupidity, Buffett believes, that positions thesecompanies to fail. Rather, it is the institutional dynamics of the impera-tive that make it difficult to resist doomed behavior. Speaking before agroup of Notre Dame students, Buffett displayed a list of thirty-sevenfailed investment banking firms. All of them, he explained, failed eventhough the volume of the New Y ork Stock Exchange had multipliedInvesting Guidelines: Management Tenets 99fifteenfold. These firms were headed by hard-working individuals withvery high IQs, all of whom had an intense desire to succeed. Buffettpaused; his eyes scanned the room. “Y ou think about that,” he saidsternly. “How could they get a result like that? I’ll tell you how,” hesaid, “mindless imitation of their peers.”18Coca-ColaWhen Goizueta took over Coca-Cola, one of his first moves was tojettison the unrelated businesses that the previous CEO had developedand return the company to its core business, selling syrup. It was aclear demonstration of Coca-Cola’s ability to resist the institutionalimperative.Reducing the company to a single-product business was undeniably abold move. What made Goizueta’s strategy even more remarkable washis willingness to take this action at a time when others in the industrywere doing the exact opposite. Several leading beverage companies wereinvesting their profits in other unrelated businesses. Anheuser-Buschused the profits from its beer business to invest in theme parks. Brown-Forman, a producer and distributor of wine and spirits, invested its prof-its in china, crystal, silver, and luggage businesses, all of them with muchlower returns. Seagram Company, Ltd., a global spirits and wine busi-ness, bought Universal Studios. Pepsi, Coca-Cola’s chief beverage rival,bought snack businesses (Frito-Lay) and restaurants including Taco Bell,Kentucky Fried Chicken, and Pizza Hut.Not only did Goizueta’s action focus the company’s attention on itslargest and most important product, but it worked to reallocate thecompany’s resources into its most profitable business. Since the eco-nomic returns of selling syrup far outweighed the economic returns ofthe other businesses, the company was now reinvesting its profits in itshighest-returning business.Clayton HomesIn an industry that is strangled by problems of its own making, Claytonstands out for its strong management and smart business model.Manufactured homes now constitute 15 percent of the total housingunits in the United States. In many respects, their historically negative100 THE WARREN BUFFETT WAYimage is disappearing. The homes are becoming more like site-builthomes in size and scope; construction quality has consistently improved;they are competitive with rentals; they have tax advantages in that own-ers do not have to own the underlying property; and mortgages are nowsupported by other large mortgage companies and government agencies,such as Fannie Mae.Still, since they are considerably less expensive than site-builthomes (2002 average pric es: $48,800 compared with $164,217), theprimary market remains consumers toward the lower end of the eco-nomic range. In 2002, over 22 million Americans lived in manufac-tured homes, with a median family income of $26,900.19Many manufacturers were caught in a self-inflicted double bind inthe 1990s, and many of them failed. One arm of this double bind wasthe increasing acceptance and popularity of these homes, which rushedmany in the industry toward overexpansion. The other squeeze factorwas simple greed.The homes are sold through retailers that are either independentdealers representing several manufacturers or company-owned outlets.Right there, on the same lot, shoppers usually find a financing opera-tion, often a subsidiary of the manufacturer/retailer. In and of itself,there is nothing wrong with this; it sounds like, and in fact operateslike, a car dealership. The problem is that it has become endemic in theindustry to push sales to anybody who can sign their name to a salesagreement, regardless of credit history, based on loans that are destinedto default.Selling scads of units creates immediate profits for the retailers andhuge commissions for the salespeople. It also creates enormous economicproblems longer range. It is an unfortunate reality that many homes aresold to people with fragile economic circumstances, and repossessionrates are high, which reduces the demand for new homes. As unemploy-ment rates rose in the past few years, so did loan delinquencies. Factor inthe oversupply of inventory from the 1990s, and the tight economictimes that diminished spending across the board, and it adds up to asorry state of affairs for the industry as a whole.Much of the problem can be traced to the very weak loans that areso common in the manufactured home busin ess. Why do they all do it?Because they all do it, and each company fears losing market share if itdoes otherwise. That, in a nutshell, is the curse of the institutionalInvesting Guidelines: Management Tenets 101imperative. Clayton has not been completely immune, but it hasavoided the most egregious faults.Most importantly, Clayton compensates its salespeople in a differentway. The commissions of sellers and managers are based not only on thenumber of homes sold but also on the quality and performance of theloans made. Sales staff share the financial burden when loan payments aremissed, and share the revenue when the loan performs well. Take, for ex-ample, a sales manager who handles the sale and financing of a $24,000mobile home. If the customer cannot make the payments, Clayton wouldtypically lose $2,500, and the manager is responsible for up to half theloss.20But if the loan performs, the manager shares up to half of that, too.That puts the burden to avoid weak loans on the sales personnel.The methodology paid off: In 2002, “only 2.3 percent of the home-owners with a Clayton mortgage are 30 days delinquent.”21That isroughly half the industry delinquency rate. In the late 1990s, when morethan 80 factories and 4,000 retailers went out of business, Clayton closedonly 31 retailers and did not shut any factories. By 2003, when Buffettentered the picture, Clayton had emerged from the downturn in theeconomy in general and the mobile home in dustry in particular strongerand better positioned than any of its competitors.Warren Buffett bought Clayton Homes because he saw in JimClayton a hardworking self-starter with strong management skills and alot of smarts. Clayton showed not once but twice that he could weathera downturn in the industry by structuring his business model in a waythat avoided an especially damaging institutional imperative.The Washington Post CompanyBuffett has told us that even third-rate newspapers can earn substantialprofits. Since the market does not require high standards of a paper,it is up to management to impose its own. And it is management’s highstandards and abilities that can diffe rentiate the business’s returnswhen compared with its peer group. In 1973, if Buffett had invested inGannett, Knight-Ridder, the New York Times, or Times Mirror thesame $10 million he did in the Post, his investment returns would havebeen above average, reflecting the exceptional economics of the news-paper business during this period. But the extra $200-$300 millionin market value that the Washington Post gained over its peer group,102 THE WARREN BUFFETT WAYBuffett says, “came, in very large part, from the superior nature of themanagerial decisions made by Kay [Katherine Graham] as compared tothose made by managers of most other media companies.”22Katherine Graham had the brains to purchase large quantities of thePost’s stock at bargain prices. She also had the courage, he said, to con-front the labor unions, reduce expenses, and increase the business valueof the paper. Washington Post shareholders are fort unate that KatherineGraham positioned the company so favorably.WARREN BUFFETT ON MANAGEMENT, ETHICS,AND RATIONALITYIn all his communications with Berkshire shar eholders, and indeed withthe world at large, Buffett has consistently emphasized his search forhonest and straightforward managers. He believes that not only arethese binding corporate values in today’s world, they are also pivotal is-sues that determine a company’s ultimate success and profitability inthe long term. Executive compensation, stock options, director inde-pendence, accounting trickery—these issues strike a very personal chordwith Buffett, and he does not hesitate to let us know how he feels.CEO Avarice and the Institutional ImperativeIn his 2001 letter to shar eholders, Buffett wro te, “Charlie and I are dis-gusted by the situation, so common in the last few years, in which share-holders have suffered billions in losses while the CEOs, promoters andother higher-ups who fathered these disasters have walked away withextraordinary wealth. Indeed, many of these people were urging in-vestors to buy shares while concurrently dumping their own, sometimesIn evaluating people, you look for three qualities: integrity,intelligence, and energy. If you don’t have the first, the othertwo will kill you.23WARREN BUFFETT , 1993Investing Guidelines: Management Tenets 103using methods that hid their actions. To their shame, these business lead-ers view shareholders as patsi es, not partners. ...T h e r e  i s  n o  s h o r t a g e  o fegregious conduct in corporate America.”24The accounting scandals set off alarm bells ac ross the United States,especially for anyone who held stock in a company 401(k) pl an. Share-holders started asking questions and wondering if their companies weremanaging their affairs honestly and transparently. W e all became in-creasingly aware that there were major problems in the system: CEOswere getting huge paychecks while using company money for privatejets and ostentatious parties, and directors were often rubber-stampingwhatever decisions management decided to take. It seemed as if not oneCEO could resist the temptation to get in on the enormous salaries andextravagant lifestyles en joyed by others. That is the institutional imper-ative at its most destructive.Things have not improved much, according to Buffett. In his 2003letter to shar eholders, he lambasted the seemingly unabated “epidemic ofgreed.” He wrote, “Overreaching by CEOs greatly accelerated in the1990s as compensation packages gained by the most avaricious—a titlefor which there was vigorous competition—were promptly replicatedelsewhere. In judging whether Corpor ate America is serious about re-forming itself, CEO pay remains the acid test. To date, the results aren’tencouraging.”25This from a man who has no stock options and still payshimself $100,000 a year.Stock OptionsIn addition to these lofty salaries, executives of publicly traded com-panies are customarily rewarded with fixed-price stock options, oftentied to corporate earnings but very seldom tied to the executiv e’s actualjob performance.This goes against the grain for Buffett. When stock options arepassed out indiscriminately, he says, managers with below-average per-formance are rewarded just as generously as the managers who have hadexcellent performance. In Buffett’s mind, even if your team wins thepennant, you don’t pay a .350 hitter the same as a .150 hitter.At Berkshire, Buffett uses a compensation system that rewards man-agers for performance. The reward is not tied to the size of the enter-prise, the individual’s age, or Berkshire’s overall profits. Buffett believes104 THE WARREN BUFFETT WAYthat good unit performance should be rewarded whether Berkshire’sstock price rises or falls. Instead, executives are compensated based ontheir success at meeting performance goals keyed to their area of respon-sibility. Some managers are rewarded for increasing sales, others for re-ducing expenses or curtailing capital expenditures. At the end of theyear, Buffett does not hand out stock options—he writes checks. Someare quite large. Managers can use the cash as they please. Many use it topurchase Berkshire stock.Even when stock options are treated as a legitimate aspect of exec-utive compensation, Buffett cautions us to watch how they are ac-counted for on a company’s balance sheet. He believes they should beconsidered an expense so that their effect on reported earnings is clear.This seems so obvious as to be unarguable; sadly, not all companies seeit this way.In Buffett’s mind, this is another facet of the ready acceptance of ex-cessive pay. In his 2003 letter to shar eholders, he wro te, “When CEOsor their representatives meet with compensation committees, too oftenone side—the CEO’s—has cared far more than the other about whatbargain is struck. A CEO, for example, will always regard the differencebetween receiving options for 100,000 shares or for 500,000 as monu-mental. To a comp committee, however, the difference may seem unim-portant—particularly if, as has been the case at most companies, neithergrant will have any effect on reported earnings. Under these conditions,the negotiation often has a ‘play money’ quality.”26Buffett’s strong feelings about this subject can be seen in his re-sponse to Amazon’s announcement in April 2003 that it would start ex-pensing stock options. Buffett wrote to CEO Jeff Bezos that it took“particular courage” and his decision would be “recognized and re-membered.”27A week later, Buffett bought $98.3 million of Amazon’shigh-yield bonds.Malfeasant Accounting and Shady Financing IssuesAnyone who was reading a daily newspaper in the second half of 2001could not help but be aware of the growing tide of corporate wrong-doing. For months, we all watched with som ething amounting to horroras one scandal followed another, involving some of the best-knownnames in American industry. All came to be lumped under the umbrellaInvesting Guidelines: Management Tenets 105term “accounting scandal” because the misdeeds centered on accountingtrickery and because the outside auditors who were supposed to verifythe accounting reports were themselves named as parties to the actions.It’s far broader than accounting, of course; it’s about greed, lies, andcriminal acts. But accounting reports are a good place to look for signs oftrouble. In his 2002 letter to shar eholders, Buffett warned investors to becareful in reading annual reports. “If you’ve been a reader of financial re-ports in recent years,” he wrote, “you’ve seen a flood of ‘pro-forma’earnings statements—tabulations in which managers invariably show‘earnings’ far in excess of those allowed by their auditors. In these pre-sentations, the CEO tells his owners ‘don’t count this, don’t count that—just count what makes earnings fat.’ Often, a forget-all-this-bad-stuffmessage is delivered year after year without management so much asblushing.”29Buffett is plainly disgusted by the scandals. “The blatant wrongdoingthat has occurred has betrayed the trust of so many millions of shar ehold-ers.” He blames the heady days of the 1990s, the get-rich-quick periodhe calls the Great Bubble, for the deterioration of corporate ethics. “Asstock prices went up,” he says, “the behavioral norms of managers wentdown. By the late 90s, CEOs who trav eled the high road did notencounter heavy traffic. Too many have behaved badly, fudging numbersand drawing obscene pay for mediocre business achievements.”30Andin too many cases, their companies’ directors, charged with u pholdingshareholder interests, failed miserably.Director Negligence and Corporate GovernancePart of the problem, Buffett suggests, is the shameful tendency ofboards of directors to blithely rubber-stamp whatever senior manage-ment asks for. It is a question of independence and guts—the degree toIn the long run, of course, trouble awaits managements thatpaper over operating problems with accounting maneuvers.28WARREN BUFFETT , 1991 [N OTE THE DATE OF THIS REMARK .]106 THE WARREN BUFFETT WAYwhich directors are willing to honor their fiduciary responsibility at therisk of displeasing the senior executives. That willingness, or lack of it,is on display in boardrooms across the country.“True independence—meaning the willingness to chal lenge aforceful CEO when something is wrong or foolish—is an enormo uslyvaluable trait in a director,” Buffett writes. “It is also rare. The place tolook for it is among high-grade people whose interests are in line withthose of rank and file shar eholders.” Buffett illuminates his position bydescribing what he looks for in members of the Berkshire Hathawayboard—“very high integrity, business savvy, shar eholder orientationand a genuine interest in the company.”31CAN WE REALLY PUT A VALUE ON MANAGEMENT?Buffett would be the first to admit that evaluating managers along histhree dimensions—rationality, candor, and independent thinking—ismore difficult than measuring financial performance, for the simplereason that human beings are more complex than numbers.Indeed, many analysts believe that because measuring human activityis vague and imprecise, we simply cannot value management with anydegree of confidence, and therefore the exercise is futile. Without a dec-imal point, they seem to suggest, there is nothing to measure. Othershold the view that the value of management is fully reflected in the com-pany’s performance statistics, including sales, profit margins, and returnon equity, and no other measuring stick is necessary.Both opinions have some validity, but neither is strong enough tooutweigh the original premise. The reason for taking the time to eval-uate management is that it gives you early warning signs of eventual fi-nancial performance. If you look closely at the words and actions of amanagement team, you will find clues that can help you measure thevalue of their work long before it shows up in the company’s financialreports or in the stock pages of your daily newspaper. Doing so willtake some digging on your part, and that may be enough to discouragethe weak of heart or the lazy. That is their loss, and your gain.How to go about gathering the necessary information? Buffett offersa few tips. He suggests reviewing annual reports from a few years back,paying special attention to what management said then about strategiesfor the future. Then compare those plans to today’s results: How fullyInvesting Guidelines: Management Tenets 107were they realized? Also compare strategies of a few years ago to thisyear’s strategies and ideas: How has the thinking changed? Buffett alsosuggests that it can be very valuable to compare annual reports of thecompany you are interested in with reports from similar companies inthe same industry. It is not always easy to find exact duplicates, but evenrelative performance comparison can yield insights.Expand your reading horizons. Be alert for articles in newspapersand financial magazines about the company you are interested in andabout its industry in general. Read what the company’s executives haveto say and what others say about them. If you notice that the chairmanrecently made a speech or presentation, get a copy from the investorrelations department and study it carefully. Make use of the company’sweb pages for up-to-the-minute information. In every way you canthink of, raise your antennae. The more you develop the habit of stayingalert for information, the easier the process will become.It must be said here, with sadness, that it is possible that the docu-ments you study are filled with inflated numbers, half-truths, and de-liberate obfuscations. W e all know the names of the companies chargedwith doing this; they are a rogue’s gallery of American businesses, andsome of their leaders are finding themselves with lots of time in prisonto rethink their actions. Sometimes the manipulations are so skillfulthat even forensic accountants are fooled; how then can you, an investorwithout any special knowledge, fully understand what you are seeing?The regrettable answer is, you cannot. Y ou can learn how to readannual reports and balance sheets—and you should—but if they arebased on flagrant deception and lies, you might not be able to detect it.I read annual reports of the company I’m looking at and I readthe annual reports of the competitors. That’s the main sourcematerial.WARREN BUFFETT , 1993W e like to keep things simple, so the chairman can sit aroundand read annual reports.32CHARLIE MUNGER , 1993108 THE WARREN BUFFETT WAYI do not mean to say that you should simply give up. Keep doingyour research, and strive to be alert for signs of trouble. It should notsurprise us that Warren Buffett gives us some valuable tips:33•“Beware of companies displaying weak accounting.” In particu-lar, he cautions us to watch out for companies that do not expensestock options. It’s an obvious red flag that other less obvious ma-neuvers are also present.• Another red flag: “unintelligible footnotes.” If you can’t under-stand them, he says, don’t assume it’s your shortcoming; it’s a fa-vored tool for hiding something management doesn’t want youto know.• “Be suspicious of companies that trumpet earnings projectionsand growth expectations.” No one can know the future, and anyCEO who claims to do so is not worthy of your trust./tile3In conclusion, Buffett wants to work with managers who are straightshooters, who are candid with their shareholders and their employees.His unshakable insistence on ethical behavior as a condition of doingbusiness has taken on added significance since the outbreak of corporatescandals. However, he would be the first to acknowledge that takingsuch a stand will not, in and of itself, insulate investors from losses trig-gered by fraud.I must add my own caution: I cannot promise that following thetenets of the Warren Buffett Way described in this book will protectyou 100 percent. If company officials are flat-out lying to investorsthrough fraudulent accounting or other illegal maneuvers and if they’regood at it, it can be difficult, often impossible, to detect in time. Even-tually the perpetrators end up in jail, but by then the damage to share-holders is done; the money is gone. What I can say is this: If you adoptthe careful, thoughtful way of looking at investments that Buffettteaches us and take the time to do your homewo rk, you will be rightmore often than you are wrong, and certainly more often than thosewho allow themselves to be pushed and pulled willy-nilly by headlinesand rumor.