615Investing GuidelinesBusiness TenetsWe come now to the heart of the mat ter—the essence of WarrenBuffett’s way of thinking about investing. Warren Buffett is sothoroughly identified with the stock market that even peoplewho have no interest in the market know his name and reputation.Others, those who read the financial pages of the newspaper only casu-ally, may know him as the head of an unusual company whose stocksells for upward of $90,000 per share. And even the many new investorswho enthusiastically devote careful attention to market news think ofhim primarily as a brilliant stock picker.Few would deny that the world’s most famous and most successfulinvestor is indeed a brilliant stock picker. But that seriously understatesthe case. His real gift is picking companies. I mean this in two senses:First, Berkshire Hathaway, in addition to its famous stock portfolio,owns many companies directly. Second, when considering new stockpurchases, Buffett looks at the underlying business as thoroughly as hewould if he were buying the whole company, using a set of basic prin-ciples developed over many years. “When investing,” he sa ys, “we viewourselves as business analysts—not as market analysts, not as macro-economic analysts, and not even as security analysts.”1If we go back through time and review all of Buffett’s purchases,looking for the commonalities, we find a set of basic principles, or tenets,62 THE WARREN BUFFETT WAYthat have guided his decisions. If we extract these tenets and spread themout for a closer look, we see that they naturally group themselves intofour categories:1.Business tenets. Three basic characteristics of the business itself2.Management tenets. Three important qualities that senior man-agers must display3.Financial tenets. Four critical financial decisions that the com-pany must maintain4.Value tenets. Two interrelated guidelines about purchase priceNot all of Buffett’s acquisitions will display all the tenets, but takenas a group, these tenets constitute the core of his investment approach.They can also serve as guideposts for all investors. In this chapter, welook at the first group—the characteristics of the business—and studyhow some of Buffett’s investment decisions reflect those tenets.For Buffett, stocks are an abstraction.3He does not think in terms ofmarket theories, macroeconomic concepts, or sector trends. Rather, hemakes investment decisions based only on how a business operates. Hebelieves that if people choose an investment for superficial reasons insteadof business fundamentals, they are more likely to be scared away at thefirst sign of trouble, in all likelihood losing money in the process. Buffettconcentrates on learning all he can about the business under considera-tion, focusing on three main areas:1. Is the business simple and understandable?2. Does the business have a consistent operating history?3. Does the business have favorable long-term prospects?I want to be in businesses so good even a dummy can makemoney.2WARREN BUFFETT , 1988Investing Guidelines: Business Tenets 63A SIMPLE AND UNDERSTANDABLE BUSINESSIn Buffett’s view, investors’ financial success is correlated to the degreein which they understand their investment. This understanding is a dis-tinguishing trait that separates investors with a business orientation frommost hit-and-run investors, people who merely buy shares of stock. It iscritical to the buy-or-don’t-buy decision for this reason: In the finalanalysis, after all their research, investors must feel convinced that thebusiness they are buying into will perform well over time. They musthave some confidence in their estimate of its future earnings, and that hasa great deal to do with how well they understand its business fundamen-tals. Predicting the future is always tricky; it becomes enormously moredifficult in an arena you know nothing about.Over the years, Buffett has owned a vast array of businesses: a gasstation; a farm implementation business; textile companies; a major re-tailer; banks; insurance companies; advertising agencies; aluminum andcement companies; newspapers; oil, mineral, and mining companies;food, beverage, and tobacco companies; t elevision and cable companies.Some of these companies he controlled, and in others he was or is a mi-nority shareholder. But in all cas es, he was or is acutely aware of howthese businesses operate. He understands the revenues, expenses, cashflow, labor relations, pricing flexibility, and capital allocation needs ofevery single one of Berkshire’s holdings.Buffett is able to maintain a high level of knowledge about Berk-shire’s businesses because he purposely limits his s elections to companiesthat are within his area of financial and intellectual understanding. Hecalls it his “circle of competence.” His logic is compelling: If you own acompany (either fully or some of its shares) in an industry you do not un-derstand, it is impossible to accurately interpret developments and there-fore impossible to make wise decisions. “Invest within your circle ofcompetence,” he counsels. “It’s not how big the circle is that counts, it’show well you define the parameters.”4Critics have argued that Buffett’s self-imposed restrictions excludehim from industries that offer the greatest investment potential, such astechnology. His response: Investment success is not a matter of howmuch you know but how realistically you define what you don’t know.“An investor needs to do very few things right as long as he or she avoids64 THE WARREN BUFFETT WAYbig mistakes.”5Producing above-average results, Buffett has learned,often comes from doing ordinary things. The key is to do those thingsexceptionally well.Coca-Cola CompanyThe business of Coca-Cola is relatively simple. The company purchasescommodity inputs and combines them to manufacture a concentratethat is sold to bottlers. The bottlers then combine the concentr ate withother ingredients and sell the finished product to retail outlets includingminimarts, supermarkets, and vending machines. The company alsoprovides soft drink syrups to fountain retailers, who sell soft drinks toconsumers in cups and glasses.The company’s name brand products include Coca-Cola, DietCoke, Sprite, PiBB Xtra, Mello Yello, Fanta soft drinks, Tab, Dasani,and Fresca. The company’s beverages also include Hi-C brand fruitdrinks, Minute Maid orange juice, Powerade, and Nestea. The companyowns 45 percent of Coca-Cola Enterprises, the largest bottler in theUnited States, and 35 percent of Coca-Cola Amatil, an Australian bot-tler that has interests not only in Australia but also in New Zealand andEastern Europe.The strength of Coca-Cola is not only its name-brand products butalso its unmatched worldwide distribution system. Today, internationalsales of Coca-Cola products account for 69 percent of the company’snet sales and 80 percent of its profits. In addition to Coca-Cola Amatil,the company has equity interests in bottlers located in Mexico, SouthAmerica, Southeast Asia, Taiwan, Hong Kong, and China.The Washington Post CompanyBuffett’s grandfather once owned and edited the Cuming County Demo-crat, a weekly newspaper in W est Point, Nebraska. His grandmotherhelped out at the paper and also set the type at the family’s printing shop.His father, while attending the University of Nebraska, edited the DailyNebraskan. Buffett himself was once the circulation manager for theLincoln Journal. It has often been said that if Buffett had not embarkedon a business career, he most surely would have pursued journalism.(Text continues on page 67.)65CASE IN POINTBENJAMIN MOORE , 2000In November 2000, Warren Buffett and Berkshire Hathawaypaid about $1 billion for Benjamin Moore & Co., the Mercedesof paint companies. Founded in 1883 by the Moore brothers intheir Brooklyn basement, Benjamin Moore today is fifth largestpaint manufacturer in the United States and has an unmatchedreputation for quality.It was reported that Buffett paid a 25 percent premium overthe stock’s then current price. On the surface, that might seemto contradict one of Buffett’s iron-clad rules: that he will actonly when the price is low enough to constitute a margin ofsafety. However, we also know that Buffett is not afraid to payfor quality. Even more revealing, the stock price jumped 50percent to $37.62 per share after the deal was announced. Thistells us that either Buffett found yet another company that wasundervalued or else that the rest of the investing world was bet-ting on Buffett’s acumen and traded the price up even higher—or both.Benjamin Moore is just the sort of company Buffett likes.The paint business is nothing if not simple and easy to under-stand. One of the largest paint manufacturers in the UnitedStates and the tenth largest spec ialty paint producer, Be njaminMoore makes one of the finest, if not thefinest, architecturalpaint in the United States. The company is not just famous forthe quality of its paint, however; architects, designers, andbuilders regard Benjamin Moore colors as the gold standard fortheir industry. In fact, the company dev eloped the first com-puterized color matching system, and it is still recognized as theindustry standard. With roughly 3,200 colors, Benjamin Moorecan match almost any shade.Buffett also tends to buy companies that have a consistentoperating history and as a result, upon buying a company, he(Continued)66does not expect to have to change much. His modus operandi isto buy companies that are already successful and still have po-tential for growth. Benjamin Moore’s current success and statusin the marketplace over the decades speak to the company’sconsistent product quality, production, brand strength, and ser-vice. Now, 121 years after its founding, the company brings inabout $80 million of profit on $900 million in sales.Looking at Benjamin Moore, Buffett also saw a well-runcompany. Although there were questions a few years ago aboutMoore’s retail strategy, the company has undertaken a brand re-juvenation program in the United States and Canada. BenjaminMoore increased its retail presence in independent stores with itsSignature Store Program and bought certain retail stores, such asManhattan-based Janovic, outright. Just before the Berkshire ac-quisition in 2000, the company underwent a cost-cutting andstreamlining program to improve its operations.All that adds up to favorable long-term prospects. BenjaminMoore is a classic example of a company that has turned a com-modity into a franchise. Buffett’s definition of a franchise is onewhere the product is needed or desired, has no close substitute,and is unregulated. Most people in the building industry wouldagree that Moore is a master in all three categories. Consideringthe company’s arsenal of over 100 chemists, chemical engineers,technicians, and support staff that maintain the company’s strictproduct standards and develop new products, the risk of Ben-jamin Moore paints becoming a perishable commodity is slight.The on-going and rigorous testing to which all the Mooreproducts are subjected is a sign that Benjamin Moore will con-tinue to set industry standards. Finally, although BenjaminMoore products are not cheap, their quality commands pricingpower that defeats any notion of inflation.Investing Guidelines: Business Tenets 67In 1969, Buffett bought his first major newspaper, the Omaha Sun,along with a group of weekly papers; from them he learned the businessdynamics of a newspaper. He had four years of hands-on experience run-ning a newspaper before he bought his first share of the Washington Post.Wells FargoBuffett understands the banking business very well. In 1969, Berkshirebought 98 percent of the Illinois National Bank and Trust Companyand held it until 1979, when the Bank Holding Act required Berkshireto divest its interest. During that ten-year period, the bank took itsplace beside Berkshire’s other controlled holdings and Buffett reportedits sales and earnings each year in Berkshire’s annual reports.Just as Jack Ringwalt helped Buffett understand the intricacy of theinsurance business (see Chapter 3), Gene Abegg, who was chairman ofIllinois National Bank, taught Buffett about the banking business. Helearned that banks are profitable businesses as long as loans are issued re-sponsibly and costs are curtailed. A well-managed bank could not onlygrow its earnings but also earn a handsome return on equity.The key is “well managed.” The long-term value of a bank, asBuffett learned, is determined by the actions of its managers, becausethey control the two critical variables: costs and loans. Bad managershave a way of running up the costs of operations while making foolishloans; good managers are always looking for ways to cut costs and rarelymake risky loans. Carl Reichardt, then chairman of W ells Fargo, hadrun the bank since 1983, with impressive results. Under his leadership,growth in earnings and return on equity were both above average andoperating efficiencies were among the highest in the country. Reichardthad also built a solid loan portfolio.CONSISTENCYWarren Buffett cares very little for stocks that are “hot” at any givenmoment. He is far more inter ested in buying into companies that he be-lieves will be successful and profitable for the long term. And whilepredicting future success is certainly not foolproof, a steady track recordis a relatively reliable indicator. When a company has demonstrated68 THE WARREN BUFFETT WAYconsis tent results with the same type of products year after year, it is notunreasonable to assume that those results will continue.As long, that is, as nothing major changes. Buffett avoids purchasingcompanies that are fundamentally changing direction because their pre-vious plans were unsuccessful. It has been his experience that under-going major business changes increases the likelihood of committingmajor business errors.“Severe change and exceptional returns usually don’t mix,” Buffettobserves.6Most individuals, unfortunately, invest as if the opposite weretrue. Too often, they scramble to purchase stocks of companies that arein the midst of a corporate reorganization. For some unexplained reason,says Buffett, these investors are so infatuated with the notion of what to-morrow may bring that they ignore today’s business reality. In contrast,Buffett says, his approach is “very much profiting from lack of change.That’s the kind of business I like.”7Buffett also tends to avoid businesses that are solving difficult prob-lems. Experience has taught him that turnarounds seldom turn. It can bemore profitable to expend energy purchasing good businesses at reason-able prices than difficult businesses at cheaper prices. “Charlie and I havenot learned how to solve difficult business problems,” Buffett admits.“What we have learned is to avoid them. To the extent that we havebeen successful, it is because we concentrated on identifying one-foothurdles that we could step over rather than because we acquired anyability to clear seven-footers.”8The Coca-Cola CompanyNo other company today can match Coca-Cola’s consistent operatinghistory. This is a business that was started in the 1880s selling a bever-age product. Today, 120 years later, Coca-Cola is selling the same bev-erage. Even though the company has periodically invested in unrelatedbusinesses, its core beverage business has remained largely unchanged.The only significant difference today is the company’s size and itsgeographic reach. One hundred years ago, the company employed tentraveling salesmen to cover the entire United States. At that point, thecompany was selling 116,492 gallons of syrup a year, for annual sales of$148,000.9Fifty years later, in 1938, the company was selling 207 mil lionInvesting Guidelines: Business Tenets 69cases of soft drinks annually (having converted sales from gallons tocases). That year, an article in Fortune noted, “It would be hard toname any company comparable to Coca-Cola and selling, as Coca-Coladoes, an unchanged product that can point to a ten year record an ythinglike Coca-Cola’s.”10Today, nearly seventy years after that article was published, Coca-Cola is still selling syrup. The only difference is the increase in quantity.By the year 2003, the company was selling over 19 billion cases of softdrink in more than 200 countries, generating $22 billion a year in sales.The Washington Post CompanyBuffett tells Berkshire’s shar eholders that his first f inancial connectionwith the Washington Post was at age 13. He delivered both the Wash-ington Post and the Times-Herald on his paper route while his fatherserved in Congress. Buffett likes to remind others that with this dualdelivery route he merged the two papers long before Phil Grahambought the Times-Herald.Obviously, Buffett was aware of the newspaper’s rich history. Andhe considered Newsweek magazine a predictable business. He quicklylearned the value of the company’s television stations. The WashingtonPosthad been reporting for years the stellar performance of its broadcastdivision. Buffett’s personal experience with the company and its ownsuccessful history led him to believe that the Washington Post was aconsistent and dependable business performer.GilletteFew companies have dominated their industry as long as Gillette. It wasthe lead brand of razors and blades in 1923 and the lead brand in 2003.Maintaining that position for so many years has required the company tospend hundreds of millions of dollars inventing new, improved products.Even though Wilkinson, in 1962, developed the first coated stainlesssteel blade, Gillette bounced back quickly and has since worked hard toremain the world’s leading innovator of shaving products. In 1972,Gillette developed the popular twin-blade Trac II; in 1977, the Atrarazor with its pivoting head. Then, in 1989, the company developed the70 THE WARREN BUFFETT WAYpopular Sensor, a razor with independently suspended blades. Gillette’sconsistent success is a result of its innovation and patent protection of itsnew products.Clayton HomesIn fiscal year 2002, Clayton reported its twenty-eighth consecutiveyear of profits, $126 million, up 16 percent from the year before, onrevenue of $1.2 billion.11This performance is all the more extraordi-nary when we consider the fearsome problems that others in the indus-try experienced. In the late 1990s, over 80 factories and 4,000 retailerswent out of business, a victim of two colliding forces: Many manufac-turers had expanded too quickly and at the same time had made toomany weak loans, which inevitably led to widespread repossessions, fol-lowed by diminished demand for new housing.Clayton had a different way of doing business (more about their poli-cies in Chapter 6). Its sound management and skillful handling of roughtimes enabled the company to maintain profitability even as competitorswere going bankrupt.FAVORABLE LONG-TERM PROSPECTS“W e like stocks that generate high returns on invested capital,” Buffetttold those in attendance at Berkshire’s 1995 annual meeting, “wherethere is a strong likelihood that it will continue to do so.”12“I look atlong-term competitive advantage,” he later added, “and [whether] that’ssomething that’s enduring.”13That means he looks for what he termsfranchises.According to Buffett, the economic world is divided into a smallgroup of franchises and a much larger group of commodity businesses,most of which are not worth purchasing. He defines a franchise as acompany whose product or service (1) is needed or desired, (2) has noclose substitute, and (3) is not regulated.Individually and collectively, these create what Buffett calls a moat—something that gives the company a clear advantage over others and pro-tects it against incursions from the competition. The bigger the moat, themore sustainable, the better he likes it. “The key to investing,” he says,Investing Guidelines: Business Tenets 71“is determining the competitive advantage of any given company and,above all, the durability of that advantage. The products or services thathave wide, sustainable moats around them are the ones that deliver re-wards to investors.”14(To see what a moat looks like, read the story ofLarson-Juhl in Chapter 8.)A franchise that is the only source of a product people want canregularly increase prices without fear of losing market share or unit vol-ume. Often a franchise can raise its prices even when demand is flat andcapacity is not fully utilized. This pricing flexibility is one of the defin-ing characteristics of a franchise; it allows franchises to earn above-average returns on invested capital.Another defining characteristic is that franchises possess a greateramount of economic goodwill, which enables them to better withstandthe effects of inflation. Another is the ability to survive economicmishaps and still endure. In Buffett’s succinct phrase, “The definition ofa great company is one that will be great for 25 to 30 years.”16Conversely, a commodity business offers a product that is virtuallyindistinguishable from the products of its competitors. Years ago, basiccommodities included oil, gas, chemicals, wheat, copper, lumber, andorange juice. Today, computers, automobiles, airline service, banking,and insurance have become commodity-type products. Despite mam-moth advertising budgets, they are unable to achieve meaningful prod-uct differentiation.Commodity businesses, generally, are low-returning businesses and“prime candidates for profit trouble.”17Since their product is basicallyno different from anyone els e’s, they can compete only on the basis ofprice, which severely undercuts profit margins. The most dependable (Text continues on page 77.)Look for the durability of the franchise. The most importantthing to me is figuring out how big a moat there is around thebusiness. What I love, of course, is a big castle and a big moatwith piranhas and crocodiles.15WARREN BUFFETT , 199472CASE IN POINTJUSTIN INDUSTRIES , 2000In July 2000, Berkshire Hathaway bought 100 percent of Texas-based Justin Industries for $600 million. The company has twodivisions: Justin Brands, which comprises four brands of W est-ern boots, and Acme Building Brands, with companies thatmake bricks and other building products.Cowboy boots and bricks. It is one of Berkshire’s most in-teresting, and most colorful, acquisitions. And it says a greatdeal about Warren Buffett.In many ways, Justin epitomizes all the business strengthsthat Buffett looks for. Clearly, it is simple and understandable;there’s nothing particularly complex about boots or bric ks. Itrepresents a remarkably consistent operating history, as a lookat the separate companies will show; all have been at the samebusiness for many decades, and most are at least a century old.Finally, and most especially, Buffett recognized favorable long-term prospects, because of one aspect that he highly admires: inwhat are essentially commodity in dustries, the products haveachieved franchise status.Justin BrandsThe company that is now Justin began in 1879 when H. J. ( Joe)Justin, who was then 20 years old, started making boots forcowboys and ranchers from his small shop in Spanish Fort,Texas, near the Chisholm Trail. When Joe died in 1918, hissons John and Earl took over and in 1925 moved the companyto Fort Worth. In 1948, Joe’s grandson John Jr. bought out hisrelatives (except Aunt Enid), and guided the business for thenext fifty years.John Justin Jr. was a legendary figure in Fort Worth. Hebuilt an empire of W estern boots by acquiring three rival com-panies, worked out the deal to buy Acme Bricks in 1968, andserved a term as Fort Worth mayor. He retired in 1999, butstayed on as chairman emeritus, and that’s why, at the age of 83,it was he who welcomed Warren Buffett to town in April 2000.73Justin Boots, known for rugged, long-lasting boots forworking cowboys, remains the flagship brand. But Justin Brandsincludes other names.• Nocona, founded in 1925 by Enid Justin. One of JoeJustin’s seven children, Enid started working in her father’scompany when she was twelve. After her nephews movedthe family business from the small town of Nocona, Texas,to Fort Worth in 1925, Enid set up a rival company in theoriginal locale. Against all odds, she built a success. Fiercecompetitors for years, the two companies were joined underthe Justin name in 1981. Enid, who was then 85, reluctantlyagreed to the merger because of her declining health.• Chippewa, founded in 1901 as a maker of boots for log-gers, today makes sturdy hiking boots and quality outdoorwork boots. It was acquired by Justin in 1985.• T ony Lama, which dates back to 1911, when Tony Lama,who had been a cobbler in the U.S. Army, opened a shoe-repair and boot-making shop in El Paso. The boots quicklybecame a favorite of local ranchers and cowboys who valuedthe good fit and long-lasting quality. In recent years, formany the Tony Lama name has become synonymous withhigh-end boots handcrafted from exotic leathers such as boa,alligator, turtle, and ostrich, many with prices near $500. In1990, Tony Lama Jr., chairman and CEO, agreed to mergewith archrival Justin.Two groups of people buy W estern-style boots: those whowear them day in and day out, because they can’t imaginewearing anything else; and those who wear them as fashion.The first group is the heart of Justin’s customer base, but thesecond group, while smaller, does have an impact on sales vol-ume as fashion trends twist and turn.When big-name designers like Ralph Lauren and CalvinKlein show W estern styles in their catalogs, boot sales climb. Butfashion is notoriously fickle, and the company struggled in thelate 1990s. After a peak in 1994, the sales of W estern bootsbegan to decline. In 1999, Justin’s stock price dipped below $13.(Continued)74John Justin Jr. retired in April 1999, and John Roach, formerhead of the Tandy Corp., came in to lead a restructuring. In justover a year, the new management engineered an impressiveturnaround—adding new footwear products, consolidating theexisting lines to eliminate duplicate designs, and instituting effi-ciencies in manufacturing and distribution. In April 2000, thestreamlined company announced first quarter results: footwearsales rose 17 percent to $41.1 million, and both net earnings andgross margins increased significantly.Two months later, Berkshire Hathaway announced it hadreached an agreement to buy the company, prompting BearStearns analyst Gary Schneider to comment, “This is goodnews for employees. Management made all the changes lastyear. They’ve already taken the tough measures necessary tolower costs.”18Today the boot division of Justin has 4,000 vendors andabout 35 percent of the W estern footwear market; in stores thatspecialize in W estern apparel, some 70 percent of the boots onthe shelves are Justin brands. Most prices start at around $100.In the higher price brackets (several hundred dollars and up),Justin has about 65 percent of market share.Acme Building BrandsThe other division of Justin Industries is also a pioneer Texascompany that is more than a century old. Founded in 1891 inMilsap, Texas, Acme became a Justin company in 1968, whenJohn Justin Jr. bought it. Today, Acme is the largest and mostprofitable brick manufacturer in the country.Because long-distance shipping costs are prohibitive, brickstend to be a regional product. Acme dominates its region(Texas and five surrounding states) with more than 50 percentof market share. In its six-state area, Acme has 31 productionfacilities, including 22 brick plants, its own sales offices, andits own fleet of trucks. Builders, contractors, and homeownerscan order bricks direct from the company, and they will bedelivered on Acme trucks. Acme sells more than one billion75bricks a year, each one stamped with the Acme logo, and eachone guaranteed for 100 years.Demand for bricks is tied to housing starts and, therefore,subject to changes in interest rates and in the overall economy.Even a run of bad weather can affect sales. Nonetheless, Acmefared better during the techno-crazed 1990s than the bootcompanies, and today is still the chief Justin money-maker. Inaddition to its bricks, Acme Building Brands includes Feather-lite Building Products Corporation (concrete masonry) andthe American Tile Supply Company, maker of ceramic andmarble tiles.The Berkshire DealFor years Justin was largely ignored by Wall Street. With justtwo divisions, it was not large enough to be a conglomerate.Yet, operating in two different categories made it som ething ofa puzzlement. As John Justin noted in 1999, just before he re-tired, “The analysts who understand the footwear businessdon’t understand the building materials business, and the otherway around.”19Warren Buffett understands both. For one thing, Berk-shire already owned several footwear companies, so he hadyears to learn the industry. More to the point, he understandsstable, steady businesses that make products people never stopneeding.And the timing was right. The company with a reputationfor more than 100 years of quality was facing rocky times; itsstock price had dropped 37 percent over the prior five years, andthere was pressure to split the company into two parts. Buffett’swell-known preference for simple, low-tech businesses madethis a perfect fit.When Buffett first met with John Justin in Fort Worth, heremarked that the city reminded him of Omaha; he meant it asa great compliment. When he looked into the two com ponentsof the company, he saw something else he admir es: franchise (Continued)76quality. Both divisions of Justin have managed to turn them-selves into a franchise, through a combination of top quality,good marketing, and shrewd positioning.Acme sells a product that most people consider a commodity.Who, after all, can name the brand of bricks they prefer? Acmecustomers, that’s who. With a skillful marketing campaign fea-turing football legend Troy Aikman, Acme has made itself sowell known that when Texans were recently asked to name theirfavorite brand of brick, 75 percent of res pondents said Acme.That brand consciousness is reinforced every time a consumerpicks up a brick and sees the Acme logo stamped into it.The boots, too, have established themselves as franchises.Spend a few minutes in any W estern-apparel retail outlet, andyou’ll hear customers say things like “My son is ready for somenew Justins” or “Show me what you’ve got in Tony Lamas”more often than you hear “I’m looking for some cowboy boots.”When they mention the boots by name, and when they’re will-ing to pay top price for top quality, that’s a franchise.After the improvements of its new management team in1999 and 2000, Justin began attracting attention. According toBear Stearns analyst Gary Schneider, there was widespread in-terest from many buyers, including Europeans, but Buffett’swas the first offer the company seriously contemplated.20Berkshire’s offer was for $22 per share in cash. That repre-sented a 23 percent premium over closing stock price, but Buf-fett was not fazed. “It was a chance to get not only one goodbusiness but two good businesses at one time,” he remarked.“A double dip, in effect. First-class businesses with first-classmanagements, and that’s just what we look for.” Nor, headded, did he have plans to change anything. “W e buy businessthat are running well to start with. If they needed me in FortWorth, we wouldn’t be buying it.”21The day after the dealwas announced, Justin’s stock price jumped 22 percent, andWarren Buffett returned to Omaha with a brand-new pair ofostrich-skin Tony Lamas.Investing Guidelines: Business Tenets 77way to make a commodity business profitable, then, is to be the low-cost provider.The only other time commodity businesses turn a profit is duringperiods of tight supply—a factor that can be extremely difficult topredict. In fact, a key to determining the long-term profitability ofa commodity business, Buffett notes, is the ratio of “supply-tight tosupply-ample years.” This ratio, however, is often fractional. The mostrecent supply-tight period in Berkshire’s textile division, Buffett quips,lasted the “better part of a morning.”The Coca-Cola CompanyShortly after Berkshire’s 1989 public announcement that it owned 6.3percent of the Coca-Cola Company, Buffett was interviewed by Mel-lisa Turner, a business writer for the Atlanta Constitution. She askedBuffett a question he has been asked often: Why hadn’t he purchasedshares in the company sooner? By way of answer, Buffett related whathe was thinking at the time he finally made the decision.“Let’s say you were going away for ten years,” he explained, “andyou wanted to make one investment and you know everything that youknow now, and you couldn’t change it while you’re gone. What wouldyou think about?” Of course, the business would have to be simple andunderstandable. Of course, the company would have to have demon-strated a great deal of business consistency over the years. And ofcourse, the long-term prospects would have to be favorable. “If I cameup with anything in terms of certainty, where I knew the market wasgoing to continue to grow, where I knew the leader was going to con-tinue to be the leader—I mean worldwide—and where I knew therewould be big unit growth, I just don’t know an ything like Coke. I’d berelatively sure that when I came back they would be doing a hell of a lotmore business than they do now.”22But why purchase at that particular time? Coca-Cola’s business at-tributes, as described by Buffett, have existed for several decades. Whatcaught his eye, he confesses, were the changes occurring at Coca-Cola,during the 1980s, under the leadership of Roberto Goizueta.Goizueta, raised in Cuba, was Coca-Cola’s first foreign chief exec-utive officer. In 1980, Robert Woodruff, the company’s 91-year-oldpatriarch, brought him in to correct the problems that had plagued the78 THE WARREN BUFFETT WAYcompany during the 1970s. It was a dismal period for Coca-Cola—dis-putes with bottlers, accusations of mistreatment of migrant workers atthe company’s Minute Maid groves, environmen talists’ cl aim thatCoke’s “one way” containers contributed to the country’s growing pol-lution problem, and the Federal Trade Commission charge that thecompany’s exclusive franchise system violated the Sherman Anti-TrustAct. Coca-Cola’s international business was reeling as well.One of Goizueta’s first acts was to bring together Coca-Cola’s topfifty managers for a meeting in Palm Springs, California. “Tell mewhat we’re doing wrong,” he said. “I want to know it all and once it’ssettled, I want 100 percent loyalty. If a nyone is not happy, we will makeyou a good settlement and say goodbye.”23Goizueta encouraged his managers to take intelligent risks. Hewanted Coca-Cola to initiate action rather than to be reactive. He begancutting costs. And he demanded that any business that Coca-Cola ownedmust optimize its return on assets. These actions immediately translatedinto increasing profit margins. And captured the attention of WarrenBuffett.The Washington Post Company“The economics of a dominant newspaper,” Buffett once wrote, “areexcellent, among the very best in the world.”24The vast majority ofU.S. newspapers operate without any direct competition. The owners ofthose newspapers like to believe that the exceptional profits they earneach year are a result of their paper’s journalistic quality. The truth, saidBuffett, is that even a third-rate newspaper can generate adequate prof-its if it is the only paper in town. That makes it a classic franchise, withall the benefits thereof.It is true that a high-quality paper will achieve a greater penetrationrate, but even a mediocre paper, he explains, is essential to a communityfor its “bulletin board” appeal. Every business in town, every home seller,every individual who wants to get a message out to the community needsthe circulation of a newspaper to do so. The paper’s owner receives, in ef-fect, a royalty on every business in town that wants to advertise.In addition to their franchise quality, newspapers possess valuableeconomic goodwill. As Buffett points out, newspapers have low capitalneeds, so they can easily translate sales into profits. Even expensiveInvesting Guidelines: Business Tenets 79computer-assisted printing presses and newsroom electronic systems arequickly paid for by lower fixed wage costs. Newspapers also are able toincrease prices relatively easily, thereby generating above-average re-turns on invested capital and reducing the harmful effects of inflation.Buffett figures that a typical newspaper could double its price and stillretain 90 percent of its readership.The McLane CompanyMcLane is perched on the edge of great growth potential. Now that itis no longer part of Wal-Mart, it is free to pursue arrangements withWal-Mart’s competitors, such as Target and other large stores in theUnited States. This, combined with the company’s focus on efficiencyand investment in enterprise-wide software systems, freight manage-ment, and point-of-sales systems among other automated processes, willenable McLane to maintain price efficiency and service quality.At the time Buffett bought McLane, some of the industry players,such as Fleming and U.S. Food Service, a division of Royal Ahold,were going through difficult times for various reasons. Although it isdoubtful that this influenced Buffett’s decision, it was said at the timethat if Fleming did indeed go under, an extra $7 billion worth of busi-ness would be up for grabs.The Pampered ChefThe Pampered Chef has demonstrated a consistency that many olderbusinesses might well envy, with a growth rate of 22 percent each yearfrom 1995 to 2001. And the long-term outlook is strong. According tothe Direct Selling Association, party plan businesses raked in more than$7 billion nationwide in 2000, an increase of $2.7 billion since 1996.Christopher herself is not slowing down. She believes that Ameri-can cupboards have plenty of room for more products and points outthat Mary Kay, a direct-sell cosmetics company, has a sales force of600,000—giving her p lenty of room to grow. Christopher is develop-ing new products, such as ceramic serving ware, and is expanding intoCanada, the United Kingdom, and Germany. Finally, the company isstructured in such a way that it does not need a lot of capital to expandand it has no sizable competition in its category.