293“Our Main BusinessIs Insurance”The Early Days ofBerkshire HathawayWhen the Buffett Partnership took control of Berkshire Hathawayin 1965, stockholders’ equity had dropped by half and loss fromoperations exceeded $10 million. Buffett and Ken Chace, whomanaged the textile group, labored intensely to turn the textile millsaround. Results were disappointing; returns on equity struggled to reachdouble digits.Amid the gloom, there was one bright spot, a sign of things tocome: Buffett’s deft handling of the company’s common stock portfo-lio. When Buffett took over, the corporation had $2.9 million in mar-ketable securities. By the end of the first year, Buffett had enlarged thesecurities account to $5.4 million. In 1967, the dollar return from in-vesting was three times the return of the entire textile division, whichhad ten times the equity base.Nonetheless, over the next decade Buffett had to come to gripswith certain realities. First, the very nature of the textile businessmade high returns on equity improbable. Textiles are commodities30 THE WARREN BUFFETT WAYand commodities by definition have a difficult time differentiatingtheir products from those of competitors. Foreign competition, whichemployed a cheaper labor force, was squeezing profit margins. Second,to stay competitive, the textile mills would require significant capitalimprovements—a prospect that is frightening in an inflationary envi-ronment and disastrous if the business returns are anemic.Buffett made no attempt to hide the difficulties, but on severaloccasions he explained his thinking: The textile mills were the largestemployer in the area; the work force was an older age group with rela-tively nontransferable skills; management had shown a high degree ofenthusiasm; the unions were being reasonable; and lastly, he believedthat the textile business could attain some profits.However, Buffett made it clear that he expected the textile groupto earn positive returns on modest capital expenditures. “I won’t closedown a business of subnormal profitability merely to add a fraction of apoint to our corporate returns,” said Buffett. “I also feel it inappropri-ate for even an exceptionally profitable company to fund an operationonce it appears to have unending losses in prospect. Adam Smith woulddisagree with my first proposition and Karl Marx would disagree withmy second; the middle ground,” he explained “is the only position thatleaves me comfortable.”1In 1980, the annual report revealed ominous clues for the futureof the textile group. That year, the group lost its prestigious lead-offposition in the Chairman’s Letter. By the next year, textiles were notdiscussed in the letter at all. Then, the inevitable: In July 1985, Buffettclosed the books on the textile group, thus ending a business that hadstarted some one hundred years earlier.The experience was not a complete failure. First, Buffett learned avaluable lesson about corporate turnarounds: They seldom succeed. Sec-ond, the textile group generated enough capital in the earlier years tobuy an insurance company and that is a much brighter story.THE INSURANCE BUSINESSIn March 1967, Berkshire Hathaway purchased, for $8.6 million, theoutstanding stock of two insurance companies headquartered in Omaha:“Our Main Business Is Insurance” 31National Indemnity Company and National Fire & Marine InsuranceCompany. It was the beginning of a phenomenal success story. BerkshireHathaway the textile company would not long survive, but BerkshireHathaway the investment company that encompassed it was about totake off.To appreciate the phenomenon, we must recognize the true value ofowning an insurance company. Sometimes insurance companies are goodinvestments, sometimes not. They are, however, always terrific invest-ment vehicles. Policyholders, by paying their premiums, provide a con-stant stream of cash, known as the float. Insurance companies set asidesome of this cash (called the reserve) to pay claims each year, based ontheir best estimates, and invest the rest. To give themselves a high degreeof liquidity, since it is seldom possible to know exactly when claim pay-ments will need to be paid, most opt to invest in marketable securities—primarily stocks and bonds. Thus Warren Buffett had acquired not onlytwo modestly healthy compani es, but a cast-iron vehicle for managinginvestments.For a seasoned stock picker like Buffett, it was a perfect match. Injust two years, he increased the combined stocks and bonds portfolio ofthe two companies from $31.9 million to nearly $42 million. At thesame time, the insurance businesses themselves were doing quite well.In just one year, the net income of National Indemnity rose from $1.6million to $2.2 million.Buffett’s early success in insurance led him to expand aggressivelyinto this group. Over the next decade, he purchased three additionalinsurance companies and organized five more. And he has not sloweddown. As of 2004, Berkshire owns 38 insurance companies, includingtwo giants, the Government Employees Insurance Company (GEICO)and General Re, each of which has several subsidiaries.Government Employees Insurance CompanyWarren Buffett first became acquainted with GEICO while a studentat Columbia because his mentor, Ben Graham, was a chairman ofits board of directors. A favorite part of the Buffett lore is the now-familiar story of the young student visiting the company’s offices on aSaturday morning and pounding on the door until a janitor let him in.32 THE WARREN BUFFETT WAYBuffett then spent five hours getting an education in the insurancebusiness from the only person working that day: Lorimer Davidson, aninvestment officer who eventually became the company’s CEO. Whathe learned intrigued him.GEICO had been founded on a couple of simple but fairly revolu-tionary concepts: If you insure o nly people with good driving records,you’ll have fewer claims; and if you sell direct to customers, withoutagents, you keep overhead costs down.Back home in Omaha and working for his father’s brokerage firm, avery young Warren Buffett wrote a report of GEICO for a financialjournal in which he noted, in what may be the understatement of thatdecade, “There is reason to believe the major portion of growth liesahead.”2Buffett put $10,282 in the company, then sold it the next year at50 percent profit. But he always kept track of the company.Throughout the 1950s and 1960s, GEICO prospered. But then itbegan to stumble. For several years, the company had tried to expand itscustomer base by underpricing and relaxing its eligibility requirements,and two years in a row it seriously miscalculated the amount neededfor reserves (out of which claims are paid). The combined effect of thesemistakes was that, by the mid-1970s, the once-bright company was nearbankruptcy.When the stock price dropped from $61 to $2 a share in 1976,Warren Buffett started buying. Over a period of five years, with an un-shakable belief that it was a strong company with its basic competitiveadvantages unchanged, he invested $45.7 million in GEICO.The very next year, 1977, the company was profitable again. Overthe next two decades, GEICO had positive underwriting ratios—mean-ing that it took in more in premiums than it paid out in claims—in everyyear but one. In the industry, where negative ratios are the rule ratherthan the exception, that kind of record is almost unheard of. And thatexcess float gives GEICO tremendous resources for investments, bril-liantly managed by a remarkable man named Lou Simpson.By 1991, Berkshire owned nearly half (48 percent) of GEICO. Theinsurance company’s impressive performance, and Buffett’s interest inthe company, continued to climb. In 1994, serious discussions beganabout Berkshire’s buying the entire company, and a year later the finaldeal was announced. At that point, Berkshire owned 51 percent ofGEICO, and agreed to purchase the rest for $2.3 billion. This at a time“Our Main Business Is Insurance” 33when most of the insurance industry struggled with profitability andmost investors stayed away in droves. By the time all the paperwork wasdone, it was early 1996. At that point, GEICO officially became awholly owned unit of Berkshire Hathaway, managed independentlyfrom Berkshire’s other insurance holdings.Despite a rough spot or two, Buffett’s trust in the basic concept ofGEICO has been handsomely rewarded. From 1996 to 2003, thecompany increased its share of market from 2.7 to 5 percent. Thebiggest rough spot was the year 2000, when many policyholdersswitched to other insurers, and a very large, very expensive advertis-ing campaign ($260 million) failed to produce as much new businessas projected.Things began to stabilize in 2001, and by 2002, GEICO was solidlyback on track, with substantial growth in market share and in profits.That year, GEICO took in $6.9 billion in premiums, a huge jump fromthe $2.9 billion booked in 1996, the year Berkshire took full ownership.In April 2003, the company hit a major milestone when it added itsfive-millionth policyholder. By year-end 2003, those five million policy-holders had sent in premiums to taling $8.1 billion.Because its profit margins increase the longer policyholders stay withthe company, GEICO focuses on building long-term relationships withcustomers. When Buffett took over the company in 1996, he put in anew incentive system that rewards this focus. Half the bonuses and profitsharing are based on policies that are at least one year old, the other halfon policyholder growth.The average GEICO customer has more than one vehicle insured,pays premiums of approximately $1,100 year after year, but maintainsan excellent driving record. As Buffett once pointed out, the economicsof that formula are simple: “Cash is pouring in rather than going out.”3From the early bargain days of $2 a share in 1976, Buffett paidclose to $70 a share for the rest of the company in 1996. He makes noapologies. He considers GEICO a unique company with unlimited po-tential, something worth paying a hefty price for. In this perspective—if you want the very best companies, you have to be willing to pay upwhen they become available—Buffett’s partner, Charlie Munger, hasbeen a profound influence.Knowing their close working relationship, it’s a fair bet that Mungerhad a lot to say about Berkshire’s other big insurance decision.34 THE WARREN BUFFETT WAYGeneral Re CorporationIn 1996 Buffett paid $2.3 billion to buy the half of GEICO he didn’t al-ready own. Two years later, he paid seven times that amount—about $16billion in Berkshire Hathaway stock—to acquire a reinsurance companycalled General Re.4It was his biggest acquisition by far; some have calledit the single biggest event in Berkshire history.5Reinsurance is a sector of the insurance industry not well known tothe general public, for it doesn’t deal in the familiar products of life,homeowner ’s, or auto insurance. In simplest terms, reinsurers insureother insurance companies. Through a contract that spells out how thepremiums and the losses are to be apportioned, a reinsurer takes on somepercentage of the original company’s risk. This allows the primary in-surer to assume a higher level of risk, reduces its needs for operating cap-ital, and moderates loss ratios.For its part, the reinsurer receives a share of premiums earned, to in-vest as it sees fit. At General Re, that investment had been primarily inbonds. This, in fact, was a key part of Buffett’s strategy in buying thecompany.When Buffett acquired it, General Re owned approximately $19billion in bonds, $5 billion in stocks, and $15 billion in float. By usingBerkshire stock to buy the company and its heavy bond portfolio, Buf-fett in one neat step shifted the balance of Berkshire’s overall holdingsfrom 80 percent stocks to 60 percent. When the IRS ruled late in 1998that the merger involved no capital gains, that meant he had managed to“sell” almost 20 percent of Berkshire’s equity holdings, thus deftly side-stepping the worst of price volatility, essentially tax free.The only significant staff change that followed the merger was theelimination of General Re’s investment unit. Some 150 people had beenin charge of deciding where to invest the company’s funds; they were re-placed with just one individual—Warren Buffett.Just after Berkshire bought General Re, the company had one ofits worst years. In 1999, GenRe, as it is known, paid claims resultingfrom natural disasters (a major hailstorm in Australia, earthquakes inTurkey, and a devastating series of storms in Europe), from the largesthouse fire in history, and from high-profile movie flops (the companyhad insured box-office receipts). To make matters worse, GenRe waspart of a grouping of several insurers and reinsurers that became ensnarledin a workers’ compensation tangle that ended in multiple liti gation and a“Our Main Business Is Insurance” 35loss exposure of approximately $275 million for two years running(1998 and 1999).The problem, it later became apparent, was that GenRe was under-pricing its product. Premiums coming in, remember, will ultimately bepaid to policyholders who have claims. When more is paid out thancomes in, the result is an underwriting loss. The ratio of that loss to thepremiums received in any given year is known as the cost of float for thatyear. When the two parts of the formula are even, the cost of float iszero—which is a good thing. Even better is less than zero, or negativefloat cost, which is what happens when premiums outstrip loss payments,producing an underwriting profit. This is referred to as negative cost offloat, but it is actually a positive: The insurer is literally being paid tohold the capital.Float is a wonderful thing, Buffett has often commented, unl ess itcomes at too high a cost. Premiums that are too low or losses that are un-expectedly high adversely affect the cost of float; when both occur si-multaneously, the cost of float skyrockets.And that is just what happened with GenRe, although it wasn’tcompletely obvious at first. Buffett had realized as early as 1999 thatthe policies were underpriced, and he began working to correct it. Theeffects of such changes are not felt overnight, however, and in 2000,General Re experienced an underwriting loss of $1.6 billion, produc-ing a float cost of 6 percent. Still, Buffett felt able to report in his 2000letter to shar eholders that the situation was improving and he expectedthe upward trend to continue. Then, in a moment of terrible, uninten-tional foreshadowing, he added, “Absent a mega-catastrophe, we expectour float cost to fall in 2001.”6Some six months later, on September11, the nation had an enormous hole torn in its soul by a mega-catastrophe we had never imagined possible.In a letter to shar eholders that was sent out with the third quarter2001 report, Buffett wrote, “A mega-catastrophe is no surprise. Onewill occur from time to time, and this will not be our last. W e didnot, however, price for manmade mega-cats, and we were foolish innot doing so.”7Buffett estimated that Berkshire’s underwriting losses from the ter-rorist attacks on September 11 totaled $2.275 billion, of which $1.7 bil-lion fell to General Re. That level of loss galvanized a change at GenRe.More aggressive steps were taken to make sure the policies were pricedcorrectly, and that sufficient reserves were in place to pay claims. These36 THE WARREN BUFFETT WAYcorrective maneuvers were successful. In 2002, after five years of losses,GenRe reported its first underwriting profit, prompting Buffett to an-nounce at the 2002 annual meeting, “W e’re back.”/tile3Warren Buffett, as is well known, takes the long view. He is the firstto admit, with his trademark candor, that he had not seen the prob-lems at GenRe. That in itself is interesting, and oddly ironic, to Buf-fett’s observers. That such an experienced hand as Buffett could missthe problems demonstrates the complexity of the insurance industry.Had those problems been apparent, I have no doubt Buffett would nothave paid the price he did for GenRe. I’m also reasonably certain hewould have proceeded, however, because his line of sight goes to thelong term.The reinsurance industry offers huge potential, and a well-runreinsurance business can create enormous value for shar eholders. Buffettknows that better than most. So, even though GenRe’s pricing errorscreated problems in the short run, and even though he bought thoseproblems along with the company, this does not negate his basic con-clusion that a well-managed reinsurance company could create greatvalue for Berkshire. In a situation such as this, Buffett’s instinct is to fixthe problems, not unload the company.As he usually does, Buffett credits the company’s managers withrestoring underwriting discipline by setting rational prices for the poli-cies and setting up sufficient reserv es. Under their leadership, he wrotein the 2003 letter to shar eholders, General Re “will be a powerful en-gine driving Berkshire’s future profitability.”8At this writing, General Re is one of only two major global rein-surers with a AAA rating. The other is also a Berkshire company: theNational Indemnity reinsurance operation.Berkshire Hathaway Reinsurance GroupThe National Indemnity insurance operation inside Berkshire today is afar cry from the company that Buffett purchased in 1967. Different,that is, in operation and scope, but not in underlying philosophy.One aspect of National Indemnity that did not exist under itsfounder, Jack Ringwalt, is the reinsurance division. Today, this divi sion,“Our Main Business Is Insurance” 37run from National Indemnity’s office in Stamford, Connecticut, con-tributes powerfully to Berkshire’s revenues.The reinsurance group is headed by Ajit Jain, born in India and ed-ucated at the Indian Institute of Technology and at Harvard. He re-cently joked that when he joined Berkshire in 1982, he didn’t evenknow how to spell reinsurance, yet Jain has built a tremendously prof-itable operation that earns Buffett’s highest praise year in and year out.9Working on the foundation of Berkshire’s financial strength, thereinsurance group is able to write policies that other companies, evenother reinsurers, would shy away from. Some of them stand out becausethey are so unusual: a policy insuring against injury to superstar short-stop Alex Rodrigez for the Texas Rangers baseball team, or against a $1billion payout by an Internet lottery. Commenting on the latter, a vicepresident in the reinsurance division noted, “As long as the premium ishigher than the odds, we’re comfortable.”10The bulk of underwriting at the reinsurance group is not quite soflashy. It is, however, extremely profitable. Significant revenue in-creases occurred in 2002 and 2003. In the aftermath of September 11,many companies and individuals increased their insurance coverage,often significantly, yet there were no catastrophic losses in the twofollowing years. In 2003, the Berkshire Hathaway Reinsurance Groupbrought in $4.43 billion in premiums, bringing its total float to justunder $14 billion.Perhaps more significant, its cost of float that year was a negative3 percent—meaning there was no cost, but rather a profit. (In thiscase, remember, “negative” is a positive.) That is because the reinsur-ance group in 2003 had an underwriting gain (more premiums thanpayouts) of more than $1 billion. For comparison, that same year theGEICO underwriting gain was $452 million, and General Re’s was$145 million.It is no wonder Buffett says of J ain, “If you see Ajit at our annualmeeting, bow deeply.”11/tile3Warren Buffett understands the insurance business in a way that fewothers do. His success derives in large part from ackno wledging the es-sential commodity nature of the industry and elevating his insurancecompanies to the level of a franchise.38 THE WARREN BUFFETT WAYInsurance companies sell a product that is indistinguishable fromthose of competitors. Policies are standardized and can be copied by any-one. There are no trademarks, no patents, no advantages in location orraw materials. It is easy to get licensed and insurance rates are an openbook. Insurance, in other words, is a commodity product.In a commodity business, a common way to gain market share is tocut prices. In periods of intense competition, other companies were will-ing to sell insurance policies below the cost of doing business rather thanrisk losing market share. Buffett held firm: Berkshire’s insurance opera-tions would not move into unprofitable territory. Only once—at GeneralRe—did this happen, and it caught Buffett unaware.Unwilling to compete on price, Buffett instead seeks to distinguishBerkshire’s insurance companies in two other ways. First, by financialstrength. Today, in annual revenue and profit, Berkshire’s insurancegroup ranks second, only to AIG, in the property casualty industry. Ad-ditionally, the ratio of Berkshire’s investment portfolio ($35.2 billion) toits premium volume ($8.1 billion) is significantly higher than the indus-try average.The second method of differentiation involves Buffett’s underwrit-ing philosophy. His goal is simple: to always write large volumes ofinsurance but only at prices that make sense. If prices are low, he is con-tent to do very little business. This philosophy was instilled at NationalIndemnity by its founder, Jack Ringwalt. Since that time, says Buffett,Berkshire has never knowingly wavered from this underwriting disci-pline. The only exception is General Re, and its underpricing had aY ou can always write dumb insurance policies. There is an un-limited market for dumb insurance policies. And they’re verytroubling because the first day the premium comes in, that’s thelast time you see any new money. From then on, it’s all goingout. And that’s not our aim in life.12WARREN BUFFETT , 2001“Our Main Business Is Insurance” 39large impact on Berkshire’s overall performance for several years. Today,that unpleasant state of affairs has been rectified.Berkshire’s superior financial strength has distinguished its insuranceoperations from the rest of the industry. When competitors vanish fromthe marketplace because they are frightened by recent losses, Berkshirestands by as a constant supplier of insurance. In a word, the financial in-tegrity that Buffett has imposed on Berkshire’s insurance companies hascreated a franchise in what is otherwise a commodity business. It’s notsurprising that Buffett notes, in his typical straightforward way, “Ourmain business is insurance.”13The stream of cash generated by Berkshire’s insurance operations ismind-boggling: some $44.2 billion in 2003. What Buffett does with thatcash defines him and his company. And that takes us to our next chapter.