1419Investing inFixed-Income SecuritiesWarren Buffett is perhaps best known in the investment worldfor his decisions in common stocks, and he is famous for his“buy and hold” positions in companies such as Coca-Cola,American Express, the Washington Post, and Gillette. His activities arenot, however, limited to stocks. He also buys short-term and long-termfixed-income securities, a category that includes cash, bonds, and pre-ferred stocks. In fact, fixed-income investing is one of Buffett’s regularoutlets, provided—as always—that there are undervalued opportuni-ties. He simply seeks out, at any given time, those investments thatprovide the highest aftertax return. In recent years, this has includedforays into the debt market, including corporate and governmentbonds, convertible bonds, convertible preferred stock, and even high-yielding junk bonds.When we look inside these fixed-income transactions, what we seelooks familiar, for Buffett has displayed the same approach that he takeswith investments in stocks. He looks for margin of safety, commitment,and low prices (bargains). He insists on strong and honest management,good allocation of capital, and a potential for profit. His decisions donot depend on hot trends or market-timing factors but instead are savvyinvestments based on specific opportunities where Buffett believes thereare undervalued assets or securities.142 THE WARREN BUFFETT WAYThis aspect of Buffett’s investing style doesn’t receive a great deal ofattention in the financial press, but it is a critical part of the overall Berk-shire portfolio. Fixed-income securities represented 20 percent of Berk-shire’s investment portfolio in 1992; today, 14 years later, that percentagehas grown to about 30 percent.The reason for adding these fixed-income investments is simple:They were the best value at the time. Because of the absolute growth ofthe Berkshire Hathaway portfolio and the changing investment environ-ment, including a lack of publicly traded stocks that he finds attractive,Buffett has often turned to buying entire companies and to acquiringfixed-income securities. He wrote in his 2003 letter to shar eholders thatit was hard to find significantly undervalued stocks, “a difficulty greatlyaccentuated by the mushrooming of the funds we must deploy.”In that same 2003 letter, Buffett explained that Berkshire wouldcontinue the capital allocation practices it had used in the past: “If stocksbecome cheaper than entire businesses, then we will buy them aggres-sively. If selected bonds become attractive, as they did in 2002, we willagain load up on these securities. Under any market or economic condi-tions we will be happy to buy businesses that meet our standards. And,for those that do, the bigger, the better. Our capital is underutilizednow. It is a painful condition to be in but not as painful as doing some-thing stupid. (I speak from experience.)”1To some extent, fixed-income investments will always be necessaryfor Berkshire Hathaway’s portfolio because of Berkshire’s concentrationin insurance companies. To fulfill their obligation to policyholders,insurance companies must invest some of their assets in fixed-incomesecurities. Still, Berkshire holds a significantly smaller percentage offixed-income securities in its insurance investment portfolio comparedwith other insurance companies.Generally speaking, Buffett has tended to avoid fixed-income invest-ments (outside what was needed for the insurance portfolios) wheneverhe feared impending inflation, which would erode the future purchasingpower of money and therefore the value of bonds. Even though interestrates in the late 1970s and early 1980s approximated the returns of mostbusinesses, Buffett was not a net purchaser of long-term bonds. There al-ways existed, in his mind, the possibility of runaway inflation. In thatkind of environment, common stocks would have lost real value, butInvesting in Fixed-Income Securities 143bonds outstanding would have suffered far greater losses. An insurancecompany heavily invested in bonds in a hyperinflationary environmenthas the potential to wipe out its portfolio.Even though thinking of Buffett and bonds in the same sentence maybe a new idea for you, it will come as no surprise that he applies the sameprinciples as he does in valuing a company or stocks. He is a principle-based investor who will put his money in a deal where he sees a potentialfor profit, and he makes sure that the risk is priced into the deal. Even infixed-income transactions, his business owner’s perspective means thathe pays close attention to the issuing company’s management, values, andperformance. This “bond-as-a-business” approach to fixed-income in-vesting is highly unusual but it has served Buffett well.BONDSWashington Public Power Supply SystemBack in 1983, Buffett decided to invest in some bonds of the Washing-ton Public Power Supply System (WPPSS). The transaction is a clearexample of Buffett’s thinking in terms of the possible gains from buy-ing the bonds compared with those if he bought the entire company.On July 25, 1983, WPPSS (pronounced, with macabre humor,“Whoops”) announced that it was in default of $2.25 billion in munic-ipal bonds used to finance the uncompleted construction of two nuclearreactors, known as Projects 4 and 5. The state ruled that the local powerauthorities were not obligated to pay WPPSS for power they had previ-ously promised to buy but ultimately did not require. That decision ledto the largest municipal bond default in U.S. history. The size of thedefault and the debacle that followed depressed the market for publicpower bonds for several years. Investors moved quickly to sell their util-ity bonds, forcing prices lower and current yields higher.The cloud over WPPSS Projects 4 and 5 cast a shadow over Projects1, 2, and 3. But Buffett perceived significant differences between theterms and obligations of Projects 4 and 5 on the one hand and those ofProjects 1, 2, and 3 on the other. The first three were operational util-ities that were also direct obligations of Bonneville Power Administra tion,144 THE WARREN BUFFETT WAYa government agency. However, the problems of Projects 4 and 5 wereso severe that some were predicting they could weaken the credit posi-tion of Bonneville Power.Buffett evaluated the risks of owning municipal bonds of WPPSSProjects 1, 2, and 3. Certainly there was a risk that these bonds coulddefault and a risk that the interest payments could be suspended for aprolonged period. Still another factor was the upside ceiling on whatthese bonds could ever be worth. Even though he could purchase thesebonds at a discount to their par value, at the time of maturity theycould only be worth one hundred cents on the dollar.Shortly after Projects 4 and 5 defaulted, Standard & Poor’s suspendedits ratings on Projects 1, 2, and 3. The lowest coupon bonds of Projects 1,2, and 3 sank to forty cents on the dollar and produced a current yield of15 to 17 percent tax-free. The highest coupon bonds fell to eighty centson the dollar and generated a similar yield. Undismayed, from October1983 through June the following year, Buffett aggressively purchasedbonds issued by WPPSS for Projects 1, 2, and 3. By the end of June1984, Berkshire Hathaway owned $139 million of WPPSS Project 1, 2,and 3 bonds (both low-coupon and high-coupon) with a face value of$205 million.With WPPSS, explains Buffett, Berkshire acquired a $139 millionbusiness that could expect to earn $22.7 million annually after tax (thecumulative value of WPPSS annual coupons) and would pay those earn-ings to Berkshire in cash. Buffett points out there were few businessesavailable for purchase during this time that were selling at a discount tobook value and earning 16.3 percent after tax on unleveraged capital.Buffett figured that if he set out to purchase an unleveraged operatingcompany earning $22.7 million after tax ($45 million pretax), it wouldhave cost Berkshire between $250 and $300 million—assuming he couldfind one. Given a strong business that he understands and likes, Buffettwould have happily paid that amount. But, he points out, Berkshire paidhalf that price for WPPSS bonds to realize the same amount of earnings.Furthermore, Berkshire purchased the business (the bonds) at a 32 per-cent discount to book value.Looking back, Buffett admits that the purchase of WPPSS bondsturned out better than he expected. Indeed, the bonds outperformedmost business acquisitions made in 1983. Buffett has since sold theWPPSS low-coupon bonds. These bonds, which he purchased at aInvesting in Fixed-Income Securities 145significant discount to par value, doubled in price while annually pay-ing Berkshire a return of 15 to 17 percent tax-free. “Our WPPSS ex-perience, though pleasant, does nothing to alter our negative opinionabout long-term bonds,” said Buffett. “It only makes us hope that werun into some other large stigmatized issue, whose troubles have causedit to be significantly misappraised by the market.”2RJR NabiscoLater in the 1980s, a new investment vehicle was introduced to the fi-nancial markets. The formal name is high-yield bond, but most in-vestors, then and now, call them junk bonds.In Buffett’s view, these new high-yield bonds were different fromtheir predecessor “fallen angels”—Buffett’s term for investment-gradebonds that, having fallen on bad times, were downgraded by ratingsagencies. The WPPSS bonds were fallen angels. He described the newhigh-yield bonds as a bastardized form of the fallen angels and, he said,were junk before they were issued.Wall Street’s securities salespeople were able to promote the legiti-macy of junk bond investing by quoting earlier research that indicatedhigher interest rates compensated investors for the risk of default. Buf-fett argued that earlier default statistics were meaningless since theywere based on a group of bonds that differed significantly from the junkbonds currently being issued. It was illogical, he said, to assume thatjunk bonds were identical to the fallen angels. “That was an error sim-ilar to checking the historical death rate from Kool-Aid before drink-ing the version served at Jonestown.”3As the 1980s unfolded, high-yield bonds became junkier as new of-ferings flooded the market. “Mountains of junk bonds,” noted Buffett,“were sold by those who didn’t care to those that didn’t think and therewas no shortage of either.”4At the height of this debt mania, Buffettpredicted that certain capital enterprises were guaranteed to fail when itbecame apparent that debt-laden companies were struggling to meettheir interest payments. In 1989, Southmark Corporation and Inte-grated Resources both defaulted on their bonds. Even Campeau Corpo-ration, a U.S. retailing empire created with junk bonds, announced itwas having difficulty meeting its debt obligations. Then on October 13,1989, UAL Corporation, the target of a $6.8 billion management-union146 THE WARREN BUFFETT WAYled buyout that was to be financed with high-yield bonds, announcedthat it was unable to obtain financing. Arbitrageurs sold their UAL com-mon stock position, and the Dow Jones Industrial Average dropped 190points in one day.The disappointment over the UAL deal, coupled with the losses inSouthmark and Integrated Resources, led many investors to questionthe value of high-yield bonds. Portfolio managers began dumpingtheir junk bond positions. Without any buyers, the price for high-yield bonds plummeted. After beginning the year with outstandinggains, Merrill Lynch’s index of high-yield bonds returned a paltry 4.2percent compared with the 14.2 percent returns of investment-gradebonds. By the end of 1989, junk bonds were deeply out of favor withthe market.A year earlier, Kohlberg Kravis & Roberts had succeeded in pur-chasing RJR Nabisco for $25 billion financed principally with bankdebt and junk bonds. Although RJR Nabisco was meeting its financialobligations, when the junk bond market unrav eled, RJR bonds de-clined along with other junk bonds. In 1989 and 1990, during the junkbond bear market, Buffett began purchasing RJR bonds.Most junk bonds continued to look unattractive during this time, butBuffett figured RJR Nabisco was unjustly punished. The company’s sta-ble products were generating enough cash flow to cover its debt pay-ments. Additionally, RJR Nabisco had been successful in selling portionsof its business at very attractive prices, thereby reducing its debt-to-equity ratio. Buffett analyzed the risks of investing in RJR and concludedthat the company’s credit was higher than perceived by other investorswho were selling their bonds. RJR bonds were yielding 14.4 percent (abusinesslike return), and the depressed price offered the potential for cap-ital gains.So, between 1989 and 1990, Buffett acquired $440 million in dis-counted RJR bonds. In the spring of 1991, RJR Nabisco announced itwas retiring most of its junk bonds by redeeming them at face value. TheRJR bonds rose 34 percent, producing a $150 million capital gain forBerkshire Hathaway.Level 3 CommunicationsIn 2002, Buffett bought up large bundles of other high-yield corporatebonds, increasing his holdings in these securities sixfold to $8.3 billion.Investing in Fixed-Income Securities 147Of the total, 65 percent were in the energy industry and about $7 bil-lion were bought through Berkshire insurance companies.Describing his thinking in the 2002 letter to shar eholders, Buffettwrote, “The Berkshire management does not believe the credit risks as-sociated with the issuers of these instruments has correspondingly de-clined.” And this comes from a man who does not take unaccounted-for(read: unpriced) risks. To that point, he added, “Charlie and I detest tak-ing even small risks unless we feel we are being adequately compensatedfor doing so. About as far as we will go down that path is to occasionallyeat cottage cheese a day after the expiration date on the carton.”5In addition to pricing his risk, he also typically bought the securi-ties at far less than what they were worth, even at distressed prices, andwaited until the asset value was realized.What is particularly intriguing about these bond purchases is that, inall likelihood, Buffett would not have bought equity in many of thesecompanies. By the end of 2003, however, his high-yield investments paidoff to the tune of about $1.3 billion, while net income for the companythat year was a total of $8.3 billion. As the high-yield market skyrock-eted, some of the bonds were called or sold. Buffett’s comment at thetime was simply, “Yesterday’s weeds are being priced as today’s flowers.”In July 2002, three companies invested a total of $500 million inBroomfield, Colorado-based Level 3 Communications’ ten-year con-vertible bonds, with a coupon of 9 percent and a conversion price of$3.41, to help the company make acquisitions and to enhance the com-pany’s capital position. The three were Berkshire Hathaway ($100 mil-lion), Legg Mason ($100 million) and Longleaf Partners ($300 million).Technology-intensive companies are not Buffett’s normal acquisitionfare; he candidly admits he does not know of a way to properly valuetechnology companies. This was an expensive deal for Level 3 but it gavethem the cash and credibility when they needed it. For his part, Buffettobtained a lucrative (9 percent) investment with an equity position. Atthe time, Buffett was quoted as saying that investors should expect 7 to 8percent returns from the stock market annually, so at 9 percent, he wasahead of the game.There is another aspect to this story that is typical of Buffett—astrong component of managerial integrity and personal relationsh ips.Level 3 Communications was a spin-off from an Omaha-based con-struction company, Peter Kiewit Sons; Buffett’s friend Walter Scott Jr.,is both chairman emeritus of Kiewit and chairman of Level 3. Often148 THE WARREN BUFFETT WAYcalled Omaha’s first citizen, Scott was the driving force behind thecity’s zoo, its art museum, the engineering institute, and the NebraskaGame and Parks Foundation. Scott and Buffett have close personal andprofessional connections: Scott sits on Berkshire’s board, and the twomen are only floors away from each other at Kiewit Plaza.Even though Buffett knew Scott well and held him in high regard,he wanted the investment to be fair and transparent, with no questionthat the relationship between the two men unduly influenced the deal.So Buffett suggested that O. Mason Hawkins, chairman and chief ex-ecutive of Southeastern Asset Management, which advises LongleafPartners, set up the deal and negotiate the terms.By mid-June 2003, a year later, Buffett, Legg Mason, and LongleafPartners exchanged $500 million for a total of 174 million Level 3 com-mon shares (including an extra 27 million shares as an incentive to con-vert). (Longleaf had already converted $43 million earlier in the yearand then converted the rest, $457 million, in June.)Buffett received 36.7 million shares. In June, he sold 16.8 million for$117.6 million, and in November sold an additional 18.3 million sharesfor $92.4 million. Sure enough, Level 3 made good on its debt payments,and by the end of 2003, Buffett had doubled his money in 16 months.On top of that, his bonds had earned $45 million of interest, and he stillheld on to 1,644,900 of Level 3’s shares.QwestIn the summer of 2002, Berkshire purchased hundreds of millions of dol-lars of bonds issued by Qwest Communications, a struggling telecommu-nications company based in Denver formerly known as US W est, and itsregulatory operating subsidiary, Qwest Corporation. At the time, Qwesthad $26 billion in debt and was in the midst of restating its 1999, 2000,and 2001 financial statements. Bankruptcy rumors were flying. Qwestcorporate bonds were trading at thirty-five to forty cents on the dollarand the bonds of its operating company at eighty cents to the dollar.Some of the bonds were yielding 12.5 percent and were backed with spe-cific assets; other, riskier bonds were not. Buffett bought both.Most analysts at the time said that Qwest’s assets had enough valuefor Buffett to more than recover his investment given the current trad-ing price. And, if it had not been for the interest payments, QwestInvesting in Fixed-Income Securities 149would have had a healthy cash flow. The company’s m ost valuable assetwas the 14-state local phone service franchise, but Buffett had faith thatwith former Ameritech CEO, Dick Notebaert, at the helm, the com-pany would solve its problems.Amazon.comIn July 2002, only one week after Buffett wrote CEO Jeff Bezos a let-ter praising him for his decision to account for stock options as an ex-pense, Buffett bought $98.3 million of Amazon’s high-yield bonds.Buffett clearly appreciates managers who exhibit integrity andstrong values, and he has long advocated for expensing stock options,but he certainly was not on a goodwill mission when he bought theAmazon.com bonds. The Government Employees Insurance Company,the auto insurance unit of Berkshire, stood to make $16.4 million profiton the investment in high-yield bonds, a 17 percent return in ninemonths if Amazon repurchased the $264 million in 10 percent seniornotes that were issued in 1998. Later that summer, Buffett bought anadditional $60.1 million of Amazon’s 67⁄8percent convertible bonds.Assuming a price of $60.00 per $1,000 bond, the yield would have beena healthy 11.46 percent and the yield to maturity would have been evenhigher once interest payments were calculated in.It is well known that Buffett sticks with things he understands andshies away from technology. His involvement with the Internet is limitedto three online activities: He buys books, reads the Wall Street Journal,and plays bridge. Buffett even made fun of his own technology avoidancein his 2000 letter to shar eholders: “We have embraced the 21st centuryby entering such cutting-edge industries as brick, carpet and paint. Tryto control your excitement.”6So why was he attracted to Amazon’s bonds? First, he said, theywere “extraordinarily cheap.” Second, he had faith that the companywould thrive. Buffett may also have observed that Amazon.com had asimilar profile to many of his other investments in retail companies.Amazon.com generates its revenue through huge amounts of sales forlow prices and although it has low margins, the company is efficientand profitable. Buffett admires the way Bezos has created a mega-brand and the way he has pulled the company through some very dif-ficult times.150 THE WARREN BUFFETT WAYARBITRAGEArbitrage, in its simplest form, involves purchasing a security in onemarket and simultaneously selling the same security in another market.The object is to profit from price discrepancies. For example, if stock ina company was quoted as $20 per share in the London market and $20.01in the Tokyo market, an arbitrageur could profit from simultaneouslypurchasing shares of the company in London and selling the same sharesin Tokyo. In this case, there is no capital risk. The arbitrageur is merelyprofiting from the inefficiencies that occur between markets. Becausethis transaction involves no risk, it is appropriately called riskless arbi-trage. Risk arbitrage, on the other hand, is the sale or purchase of a secu-rity in hopes of profiting from some announced value.The most common type of risk arbitrage involves the purchase of astock at a discount to some future value. This future value is usuallybased on a corporate merger, liquidation, tender offer, or reorganization.The risk an arbitrageur confronts is that the future announced price ofthe stock may not be realized.To evaluate risk arbitrage opportunities, explains Buffett, you mustanswer four basic questions. “How likely is it that the promised eventwill indeed occur? How long will your money be tied up? What chanceis there that something bet ter will transpire—a competing takeoverbid, for example? What will happen if the event does not take place be-cause of antitrust action, financing glitches, etc.?”7Confronted with more cash than investable ideas, Buffett has oftenturned to arbitrage as a useful way to employ his extra cash. The ArkataCorporation transaction in 1981, where he bought over 600,000 sharesas the company was going through a leveraged buyout, was a good ex-ample. However, whereas most arbitrageurs might participate in fifty ormore deals annually, Buffett sought out only a few, financially largetransactions. He limited his participation to deals that were announcedand friendly, and he refused to speculate about potential takeovers or theprospects for greenmail.Although he never calculated his arbitrage performance over theyears, Buffett estimated that Berkshire has averaged an annual return ofabout 25 percent pretax. Because arbitrage is often a substitute forshort-term Treasury bills, Buffett’s appetite for deals fluctuated withBerkshire’s cash level.Investing in Fixed-Income Securities 151Nowadays, however, he does not engage in arbitrage on a largescale but rather keeps his excess cash in Treasuries and other short-termliquid investments. Sometimes Buffett holds medium-term, tax-exemptbonds as cash alternatives. He realizes that by substituting medium-term bonds for short-term Treasury bills, he runs the risk of principalloss if he is forced to sell at disadvantageous time. But because these tax-free bonds offer higher aftertax returns than Treasury bills, Buffett fig-ures that the potential loss is offset by the gain in income.With Berkshire’s historical success in arbitrage, shar eholders mightwonder why Buffett strayed from this str ategy. Admittedly, Buffett’s in-vestment returns were better than he imagined, but by 1989 the arbi-trage landscape started changing. The financial excesses brought about bythe leveraged buyout market were creating an environment of unbridledenthusiasm. Buffett was not sure when lenders and buyers would come totheir senses, but he has always acted cautiously when others are giddy.Even before the collapse of the UAL buyout in October 1989, Buffettwas pulling back from arbitrage transactions. Another reason may be thatdeals of a size that would really make a difference to Buffett’s very largeportfolio simply do not exist.In any case, Berkshire’s withdrawal from arbitrage was made easierwith the advent of convertible preferred stocks.CONVERTIBLE PREFERRED STOCKSA convertible preferred stock is a hybrid security that possesses charac-teristics of both stocks and bonds. Generally, these stocks provide in-vestors with higher current income than common stocks. This higheryield offers protection from downside price risk. If the common stockdeclines, the higher yield of the convertible preferred stock prevents itfrom falling as low as the common shares. In theory, the convertiblestock will fall in price until its current yield approximates the value of anonconvertible bond with a similar yield, credit, and maturity.A convertible preferred stock also provides the investor with the op-portunity to participate in the upside potential of the common shares.Since it is convertible into common shares, when the common rises, theconvertible stock will rise as well. However, because the convertiblestock provides high income and has the potential for capital gains, it is152 THE WARREN BUFFETT WAYpriced at a premium to the common stock. This premium is reflected inthe rate at which the preferred is convertible into common shares. Typi-cally, the conversion premium may be 20 percent to 30 percent. Thismeans that the common must rise in price 20 to 30 percent beforethe convertible stock can be converted into common shares without los-ing value.In the same way that he invested in high-yield bonds, Buffett in-vested in convertible preferred stocks whenever the opportunity pre-sented itself as better than other investments. In the late 1980s and1990s, Buffett made several investments in convertible preferred stocks,including Salomon Brothers, Gillet te, USAir, Champion International,and American Express.Takeover groups were challenging several of these companies, andBuffett became known as a “white knight,” rescuing companies fromhostile invaders. Buffett, however, certainly did not perceive himself as apro bono savior. He simply saw these purchases as good investmentswith a high potential for profit. At the time, the preferred stocks of thesecompanies offered him a higher return than he could find elsewhere.Some of the companies issuing the convertible preferred securitieswere familiar to Buffett, but in other cases he had no special insight aboutthe business nor could he predict with any confidence what its future cashflows would be. This unpredictability, Buffett explains, is the precise rea-son Berkshire’s investment was a convertible preferred issue rather thancommon stock. Despite the conversion potential, the real value of the pre-ferred stock, in his eye, was its fixed-income characteristics.There is one exception: MidAmerican. This is a multifaceted trans-action involving convertible preferred and common stock as well as debt.Here, Buffett values the convertible preferred for its fixed-income re-turn as well as for its future equity stake.MidAmericanOn March 14, 2000, Berkshire acquired 34.56 million shares of con-vertible preferred stock along with 900,942 shares of common stock inMidAmerican Energy Holdings Company, a Des Moines-based gas andelectric utility, for approximately $1.24 billion, or $35.05 per share.Two years later, in March 2002, Berkshire bought 6.7 million moreshares of the convertible preferred stock for $402 million. This broughtInvesting in Fixed-Income Securities 153Berkshire’s holdings to over 9 percent voting interest and just over 80percent economic interest in MidAmerican.Since 2002, Berkshire and certain of its subsidiaries also have ac-quired approximately $1.728 million of 11 percent nontransferabletrust preferred securities, of which $150 million were redeemed inAugust 2003. An additional $300 million was invested by David Sokol,MidAmerican’s chairman and CEO, and Walter Scott, MidAmerican’slargest individual shar eholder. It w as, in fact, Scott who initially ap-proached Buffett ; it was the first major deal they had worked on to-gether in their 50 years of friendship.The price Buffett paid for MidAmerican was toward the low end ofthe scale, which according to reports was $34 to $48 per share, so hewas able to achieve a certain discount. Yet Buffett also committed him-self and Berkshire to MidAmerican’s future growth to the extent thatthey would support MidAmerican’s acquisition of pipelines up to $15billion. As part of its growth strategy, MidAmerican, with Buffett’shelp, bought pipelines from distressed energy merchants.One such purchase happened almost immediately. In March 2002,Buffett bought, from Tulsa-based Williams Company, the Kern RiverGas Transmission project, which transported 850 million cubic feet ofgas per day over 935 miles. Buffett paid $960 million, including as-sumption of debt and an additional $1 billion in capital expenses.MidAmerican also went on to acquire Dynegy’s Northern Naturalgas pipeline later in 2002 for a bargain price of about $900 million, plusthe assumption of debt. Then, as of early January 2004, Berkshire an-nounced it would put up about 30 percent of the costs, or $2 billion, fora new natural gas pipeline tapping Alaskan North Slope natural gas re-serves that would boost U.S. reserves by 7 percent. MidAmerican chair-man Sokol said that without Buffett’s help, the investment would havebeen a strain on MidAmerican.In another but related transaction, a Berkshire subsidiary, MEHCInvestment Inc., bought $275 million of Williams’s preferred stock.This preferred stock does not generally vote with the common stock inthe election of directors, but in this deal Berkshire Hathaway gained theright to elect 20 percent of MidAmerican’s board as well as rights of ap-proval over certain important transactions.Later that summer, Buffett, along with Lehman Brothers, providedWilliams with a one-year $900 million senior loan at over 19 percent,154 THE WARREN BUFFETT WAYsecured by almost all the oil and gas assets of Barrett Resources, whichWilliams originally acquired for about $2.8 billion. It was reported thatBuffett’s loan was part of a $3.4 billion package of cash and credit thatWilliams, still an investment-grade company, n eeded to stave off b ank-ruptcy. The terms of the deal were tough and laden with conditions andfees that reportedly could have put the interest rate on the deal at 34percent. Still, it can be argued that not only was Buffett helping aninvestment-grade company out of a tight spot but also protecting him-self against the high risk of the situation.Although MidAmerican was not Buffett’s only foray into the then-beleaguered energy industry, it definitely was a complex, multifacetedinvestment. Buffett believed that the company was worth more than itsthen-current value in the market. He knew that the management, in-cluding Walter Scott and David Sokol, operated with great credibility,integrity, and intelligence. Finally, the energy industry can be a stablebusiness, and Buffett was hoping it would become even more stable andprofitable.In MidAmerican, Buffett bought a fixed-income investment withan equity potential. As with all his other investments, he took a charac-teristic ownership approach and committed himself to the company’sgrowth. He made some money off the Williams fixed-income instru-ments while protecting himself with covenants, high rates, and assets(Barrett Resources). As it turned out, by October 2003, MidAmericanhad grown into the third largest distributor of electricity in the UnitedKingdom and was providing electricity to 689,000 people in Iowa,while the Kern River and Northern Natural pipelines carried about 7.8percent of the natural gas in the United States. In total, the company hadabout $19 billion of assets and $6 billion in annual revenues from 25states and several other countries, and was yielding Berkshire Hathawayabout $300 million per year./tile3It is important to remember that Buffett thinks of convertible preferredstocks first as fixed-income securities and second as vehicles for appre-ciation. Hence the value of Berkshire’s preferred stocks cannot be anyless than the value of a similar nonconvertible preferred and, because ofconversion rights, is probably more.Investing in Fixed-Income Securities 155Buffett is widely regarded as the world’s greatest value investor,which basically means buying stocks, bonds, and other securities, andwhole companies, for a great deal less than their real worth, and waitinguntil the asset value is realized. So whether it is blue-chip stocks or high-yield corporate debt, Buffett applies his same principles. A value investorgoes where the deals are.Although Buffett is usually thought of as a long-term investor incommon stocks, he has the capability, stamina, and capital to wade intobeleaguered industries and pick out dia monds in the rough. He choosesspecific companies with honest, smart managers and cash-generatingproducts. He also chooses the instruments that make the most sense atthe time. Usually, he has been right and when h e’s not, he admits it. Asit turns out, his decision to move strongly into fixed-income instru-ments in 2002 and 2003 was definitely right. In 2002, Berkshire’s grossrealized gain from fixed-income investments was $1 billion. In 2003,that number almost tripled, to $2.7 billion.