17711The Psychologyof MoneyThe study of what makes us all tick is endlessly fascinating. It is es-pecially intriguing to me that it plays such a strong role in invest-ing, a world that people generally perceive to be dominated by coldnumbers and soulless data. When it comes to investment decisions, ourbehavior is sometimes erratic, often contradictory, and occasionallygoofy. Sometimes our illogical decisions are consistently illogical, andsometimes no pattern is discernible. W e make good decisions for inex-plicable reasons, and bad decisions for no good reason at all.What is particularly alarming, and what all inv estors need to grasp,is that they are often unaware of their bad decisions. To fully under-stand the markets and investing, we have to understand our own irra-tionalities. That is every bit as valuable to an investor as being able toanalyze a balance sheet and income statement.It is a complex, puzzling, intriguing study. Few aspects of humanexistence are more emotion-laden than our relationship to money. Andthe two emotions that drive decisions most profoundly are fear andgreed. Motivated by fear or greed, or both, investors frequently buy orsell stocks at foolish prices, far above or below a company’s intrinsicvalue. To say this another way, investor sentiment has a more pro-nounced impact on stock prices than a company’s fundamentals.Much of what drives people’s decisions about stock purchases canbe explained only by principles of human behavior. And since the178 THE WARREN BUFFETT WAYmarket is, by definition, the collective decisions made by all stock pur-chasers, it is not an exaggeration to say that psychological forces pushand pull the entire market.Anyone who hopes to particip ate profitably in the market, therefore,must allow for the i mpact of emotion. It is a two-sided issue: keepingyour own emotional profile under control as much as possible and beingalert for those times when other investors’ emotion-driven decisionspresent you with a golden opport unity.The first step in properly weighting the impact of emotion in in-vesting is understanding it. Fortunately, there is good information athand. In recent years, psychologists have turned their attention to howestablished principles of human behavior play out when the dynamic ismoney. This blending of economics and psychology is known as behav-ioral finance, and it is just now moving down from the universities’ivory towers to become part of the informed conversation among invest-ment professionals—who, if they look over their shoulders, will find theshadow of a smiling Ben Graham.THE TEMPERAMENT OF A TRUE INVESTORBen Graham, as we know, fiercely urged his students to learn the basicdifference between an investor and a speculator. The speculator, he said,tries to anticipate and profit from price changes; the investor seeks onlyto acquire companies at reasonable prices. Then he explained further:The successful investor is often the person who has achieved a certaintemperament—calm, patient, rational. Speculators have the oppositetemperament: anxious, impatient, irrational. Their worst enemy is notSuccess in investing doesn’t correlate with IQ once you’reabove the level of 125. Once you have ordinary intelligence,what you need is the temperament to control the urges thatget other people into trouble in investing.1WARREN BUFFETT , 1999The Psychology of Money 179the stock market, but themselves. They may well have superior abilitiesin mathematics, finance, and accounting, but if they cannot mastertheir emotions, they are ill suited to profit from the investment process.Graham understood the emotional quicksand of the market as wellas any modern psychologist, maybe better. His notion that true in-vestors can be recognized by their temperament as well as by their skillsholds as true today as when first expressed.Investors have the following characteristics:•True investors are calm. They know that stock prices, influencedby all manner of forces both reasonable and unreasonable, will fall aswell as rise, and that includes stocks they own. When that happens, theyreact with equanimity; they know that as long as the company retainsthe qualities that attracted them as investors in the first place, the pricewill come back up. In the meantime, they do not panic.On this point, Buffett is blunt: Unless you can watch your stockholdings decline by 50 percent without becoming panic-stricken, youshould not be in the stock market. In fact, he adds, as long as you feelgood about the businesses you own, you should wel come lower prices asa way to profitably increase your holdings.At the opposite end of the spectrum, true investors also remaincalm in the face of what we might call the mob influence. When onestock or one industry or one mutual fund suddenly lands in the spot-light, the mob rushes in that direction. The trouble is, when ever yone ismaking the same choices because “everyone” knows it’s the thing todo, then no one is in a position to profit. In remarks reported in For-tuneat the end of 1999, Buffett talked about the “can’t-miss-the-party”factor that has infected so many bull-market investors.2His cautionseems to be this: True investors don’t worry about missing the party;they worry about coming to the party unprepared.•True investors are patient. Instead of being swept along in the en-thusiasm of the crowd, true investors wait for the right opportunity.They say no more often than yes. Buffett recalls that when he worked forGraham-Newman, analyzing stocks for possible purchase, Ben Grahamturned down his recommendations most of the time. Graham, Buffettsays, was never willing to purchase a stock unless all the facts were in hisfavor. From this experience, Buffett learned that the ability to say no is atremendous advantage for an investor.180 THE WARREN BUFFETT WAYBuffett believes that too many of today’s investors feel a need to pur-chase too many stocks, most of which are certain to be mediocre, insteadof waiting for the few exceptional companies. To reinforce Graham’s les-son, Buffett often uses the analogy of a punch card. “An investor,” hesays, “should act as though he had a lifetime decision card with justtwenty punches on it. With every investment decision his card ispunched, and he has one fewer available for the rest of his life.”4If in-vestors were restrained in this way, Buffett figures that they would beforced to wait patiently until a great investment opportunity surfaced.•True investors are rational. They approach the market, and theworld, from a base of clear thinking. They are neither unduly pessimisticnor irrationally optimistic; they are, instead, logical and rational.Buffett finds it odd that so many people habitually dislike marketsthat are in their best interests and favor those markets that continuallyput them at a disadvantage. They feel optimistic when market prices arerising, pessimistic when prices are going down. If they go the next stepand put those feelings into action, what do they do? Sell at lower pricesand buy at higher prices—not the most profitable strategy.Undue optimism rears its head when investors blithely assume thatsomehow the f ates will smile on them and their stock choice will be theone in a hundred that really takes off. It is especially prevalent in bullmarkets, when high expectations are commonplace. Optimists see noneed to do the fundamental research and analysis that would illuminatethe real long-term winners (e.g., finding the few keepers among all thelook-alike dot-coms) because the short-term numbers are so seductive.Undue pessimism, whether directed at one company or the marketin general, motivates investors to sell at exactly the wrong time. InBuffett’s view, true investors are pleased when the rest of the world turnspessimistic, because they see it for what it really is: a perfect time to buyW e don’t have to be smarter than the rest; we have to be moredisciplined than the rest.3WARREN BUFFETT , 2002The Psychology of Money 181good companies at bargain prices. Pessimism, he says, is “the most com-m o nc a u s eo fl o wp r i c e s ....W e  w a n t  t o  d o  b u s i n ess in such an environ-ment, not because we like pessimism but because we like the prices itproduces. It’s optimism that is the enemy of the rational buyer.”5Whether an investor feels optimistic or pessimistic is a statement ofwhat that investor thinks about the future. Forecasting what is going tohappen next is tricky at best, and downright foolish when optimism (orpessimism) is based more on emotion than on research. Buffett, who onceremarked that “the only value of stock forecasters is to make fortunetellers look good,” makes no attempt to anticipate the periods in whichthe market is likely to go up or down.6Instead, he keeps an eye on thegeneral emotional tenor of the overall market, and acts accordingly. “W esimply attempt,” he explains, “to be fearful when others are greedy and tobe greedy only when others are fearful.”7INTRODUCING MR. MARKETTo show his students how powerfully emotions are tied to stock mar-ket fluctuations, and to help them recognize the folly of succumbingto emotion, Graham created an allegorical character he named “Mr.Market.” Buffett has frequently shared the story of Mr. Market withBerkshire’s shar eholders.Imagine that you and Mr. Market are partners in a private business.Each day without fail, Mr. Market quotes a price at which he is willingto either buy your interest or sell you his. The business that you bothown is fortunate to have stable economic characteristics, but Mr. Mar-ket’s quotes are an ything b ut. For you see, Mr. Market is emotionallyunstable. Some days, he is cheerful and enormously optimistic, and canonly see brighter days ahead. On these days, he offers a very high pricefor shares in your business. At other times, Mr. Market is discouragedand terribly pessimistic; seeing nothing but trouble ahead, he quotes avery low price for your shares in the business.Mr. Market has another endearing characteristic, Graham said: Hedoes not mind being snubbed. If Mr. Market’s quotes are ignored, hewill be back again tomorrow with a new quote. Graham warned hisstudents that it is Mr. Market’s pocketbook, not his wisdom, that is use-ful. If Mr. Market shows up in a foolish mood, you are free to ignore182 THE WARREN BUFFETT WAYhim or take advantage of him, but it will be disastrous if you fall underhis influence.“The investor who permits himself to be stampeded or un duly wor-ried by unjustified market declines in his holdings is perversely trans-forming his basic advantage into a basic disadvantage,” Graham wrote.“That man would be better off if his stocks had no market quotation atall, for he would then be spared the mental anguish caused him by otherpersons’ mistakes of judgment.”8To be successful, investors need good business judgment and theability to protect themselves from the emotional whirlwind that Mr.Market unleashes. One is insufficient without the other. An importantfactor in Buffett’s success is that he has always been able to disengagehimself from the emotional forces of the stock market. He credits BenGraham and Mr. Market with teaching him how to remain insulatedfrom the silliness of the market.MR. MARKET, MEET CHARLIE MUNGERIt was more than sixty years ago that Ben Graham introduced Mr.Market, sixty years since he began writing about the irrationality thatexists in the market. Yet in all the years since, there has been little ap-parent change in investor behavior. Investors still act irrationally. Foolishmistakes are still the order of the day. Fear and greed still permeate themarketplace.W e can, through numerous academic studies and surveys, track in-vestor foolishness. W e can, if we follow Warren Buffett’s lead, turnother people’s fear or greed to our advantage. But to fully understandthe dynamics of emotion in investing, we turn to another individual:Charlie Munger.Munger’s understanding of how psychology affects investors, andhis insistence on taking it into account, have greatly influenced theoperations of Berkshire Hathaway. It is one of his most profound con-tributions. In particular, he stresses what he calls the psychology ofmisjudgment: What is it in human nature that draws people to mis-takes of judgment?Munger believes a key problem is that our brain takes shortcuts inanalysis. W e jump too quickly to conclusions. We are easily misled andare prone to manipulation. To compensate, Munger has dev eloped aThe Psychology of Money 183mental habit that has served him well. “Personally, I’ve gotten so that Inow use a kind of two-track analysis,” he said in a 1994 speech reprintedinOutstanding Investor Digest. “First, what are the factors that reallygovern the interests involved, rationally considered. And second, whatare the subconscious influences where the brain at a subconscious level isautomatically doing these things—which by and large are useful, butwhich often misfunction.”10BEHAVIORAL FINANCEIn many ways, Charlie Munger is a genuine pioneer. He was thinkingabout, and talking about, the psychological aspects of market behaviorlong before other investment professionals gave it serious attention. Butthat is beginning to change. Behavioral finance is now an accepted areaof study in the economics department at major universities, includingthe work done by Richard Thaler at the University of Chicago.Observing that people often make foolish mistakes and illogical as-sumptions when dealing with their own financial affairs, academics, in-cluding Thaler, began to dig deeper into psychological concepts to explainthe irrationalities in people’s thinking. It is a relatively new field of study,but what we are learning is fascinating, as well as eminently useful tosmart investors.OverconfidenceSeveral psychological studies have pointed out that errors in judgmentoccur because people in general are overconfident. Ask a large sampleof people how many believe their skills at driving a car are above av-erage, and an overwhelming majority will say they are excellent driv-ers. Another example: When asked, doctors believe they can diagnoseI came to the psychology of misjudgment almost against mywill; I rejected it until I realized my attitude was costing me alot of money.9CHARLIE MUNGER , 1995184 THE WARREN BUFFETT WAYpneumo nia with 90 percent confidence when in fact they are right only50 percent of the time.Confidence per se is not a bad thing. But overconfidence is an-other matter, and it can be particularly damaging when we are dealingwith our financial affairs. Overconfident investors not only make sillydecisions for themselves but also have a powerful effect on the marketas a whole.Overconfidence explains why so many investors make wrong calls.They have too much confidence in the information they gather andthink they are more right than they actually are. If all the players thinkthat their information is correct and they know something that othersdo not, the result is a great deal of trading.Overreaction BiasThaler points to several studies that demonstrate people put too muchemphasis on a few chance events, thinking they spot a trend. In partic-ular, investors tend to fix on the most recent information they receivedand extrapolate from it; the last earnings report thus becomes in theirmind a signal of future earnings. Then, believing that they see whatothers do not, they make quick decisions from superficial reasoning.Overconfidence is at work here; people believe they understand thedata more clearly than others do and interpret it better. But there is moreto it. Overreaction exacerbates overconfidence. The behaviorists havelearned that people tend to overreact to bad news and react slowly to goodnews. Psychologists call this overreaction bias. Thus if the short-termearnings report is not good, the typical investor response is an abrupt, ill-considered overreaction, with its inevitable effect on stock prices.Thaler describes this overemphasis on the short term as investor“myopia” (the medical term for nearsightedness) and believes most in-vestors would be better off if they didn’t receive monthly statements. Ina study conducted with other behavioral economists, he proved his ideain dramatic fashion.Thaler and colleagues asked a group of students to divide a hypo-thetical portfolio between stocks and Treasury bills. But first, they satthe students in front of a computer and simulated the returns of theportfolio over a trailing twenty-five-year period. Half the studentswere given mountains of information, representing the market’svolatile nature with ever-changing prices. The other group was onlyThe Psychology of Money 185given periodic perfor mance measured in five-year time periods. Thalerthen asked each group to allocate their portfolio for the next forty years.The group that had been bombarded by lots of information, some ofwhich inevitably pointed to losses, allocated only 40 percent of itsmoney to the stock market; the group that received only periodic infor-mation allocated almost 70 percent of its portfolio to stocks. Thaler,who lectures each year at the Behavioral Conference sponsored by theNational Bureau of Economic Research and the John F. Kennedy Schoolof Government at Harvard, told the group, “My advice to you is to in-vest in equities and then don’t open the mail.”11This experiment, as well as others, neatly underscores Thaler’s no-tion of investor myopia—shortsightedness leading to foolish decisions.Part of the reason myopia provokes such an irrational response is an-other bit of psychology: our innate desire to avoid loss.Loss AversionAccording to behaviorists, the pain of a loss is far greater than the enjoy-ment of a gain. Many experiments, by Thaler and others, have demon-strated that people need twice as much positive to overcome a negative.On a 50/50 bet, with precisely even odds, most people will not risk any-thing unless the potential gain is twice as high as the potential loss.This is known as asymmetrical loss aversion: The downside hasa greater impact than the upside, and it is a fundamental aspect ofhuman psychology. Applied to the stock market, it means that investorsfeel twice as bad about losing money as they feel good about pickinga winner.This aversion to loss makes investors unduly conservative, at greatcost. W e all want to believe we made good decisions, so we hold ontobad choices far too long in the vague hope that things will turn around.By not selling our losers, we never have to confront our failures. But ifyou don’t sell a mistake, you are potentially giving up a gain that youcould earn by reinvesting smartly.Mental AccountingA final aspect of behavioral finance that deserves our attention is whatpsychologists have come to call mental accounting. It refers to our habitof shifting our perspective on money as surrounding circumstances186 THE WARREN BUFFETT WAYchange. W e tend to mentally put money into different “accounts,” andthat determines how we think about using it.A simple situation will illustrate. Let us imagine that you have justreturned home from an evening out with your spouse. You reach foryour wallet to pay the babysitter, but discover that the $20 bill youthought was there, is not. So, when you drive the sitter home, you stopby an ATM and get another $20. Then the next day, you discover theoriginal $20 bill in your jacket pocket.If you’re like most people, you react with som ething like glee. The$20 in the jacket is “found” money. Even though the first $20 and thesecond $20 both came from your checking account, and both representmoney you worked hard for, the $20 bill you hold in your hand is moneyyou didn’t expect to have, and you feel free to spend it frivolously.Once again, Richard Thaler provides an interesting ac ademic ex-periment to demonstrate this concept. In his study, he started with twogroups of people. People in the first group were given $30 in cash andtold they had two choices: (1) They could pocket the money and walkaway, or (2) they could gamble on a coin flip. If they won they wouldget $9 extra and if they lost they would have $9 deducted. Most (70percent) took the gamble because they figured at the very least theywould end up with $21 of found money. Those in the second groupwere offered a different choice: (1) They could gamble on a coin toss—if they won, they would get $39 and if they lost they would get $21; or(2) they could get an even $30 with no coin toss. More than half (57percent) decided to take the sure money. Both gro ups of people stoodto win the exact same amount of money with the exact same odds, butthey perceived the situation differently.12Risk ToleranceIn the same way that a strong magnet pulls together all the nearbypieces of metal, your level of risk tolerance pulls together all the ele-ments of the psychology of finance. The psychological concepts are ab-stract; where they get real is in the day-to-day decisions that you makeabout buying and selling. And the common thread in all those decisionsis how you feel about risk.In the last dozen or so years, investment professionals have devotedconsiderable energy to helping people assess their risk tolerance. At first,The Psychology of Money 187it seemed like a simple task. By using interviews and questionnaires, theycould construct a risk profile for each investor. The trouble is, people’stolerance for risk is founded in emotion, and that means it changes withchanging circumstances. When the market declines drastically, eventhose with an aggressive profile will become very cautious. In a boomingmarket, supposedly conservative investors add more stocks just as quicklyas aggressive investors do.A true picture of risk tolerance requires digging below the surfaceof the standard assessment questions and investigating issues driven bypsychology. A few years ago, in collaboration with Dr. Justin Green ofVillanova University, I developed a risk analysis tool that focuses onpersonality as much as on the more obvious and direct risk factors.Summarizing our research, we found that propensity for risk takingis connected to two demographic factors: gender and age. Women aretypically more cautious than men, and older people are less willing toassume risk than younger people. Looking at personality factors, welearned that the investor with a high degree of risk tolerance will besomeone who sets goals and believes he or she has control of the envi-ronment and can affect its out come. This person sees the stock marketas a contingency dilemma in which information combined with ra-tional choices will produce winning results.For investors, the implications of behavioral finance are clear: Howwe decide to invest, and how we choose to manage those investments,has a great deal to do with how we think about money. Mental ac-counting has been sug gested as a further reason people don’t sell stocksthat are doing badly: In their minds, the loss doesn’t become real untilthey act on it. Another powerful connection has to do with risk. W e arefar more likely to take risks with found money. On a broader scale,mental accounting emphasizes one weakness of the efficient market hy-pothesis: It demonstrates that market values are determined not solelyby the aggregated information but also by how human beings processthat information.THE PSYCHOLOGY OF FOCUS INVESTINGEverything we have learned about psychology and investing comestogether in the person of Warren Buffett. He puts his faith in his188 THE WARREN BUFFETT WAYown research, rather than in luck. His actions derive from carefullythought-out goals, and he is not swept off course by short-term events.He understands the true elements of risk and accepts the consequenceswith confidence.Long before behavioral finance had a name, it was understood andaccepted by a few renegades like Warren Buffett and Charlie Munger.Charlie points out that when he and Buffett left graduate school, they“entered the business world to find huge, predictable patterns of ex-treme irrationality.”13He is not talking about predicting the timing,but rather the idea that when irrationality does occur it leads to pre-dictable patterns of subsequent behavior.When it comes to investing, emotions are very real, in the sensethat they affect people’s behavior and thus ultimately affect marketprices. Y ou have already sensed, I am sure, two reasons understandingthe human dynamic is so valuable in your own investing:1. Y ou will have guidelines to help you avoid the most commonmistakes.2. Y ou will be able to recognize other people’s mistakes in time toprofit from them.All of us are vulnerable to individual errors of judgment that canaffect our personal success. When a thousand or a million people makeerrors of judgment, the collective impact is to push the market in adestructive direction. Then, so strong is the temptation to follow thecrowd, accumulated bad judgment only compounds itself. In a turbu-lent sea of irrational behavior, the few who act rationally may well bethe only survivors.Successful focus investors need a certain kind of temperament. Theroad is always bumpy, and knowing the right path to take is often coun-terintuitive. The stock market’s constant gyrations can be unsettling toinvestors and make them act in irrational ways. Y ou need to be on thelookout for these emotions and be prepared to act sensibly even whenyour instincts may strongly call for the opposite behavior. But as we havelearned, the future rewards focus investing significantly enough to war-rant our strong effort.