Chapter 4
PIERRE AND MARIE
After her disastrous relationship with Kazimierz Zorawski, Marie had no
time for romance. Declaring that she would never marry, she planned todevote herself full time to her studies. She had an ardent admirer, a Mon-sieur Lamotte. We only know of their relationship through his farewellletter to her. As she prepared to take her last exams in June 1894, she re-ceived a letter from him in which he promised not to disturb her by say-ing goodbye in person. Wishing her happiness and success, he wrote “onesmall word still of reproach: you insisted that I would quickly forget youwhen I had lost sight of you.” This, he insisted was a mistake—he wouldalways remember her. Although “without doubt we won’t meet agai n...i f
you ever should need it, remember that you have left somewhere a friendready to do everything possible for you. Adieu!”
1
During the time that Marie was ﬁnishing her mathematics degree and
was seeing Lamotte, she was hired by an organization formed to promoteFrench science, the Society for the Encouragement of National Industry.Her tasks included a study of the magnetic properties of various steels, butshe was severely limited by the lack of laboratory space in which to work.While she searched for adequate space, a Polish physicist (Józef Kowalski)and his wife whom she had met during her days as a governess were inParis for their honeymoon. After hearing of Marie’s need, ProfessorKowalski suggested a meeting with his friend Pierre Curie (1859–1906),who was working on magnetism at a nearby institution and might havespace available. The Kowalskis may have hoped that a romance would re-sult from the meeting. If this was true, their hopes succeeded far beyondtheir dreams. Pierre was 34 years old and a professor at the École dePhysique et Chimie Industrielles (School of Industrial Physics and Chem-
istry) in Paris when they met. He and his brother Jacques discovered thephenomenon of piezoelectricity from their collaborative research.
Neither Pierre nor Marie had any idea of an impending romance.
Pierre had vowed to live like a monk, after a young woman with whom hehad been in love died. And Marie, after she had completed her two ex-aminations, planned to return to her father in Poland, ﬁnd a job, and useher new skills as a teacher and for the political betterment of Poland. Shecertainly convinced her suitor, Lamotte, that she would never return toParis. The ﬁrst night that Marie and Pierre met they found that, in spiteof their differences in background, they had many common interests.They were immediately attracted to one another and by the time Marieleft for Poland, Pierre was convinced that he wanted to marry her.
Pierre was the second son of Sophie-Claire Depouilly and Dr. Eugène
Curie. Both sides of his family boasted scientists and inventors. Sophie-Claire’s father and brothers were commercial inventors, and both Eugèneand his father, Paul, were physicians. The Curies advocated revolutionaryideas in politics, religion, and science. Pierre absorbed the idealistic viewsof his ancestors and, although he was interested in social questions, helargely had put them aside for scientiﬁc ones. Like Marie, Pierre was shyand introverted and totally devoted to science. They shared a distrust oftraditional religion.
Since Eugène Curie was an avid republican and skeptic, neither of his
sons was baptized nor exposed to religion. Nevertheless, they were imbuedwith a sense of reverence for their environment. Pierre was of a contem-plative nature, and his father, Eugène, decided that a traditional schoolwould have a detrimental effect on his retiring, daydreaming son. Thus,he decided to educate both sons at home. Jacques was convinced thatPierre never got the well-rounded education that would have preparedhim for a traditional university career. Although Pierre was precocious inscience and mathematics, his education in literature and the classics wasmeager. It was fortunate that Pierre’s parents recognized that he had anunusual type of intelligence. A dreamer, Pierre would have been consid-ered a slow learner in school. With the freedom allowed by his untradi-tional education, Pierre learned to appreciate natural phenomena.Walking in the woods around Paris, he was able to clear his mind of ex-traneous thoughts, and look for intricate patterns in nature. In an entry inhis diary from 1879, he praised his time in the country reporting, “what agood time I have passed there in that gracious solitude, so far from thethousand little worrying things that torment me in Paris.”
230 MARIE CURIEHis progress in mathematics and physics allowed him to earn his sec-
ondary school degree when he was 16 years old. From an early age he wasconvinced that he wanted to be a laboratory physicist. After earning hisundergraduate degree, he studied for the licentiate in physics at the Sor-bonne, part of the University of Paris. He received this degree in physicalsciences when he was 18 years old. Because of excellent recommendationsfrom the director and the assistant director of the laboratory where heworked on his licentiate, he was appointed preparator for the director andwas put in charge of the students’ laboratory work in physics, a positionthat he held for ﬁve years. During this time he began his experimental re-search. Because he needed money to support himself, Pierre was unable tocontinue his formal studies for the two or three years necessary for thedoctorate.
Until he met Marie, Pierre had spent much of his life with his older
brother Jacques. The brothers began to work together in physics whenPierre was 21 and Jacques 24. From very early times, observers had notedthat certain kinds of crystals placed in a ﬁre attracted particles of woodand ash to their surfaces. In nineteenth-century France, the study of thesecrystals became popular. Tourmaline, for example, was characterized byhaving different crystalline faces acquire different electrical charges whenheated to different temperatures. This phenomenon of generating smallamounts of electricity was known as pyroelectricity (electricity from ﬁre).
Jacques and Pierre postulated that this phenomenon was not caused byheat but by pressure. When pressure was applied, opposite faces of thecrystal should acquire an electrical charge. They devised instruments andexperiments to test their theory that mechanical energy could be con-verted into electrical energy. The phenomenon was later named piezoelec-
tricity from the Greek meaning, “to press.” The instrument that they used
to investigate many different crystals was called an electrometer, and itprovided a method of measuring small electric currents. From 1880 to1882 the brothers published seven papers on this topic .
To Pierre, collaboration seemed to be the normal way to do science. He
had begun to collaborate with Jacques from their late teen-aged years atthe Sorbonne where both were laboratory assistants. According to PaulLangevin, one of Pierre’s early students, Pierre required a laboratory closeto those he loved. Jacques and Pierre worked together until Jacques mar-ried and left Paris for Montpellier where he had a university appointment.Thereafter, their collaboration was conﬁned to the summer months. AfterJacques moved, Pierre left the Sorbonne for a job as laboratory chief at theSchool of Industrial Physics and Chemistry. The new position was cer-PIERRE AND MARIE 31tainly not a promotion. The buildings were old, his experimental research
had to be put on hold, and he had only one assistant in his laboratory. Butthese obstacles that would have proved insurmountable to an ambitiousresearcher did not bother Pierre at all. He loved his students, was excitedabout teaching, and was absolutely content to remain on the same rung ofthe teaching ladder without a promotion. Many political games had to beplayed in order to be promoted in a university. To be pleasant to superiors,to attend social functions, and to network with those in power did not ap-peal to Pierre and they were all necessary activities if he was to be pro-moted. Freedom was also very important to Pierre. He was grateful to thedirector of the school, writing that he “allowed us all great liberty; his di-rection made itself felt chieﬂy through his inspiring love of science. Theprofessors have created a kindly and stimulating atmosphere that has beenextremely helpful to me.”
3When advised that a physicist was planning to
resign and that he should become a candidate for the position he replied“it is a nasty job being a candidate for any place at all, and I am not ac-customed to this sort of exercise.” When he was proposed for an award bythe director of the school, he refused, writing to the director that
Mr. Muzet has told me that you intend to propose me to the
Prefect again for decoration. I write to beg you to do no suchthing. If you obtain this distinction for me, you will put meunder the obligation of refusing it, for I have quite decidednever to accept any decoration of any sort.
4
As Marie mentioned in her biography of Pierre, his appointment at this
school was a disaster for his experimental research. The partitions in hislaboratory were not even in place. He had to practically build his entirelaboratory from scratch. Because he was forced to interrupt his experi-mental plans, he became engrossed in theoretical research on crystals. Hepublished a number of papers on the symmetry of crystals. This study wasvery abstract and involved Pierre’s love for mathematics and involvedthought rather than experimentation.
Many years before he met Marie, Pierre wrote in his diary that
women of genius are rare. And when, pushed by some mystic
love, we wish to enter into a life opposed to nature, when wegive all our thoughts to some work which removes us fromthose immediately about us, it is with women that we have tostruggle, and the struggle is nearly always an unequal one.
532 MARIE CURIEPierre found Marie the rare woman of genius. She was fascinated by his
scientiﬁc ideas and he was proud of her success in her examinations. Thetwo seemed to complement each other—Marie was determined and fo-cused while Pierre was imaginative and a dreamer. Both were idealists, butthey acted out their idealism in different ways. Marie’s idealism demandedthat she return to Poland to contribute towards Poland’s national spirit.Pierre’s hopes were pinned on Marie’s returning to Paris to marry him.
Pierre was convinced that science was the only certain path to rectify
social injustices since social movements often failed and even successfulsocial reformers sometimes did more harm than good. In his letters, hepushed hard to convince Marie that together they could use science for thegood of human kind. Although the idea of a collaborative partnership wasfamiliar to Pierre because of his close collaboration with his brother, Marie,on the other hand, had always worked alone and the way in which shewould have planned to “save the world” would have been through activepolitical participation. Yet she was eventually won over to Pierre’s ideas.After having been burned by her unfortunate experience with KazimierzZorawski, she was extremely reluctant to allow herself to fall in love again.But the tall, lean, kindly Pierre, with the soft expressive eyes, with whomshe shared so many interests and values, began to convince her.
But winning her over was not easy for Pierre. Although he recognized
how important independence was for Marie, he wrote in exasperation “Iﬁnd that you are a little pretentious when you say that you are perfectlyfree. We are all of more or less slaves of our affections, slaves of the preju-dices of those we love.”
6Apparently Paris held a great attraction for Marie
in the person of Pierre. During the summer that she was in Poland, Pierrebegged her to return, writing that it would be a “beautiful thing, a thing Idare not hope, if we could spend our life near each other hypnotized byour dreams: your patriotic dream, our humanitarian dream and our scien-tiﬁc dream.”
7While she was in Poland, they wrote many letters back and
forth, he attempting to convince her to return and she writing of practi-cal concerns. He explained that there would be many career possibilitiesin Paris if she were French. And, if she married a Frenchman she would beconsidered French.
Marie did return to Paris, but did not accept Pierre’s suggestion that
they rent an apartment together. He had written that he had found oneon Rue Mouffetard with windows overlooking a garden and which was divided into two separate and independent parts. Instead, she took anapartment next to Bronia’s newly established medical ofﬁce. Still, whenMarie announced that she planned to live in Poland, Pierre was desperatePIERRE AND MARIE 33enough to vow to go there with her. He promised that he would make a
living in any way that he could, even by giving French lessons. To helpconvince Marie, Pierre enlisted the help of Bronia, whom he had alreadypersuaded to assist him. Each would have to modify his or her principlesin order to marry.
When Pierre decided to marry Marie he was strapped for money. He
needed enough money for his work and for his forthcoming marriage. Inorder to do this he felt that he compromised his ideals by accepting a po-sition as technical adviser to a Parisian optical ﬁrm at a fee of 100 francs amonth. He also would receive royalties by allowing the ﬁrm to exploit aphotographic lens he had devised. Still, the amount of money that he re-ceived would not be enough to provide them with a comfortable life style.If Marie had been the kind of person for whom money was important shenever would have agreed to marry Pierre. He would have been a poorchoice for a husband—someone who might seem to others to lack ambi-tion. A kind and loving man who shared her interest in science and socialrectitude was the kind of person Marie found attractive. Nevertheless,this stubborn woman was not easily won over by the equally determinedPierre.
Clearly, Marie’s relationship with Pierre was heating up several degrees,
for after she returned to Paris he convinced her to meet his parents. Theylived in an aged small house at Sceaux in a Parisian superb. The house wassurrounded by a lush garden. Marie found crusty old Eugène Curie de-lightful. A tall man with brilliant blue eyes, he impressed Marie with hissharp intellect. She found his passion for the natural sciences particularlyalluring. As much as he loved the sciences, he had been unable to pursuethem professionally for marriage and his family took precedence, and hewas forced to practice medicine in order to support his family. He instilledin his sons the same love for science as he himself had and supported themin their scientiﬁc aspirations. Although Marie characterized Eugène as au-thoritarian, she also noted that he was unselﬁsh, loving, and helpful toothers. Pierre’s mother was slight in build, and her health had been un-certain since the birth of her sons. However, she made the Curie home at-tractive and gracious.
Shortly after meeting his parents, Pierre invited Marie to the Sorbonne
as a guest at the public examination of his doctoral thesis on magnetism.Marie was suitably impressed by his answers and realized even moreacutely that they shared the same interests and values. In spite of theirshared ideals, Marie was much more ambitious and was more willing toproﬁt by the results of science. Pierre, on the other hand, rejected aca-34 MARIE CURIEdemic prizes. His self-effacing manner kept him from obtaining what he
really wanted, a professorship. Although Marie cared very little for mate-rial things she was more able to see the advantage of some kind of rewardfor achievements. After Pierre presented his thesis at the Sorbonne inMarch 1895, a professorship was created for him at the École de Physiqueet Chimie.
In her biography of Pierre, Marie states very matter of factly that
After my return from my vacation our friendship grew more
and more precious to us; each realized that he or she could ﬁndno better life companion. We decided, therefore, to marry, andthe ceremony took place in July, 1895. In conformity with ourmutual wish it was the simplest service possible,—a civil cere-mony, for Pierre Curie professed no religion, and I myself didnot practice any.
8
If it were not for her brother-in-law’s mother, who gave Marie a wed-
ding dress, she might have worn the one dress that she owned to her wed-ding. Practical Marie scorned the idea of a white dress, saying toKazimierz’s mother that if she was going to be kind enough to provide awedding dress, “please let it be practical and dark, so that I can put it onafterwards to go to the laboratory.”
9Bronia was more fashion conscious
than Marie, and guided her sister to a dressmaker who made her a tastefulnavy-blue wool suit and a blue blouse with lighter blue stripes. Marie’sdress may have been modest, but not so that of the wedding receptionguests, who were more extravagantly clad. After the civil ceremony at theTown Hall in Sceaux, attended by Marie’s father and sister Helena fromWarsaw, Bronia and Kazimierz, and the Curie family, Marie and Pierre lefton their untraditional honeymoon. They had given each other bicyclespurchased from a wedding gift from a cousin. After the reception in thegarden of the Curie family house, the newly married couple left to exploreBrittany on their shiny new bicycles.
By the 1890s when Marie and Pierre went on a cycling trek for their
honeymoon, bicycles had become a fad. The “safety bicycle” with its twowheels of the same size had generally replaced the awkward high-front-wheeled vehicle. When the safety bicycle was ﬁrst invented, enthusiasts ofthe high bicycle jeered at their cousins on the safety bikes, claiming thatthese bikes were ugly and ﬁt only for the lily-livered rider. But soon, thesafety bicycle outsold the older form. New groups of people began to takeup cycling. Not only was it used for exercise, sport, racing, and touring, butPIERRE AND MARIE 35also as a means of transportation for getting to business and social engage-
ments. It appealed to the rich and the not so rich, the long- and short-legged rider, and to both men and women. The high bicycle was indeeddangerous. Reports of cycling calamities were reported in newspapers. Thenew safety bicycle—with its chain-driven wheels and pneumatic tires—was indeed much more comfortable and considerably safer.
Pierre and Marie had their picture taken on their safety bicycles and
both were dressed in recommended cycling costumes. Marie could havecared less about fashionable cycling clothes, but was delighted to ﬁnd anexcuse to toss away her skirts and replace them with comfortable knick-ers, knee stockings, and low rubber soled shoes. These bicycles were prob-ably the best purchase that Marie and Pierre could have made. Onweekends and on holidays, the young couple took to their bicycles and ex-plored the countryside.
THE EARLY YEARS OF MARRIAGE
Aside from the bicycle trips, about the only recreation Pierre and
Marie enjoyed during their ﬁrst years of marriage was visiting her sister’sfamily in Paris and Pierre’s parents in Sceaux. Their ﬁrst home was athree-room apartment not far from the School of Physics. Marie claimedthat its chief charm was its view of a large garden. Since their ﬁnancesprecluded them from having servants, Marie assumed most of the house-hold chores. Most of her time, however, was spent studying. During theﬁrst year, she prepared for the teacher’s certiﬁcate, which would make itpossible for her to teach in a girls’ secondary school. After several monthsof preparation she came out ﬁrst in the examination in 1896. She alsotook two courses for her own ediﬁcation. One of these courses was with aninspiring teacher and theoretical physicist, Marcel Brillouin.
During their early married life Pierre continued his research on crystals.
He observed that different faces of crystals develop differently. He wantedto explain the reasons for this differential development. Marie wrote thatwhile he obtained interesting results, he never published them. She ex-plained that after he interrupted his investigations to work on radioactiv-ity he never returned to this subject.
While Pierre was preparing his teaching courses for the School of In-
dustrial Physics and Chemistry, Marie assisted him. He ﬁrst divided hislectures between crystallography and electricity. However, he soon real-ized that there was not time to treat both areas adequately. Since electric-ity had a more practical use, he decided to concentrate his lectures on that36 MARIE CURIEsubject. Marie proudly wrote that his lectures were the most complete and
modern to be found in all of Paris. He worked very hard on his lectures,wanting to make sure that they were clear and inclusive. Although he hadplanned to produce a book from these lectures, his work on radioactivityprevented him from doing so.
Marie was given permission to work at the school with Pierre, although
she would have to ﬁnance her own proposed research. She found thatPierre’s knowledge and experience broadened her own comprehension.Her research project resulted in the completion of her ﬁrst paper in thefall of 1897.
10It involved the way in which the magnetic properties of var-
ious tempered steels varied with their chemical composition. She was sup-plied with free samples of steels and had the advice of a leading physicist,Pierre, and a leading chemist, Henri Le Chatelier (1850–1936). Althoughthe paper lacked originality, it gave her the type of experience she wouldneed to pursue her next, highly creative project. In a letter to Józef shewrote that the work on magnetism was part scientiﬁc and part industrial.She recognized that it was not a particularly novel paper, but, as she men-tioned, it allowed her to work in a laboratory and it was better than giv-ing lessons to students.
By working on the routine project on steel, Marie was exploring a ﬁeld
in which it was improbable that a woman could succeed. Like Marie, otherwomen who loved science often found themselves forced into working inrepetitious scientiﬁc ﬁelds. Although women participated in all aspects ofnineteenth-century science, most of them were engaged in data-gatheringrather than idea-creation components of science. Signiﬁcantly, notable ex-ceptions occurred as the century matured. When Curie was working, in thelate nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, more women participated inthe theoretical sciences than had done so previously. Since most womeninterested in science lacked university educations, they tended to clusteraround ﬁelds that did not have speciﬁc educational requirements. In theobservational sciences, such as botany and astronomy, the expertise of am-ateurs was appreciated. Women could not only make useful contributionsto these subjects but could also remain at home while doing so. Astronomywas one of the few ﬁelds that offered women the possibility of jobs outsideof the home. But the positions that they were able to secure were thosethat their male colleagues did not want. The adoption of the technology ofcameras and spectroscopes had great implications for women since it re-quired a different labor force. Low-paid positions as “computers” at theHarvard College Observatory and the Royal Greenwich Observatory inEngland provided women with paid employment. At Harvard, the direc-PIERRE AND MARIE 37tor, Edward Pickering, hired women because astronomy was moving away
from observational astronomy and into the new ﬁeld of photographic as-trophysics. Pickering needed fewer observers (men’s work) and many moreassistants (women’s work) to classify as cheaply as possible the thousands ofphotographic plates his equipment was generating. And, of course, thewomen worked for less.
Women were very creative in developing strategies for working in sci-
entiﬁc ﬁelds. One such strategy, capitalizing on the consideration of cer-tain aspects of science as “women’s work,” allowed women to work inﬁelds not held in high regard by men. Home economics was one of thoseareas—a woman interested in chemistry could get a degree in home eco-nomics and get a prestigious job in a university or industry because hersubject did not interest men.
Another strategy women used to gain a foothold in the sciences was
collaboration with a husband or another male relative or mentor. Oftenwomen who, on their own, could never get laboratory space, obtainneeded equipment, or have their work accepted on its merits were able toaccomplish important feats when they had the prestige of a husband,brother, son, or other male investigator, behind them. A woman as a partof a couple could accomplish much original work, although society toooften assumed that the creative work was done by the male partner. Someexamples of husband/wife creative couples of this period were the Britishastronomers Annie and Walter Maunder and Margaret and William Hug-gins; American naturalists Anna Botsford Comstock and John HenryComstock; French neurologists Cecile Mugnier Vogt and Oskar Vogt; andBritish physicists Hertha Marks Ayrton and W . E. Ayrton. The most fa-mous collaboration was, of course, that between Marie and Pierre Curie.
Marie Curie faced the same problems that other women scientists had
encountered. Her solution, however, was somewhat unique. In order tohave time for her studies and research, Marie decided to eliminate allnonessential parts of her life. Although she was a notoriously poor cookshe taught herself to produce passable meals. However, the dishes that sheinvented needed little preparation or could be left to cook all day whileshe was at the school. The furniture in their apartment was minimal.They refused to accept the furniture offered to them by Pierre’s father, be-cause “every sofa and chair would be one more object to dust in the morn-ing and to furbish up on days of full cleaning.”
11Marie probably realized
that a traditional marriage would have drained all of her energy. “Insteadthe Curies calculatedly pared their family life down to the essentials, thusfreeing Marie Curie for a scientiﬁc career.”
1238 MARIE CURIEIn her biography of Pierre, Marie described their early married years
with their common interests “in our laboratory experiments and in thepreparation of lectures and examinations.” She explained that “duringeleven years we were scarcely ever separated, which means that there arevery few lines of existing correspondence between us, representing thatperiod.” They did, however, take vacations “walking or bicycling either inthe country near Paris, or along the sea, or in the mountains.” They neverstayed away from Paris for very long, because Pierre found it difﬁcult to beabsent for any length of time in a place where he lacked the facilities towork. Nevertheless he, as did she, enjoyed their long walks together, “buthis joy in seeing beautiful things never drew his thoughts away from thescientiﬁc questions that absorbed him.”
13
As difﬁcult as it was for a woman to be a scientist, it was even more un-
thinkable that a woman could be both a scientist and a mother. In 1897when Marie found that she was pregnant with her ﬁrst child, it wouldhave seemed that her scientiﬁc career was over. To make things worse, shewas miserable during the early months of the pregnancy. As she wrote toher friend Kazia on March 2, 1897,
I am going to have a child, and this hope has a cruel way of
showing itself. For more than two months I have had continualdizziness, all day long from morning to night. I tire myself outand get steadily weaker, and although I do not look ill, I feelunable to work and am in a very bad state of spirits.
14
Her pregnancy also made it difﬁcult for her to work on her research proj-ect, and she complained that she was vexed at not being able to stand be-fore the apparatus and study the magnetization of steel.
During the same time that Marie was about to give birth to a new life,
another life was about to come to an end. Pierre’s beloved mother fell ill,and Pierre spent much time with her and away from Marie during thepregnancy. In a letter to her brother Józef, Marie wrote
My husband’s mother is still ill, and as it is an incurable disease
(cancer of the breast) we are very depressed. I am afraid, aboveall, that the disease will reach its end at the same time as mypregnancy. If this should happen my poor Pierre will have somevery hard weeks to go through ....  
15
Pierre ﬁnally left his mother to take Marie, who was eight months’
pregnant, on a bicycling trip to Brest. Both Pierre and Marie seemed to bePIERRE AND MARIE 39unaware that such a cycling trip so late in pregnancy was, to say the least,
unusual. Although he was normally very considerate, Pierre seemed to ex-pect her to go at the usual pace. They eventually cut the trip short and re-turned to Paris. Marie gave birth to Irène on September 12, 1897. Pierreand Marie had spent the summer preparing for the 6.6-pound Irène.Marie’s fear about her mother-in-law’s condition was realized. T wo weeksafter Irène was born, Pierre’s mother died.
Finding adequate childcare has always deterred women scientists from
continuing to work after their children are born. Since the Curies alwaysstruggled ﬁnancially, Marie’s career might have ended with Irène’s birth ifit were not for her father-in-law, Eugène. A new widower, Eugène movedin with his son, daughter-in-law, and granddaughter. Eve Curie noted thatDr. Eugène had attached himself “passionately” to the new baby. Mariehad ﬁrst unsuccessfully tried to nurse Irène, but was forced to hire a wetnurse to feed the baby. After a series of nurses and domestic servants shewas relieved to turn Irène’s care over to her adoring grandfather.
PARIS AT THE TURN OF THE CENTURY
Marie and Pierre were somewhat detached from the vibrant, ostenta-
tious, and often vulgar aspects of turn-of-the-century Paris. Althoughthey did not participate in its excesses, they could not help but be affectedby the culture. Science often ﬂourishes in a time of general intellectualexcitement. Advances in the arts sometimes precede those in the sci-ences. This situation applied to France in the late nineteenth century,where Paris was the artistic capital of the world. During the middle to latenineteenth century, French Impressionism had its impact on the rest of the world in art as well as music and literature. Among the artists, Edgar Degas (1834–1917), Claude Monet (1840–1926), Auguste Renoir(1841–1919), and Vincent van Gogh (1850–1906), were some of the bestknown. Claude Debussy’s (1862–1918) Prelude to the Afternoon of a Faun
(Prélude à l ’après-midi d ’un faune ) and the poetry of Stéphane Mallarmé
(1842–1898) represented impressionism in other ﬁelds. In addition to im-pressionism and postimpressionism, the popular art of Henri Toulouse-Lautrec (1864–1901) memorialized the seedier aspect of Parisian life inhis paintings. Toulouse-Lautrec spent much of his time in the Mont-martre section of Paris, the center of cabaret entertainment and bo-hemian life.
As Toulouse-Lautrec was popularizing cabaret life, new technologies
invaded Paris and captivated its citizens. Although Marie Curie, the dour40 MARIE CURIEPolish woman, and Pierre, her idealist husband, remained aloof from
many of the modern trends that showed up everywhere, it was impossibleto miss the tallest structure in the world, the Eiffel Tower, which waserected for the International Exhibition of Paris of 1889. The gaslights ofthe streets of Paris were beginning to be replaced by electric ones. Tele-phones, moving pictures, electric streetcars all helped make Paris a mod-ern, exciting city.
The blending of new technology with a surface joviality hid some of
the darker aspects of this Paris—a fear and hatred of foreigners, anti-Semitism (a hatred of Jews), and anarchy. The fears festered just beneaththe surface hilarity. The French ego had been badly bruised after Francewas defeated in the Franco-Prussian War (1870–1871). The Prussianchancellor, Otto von Bismarck, was an adept military strategist as well asan adroit politician. France under Napoleon III, on the other hand,seemed both inefﬁcient and inept. When the French did not get certainconcessions from Bismarck, they declared war on Prussia and weresoundly defeated, forcing Napoleon III to step down. The ﬁnal rout oc-curred in Paris on January 28, 1871. Rebels in Paris formed the Communeof Paris and refused to disarm and submit to the French interim govern-ment supported by the Prussians. Those who were loyal to the new Frenchgovernment and those who supported the Commune engaged in a bloodybattle, which resulted in the vicious suppression of the Commune andeventually the establishment of the Third Republic (1870–1940).
In 1894 widespread French anti-Semitism came to a head. A Jewish
captain, Alfred Dreyfus, was accused of spying for Germany. The only evi-dence against him was a scrap of paper found by a cleaning woman in awastebasket. Since he was the only Jewish member of the general staff, hewas immediately suspect. Dreyfus was convicted on forged evidence andsentenced to life imprisonment on Devil’s Island off the coast of SouthAmerica. The rabidly nationalist press continued to condemn Dreyfus asa traitor. Even after the real culprit was discovered, a Major Esterhazy, thecrowds continued to malign Dreyfus and it took the fall of the govern-ment to free him.
Alongside the chaos accompanying a French society that was unhappy
with its government, disliked and feared foreigners, and was notably anti-Semitic, an anarchist movement blossomed. Anarchism is a political the-ory that ﬁnds all forms of governmental authority both unnecessary andundesirable. Ideally, it results in a society based on voluntary cooperationand the free association of individuals and groups. Some French intellec-tuals supported the French version of this international movement. Un-PIERRE AND MARIE 41fortunately, the ideals of the theory became subverted and sometimes re-
sulted in violence. In a two-year period between 1892 and 1894, 11 anar-chist bombs exploded in Paris.
Science was also criticized by those who were dismayed at the turn
French institutions had taken. Many people thought that science, with itsemphasis on reason and its apparent worship of positivism, seemed to sup-port the antichurch leaders of the Third Republic. Scientists tended tomake unrealistic claims for science and technology, yet some of the mostexciting scientiﬁc breakthroughs were born in this period. Marie andPierre Curie were scientists who thought that salvation lay in science andreason.
NOTES
1. Susan Quinn, Marie Curie: A Life (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1995),
101.
2. Marie Curie, Pierre Curie , trans. Charlotte and Vernon Kellogg (New
York: Macmillan, 1923), 42.
3. Marie Curie, Pierre Curie, 51.
4. Eve Curie, Madame Curie: A Biography (Garden City, NY: Doubleday,
Doran, & Co., 1938), 126.
5. Marie Curie, Pierre Curie, 77.
6. Robert Reid, Marie Curie (London: Collins, 1974), 65.
7. Quinn, Marie Curie: A Life , 117.
8. Marie Curie, Pierre Curie, 80.
9. Eve Curie, Madame Curie, 137.
10. Marie Curie, “Propriétés des aciers trempés,” Bulletin de la Société d ’encour-
agement pour l ’industrie nationale (1898), in Oeuvres de Marie Slodowska Curie, ed.
Irène Joliot-Curie (Warsaw: Panstwowe Wydawnictwo Naukowe, 1954), 3–42.
11. Eve Curie, Madame Curie, 143.
12. Helena M. Pycior, “Marie Curie’s “Anti-Natural Path,” in Uneasy Careers
and Intimate Lives. Women in Science, 1789–1979, ed. Pnina G. Abir-Am and
Dorinda Outram (New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press, 1987), 199.
13. Marie Curie, Pierre Curie, 82.
14. Eve Curie, Madame Curie, 147.
15. Eve Curie, Madame Curie, 148.42 MARIE CURIE