Chapter 11
LAST YEARS
INSTITUT DU RADIUM
As was discussed in the previous chapter, the Radium Institute, begun in
1912, was completed during World War I. Every ounce of strength thatMarie Curie could muster was put into making a ﬂawless memorial toPierre.
Before Pierre died, he had a vision of a laboratory dedicated to research
in radioactivity. After a chair at the Sorbonne had been instituted in hishonor, it seemed possible that this dream would materialize. Marie carriedon his hope that such a laboratory would be established. The process ofacquiring the laboratory was very convoluted. She had a strong advocatein the person of Émile Roux, the physician who was the director of thePasteur Institute. This Institute was well funded, and Roux conceived theidea that his Institute could build the laboratory. The university agreed,and with Roux’ help they planned two separate laboratories—one wouldbe directed by Curie and funded by the university, and the other would beused to study the medical applications of radioactivity and funded by thePasteur Institute. The second laboratory would be directed by the medicalresearcher Dr. Claudius Regaud. The two buildings would be constructednext door to each other and would together be known as the Institut duRadium .
Although Curie had never been interested in decorating or designing
her own home, when it came to the laboratory she was a hands-on plan-ner. Nothing was too insigniﬁcant. This laboratory was to be perfect. Shemet often with the architect and was not shy about letting her views beknown. By the late 1920s the two original laboratories had expanded.
Curie’s laboratory had doubled in size, and the number of researchers hadincreased from only a few to thirty or forty. Regaud’s facility had added anoutpatient unit and another biology lab. Other expansion projects wereplanned.
After Curie returned from the United States to her own laboratory, her
comfort level increased greatly. She was in her own surroundings. Peopleshe knew and loved supported her and she them. However, before she lefton the trip she knew that her eyesight was failing and after she returnedhome it got considerably worse. Although she suspected that radium wasthe culprit that caused her cataracts, she refused to admit to her col-leagues that there was anything wrong with her eyesight. Her daughterscovered for her, as did select research persons whom she allowed to guideher through the streets of Paris. The people in her laboratory were wellaware of the charade, but they permitted it to go on. Although she triedto cover her failing sight during her trip to the United States, the New
York Times got wind of the problem. On July 1, 1921, the newspaper re-
ported that an oculist, Dr. Peter A. Callan, had conﬁrmed the report thatshe was threatened with blindness. Marie had visited his ofﬁce a few daysbefore she was to sail on the Olympic . Callan reported that a cataract on
one eye was the problem, but that she was able to read with the other. Hedecided that immediate surgery was inadvisable because of her generallyimpaired physical condition. Presumably her health would have improvedduring the next six months, at which time the doctor assumed that shecould undergo the ordeal of surgery. The cataract operation, which wasmuch more serious in 1921 than at the present, would be performed inFrance. Her friends in the United States tried to protect her privacy bydenying that her eyes were affected. They claimed that her visit to theoculist was only to have her glasses repaired.
Curie was very loyal to the students, technicians, and scientists who
worked in her laboratory. She employed a number of women in her labo-ratory, including Ellen Gleditsch, Eva Ramstedt, Sybil Leslie, and Mar-guerite Perey. Many of the tasks delegated to the women were repetitive.Although they required precision and attention to detail, they did not de-mand a high degree of creativity. However, some of the women went farbeyond the requirements of the jobs including the four listed above. Al-though Marguerite Perey’s (1909–1975) ﬁrst responsibility in the lab wasto wash test tubes, she advanced rapidly until eventually she discoveredthe element francium. Late in her life she became the ﬁrst woman to beelected to the Académie des Sciences ,an honor never enjoyed by Marie126 MARIE CURIECurie. The Norwegian chemist Ellen Gleditsch (1879–1968), while
working in Curie’s laboratory, tested a claim by the British chemist Wil-liam Ramsay (1852–1916) that radium was descended from uranium. Sherefuted his claim. She published numerous articles and several books onradioactivity. She also was the author of a textbook of inorganic chemistryand a biography of the chemist Antoine Laurent Lavoisier (1743–1974).May Sybil Leslie (ca. 1887–1937) was a British chemist who worked inMarie Curie’s laboratory. While she was there she searched unsuccessfullyfor new radioactive elements in the mineral thorite. She then investi-gated thorium and its decay products. Eva Julia Augusta Ramstedt(1879–1974) was a Swedish physicist who worked in Curie’s laboratoryduring 1910–1911. Among other accomplishments she found that thesolubility of radium emanation (radon) varied with the solvent used andthe temperature. She coauthored papers with Ramstedt and returned toSweden where she worked at the Nobel Institute under Svante Arrhenius(1859–1927).
In addition to women, Curie’s laboratory was ethnically and nationally
diverse. There were people from many different countries. At least four-teen countries in addition to France were represented by researchers fromNorway, Sweden, Russia, Poland, England, Germany, Belgium, China,Iran, India, Austria, Portugal, Switzerland, and Greece. All in all, theCurie laboratory was an exciting place to work. Marie Curie was thebenevolent administrator, la patronne, who presided over this polyglot
group.
It was becoming more and more difﬁcult to ignore the harmful effects
of radium. Even though it was not certain that Curie’s cataracts werecaused by her exposure, other effects were clear. The reluctance that keptCurie from admitting that her discovery could be harmful is understand-able. She was unprepared to acknowledge that radium, her so-calledchild, could endanger people. As for the cataracts, respectable physicianswere using radium to cure them. Today, physicians recognize that cataractsare an early sign of exposure to radiation.
As radium developed into an industry, something that Curie never an-
ticipated nor desired, the evidence of deleterious effects began to accu-mulate. She recognized that certain local effects of radium could beharmful. She attributed the sores on her ﬁngers to direct exposure to ra-dioactive substances. But since the other symptoms experienced by thosewho came in contact with these materials varied greatly, she avoidednaming radium as the culprit. Many of the workers in her laboratory com-plained about fatigue, but, she rationalized, this could be caused by anyLAST YEARS 127number of circumstances. She recalled that Pierre had endured excruciat-
ing pains in his legs, but never had felt the lethargy noticed by the otherworkers. Marie herself began to notice pains in her arms, but again, re-fused to blame radium. She did not advise the laboratory workers or thescientists who came to learn about radioactivity to take precautions.
Some of the reports emanating from London caused scientists and lab-
oratory workers with radium to worry about their own health. In these re-ports radium was considered the cause of several deaths in a Londonhospital. After this initial report, other accounts began to snowball. Oneof the women who had worked with Curie in 1907, Norwegian scientistEllen Gleditsch (1879–1968), was appointed to a committee to inquireabout the effects of radium. Gleditsch asked Curie if France had estab-lished a similar committee to explore the effects of radium. Curie repliedin the negative.
An incident that occurred in 1925 probably did more than any other to
focus attention on the problem. A young woman from New Jersey, Mar-garet Carlough, worked in a radium dial painting factory of the U.S. Ra-dium Corporation. It was common practice for the dial painters to pointtheir brushes by using their lips. She sued the company, claiming that ithad caused irrevocable damage to her health. On further exploration theyfound others suffering from what became known as radium necrosis (tis-sue death) and severe anemia (low number of red blood cells). This ra-dium necrosis caused deterioration of the jaw. Approximately 10 dialpainters had died by the time Carlough sued the company, which deniedthat the deaths were caused by radiation. By 1928, 15 deaths were attrib-uted to radium exposure. Probably there were more misdiagnosed deaths.These deaths opposed all that was known about radium exposure. In theﬁrst place, the amount of radium in the luminous paint was minuscule—surely, they thought, not enough to harm a person. They also reluctantlyfound that when radium was ingested it was deposited in the bones of thearms and legs just as was calcium. From this vantage point it destroyedblood-forming tissues within the bones and had other harmful effects, in-cluding anemia and leukemia.
Missy Meloney wrote to Curie in June 1925 apprising her of the tragedy
of the radium factory. The deaths of two engineers closer to home withinfour days of each other in Paris emphasized the problem. These two menworked for a factory that was preparing thorium X for medical purposes.Both had been ill for a considerable time. One, Marcel Demalander, was35 years old and died of what was called severe anemia. The second man,Maurice Demenitroux, had been sick for a year and died of leukemia.128 MARIE CURIEEach day brought additional reports of damage including amputated ﬁn-
gers, blindness, and additional anemias and leukemias.
A report had been generated by the French Academy of Medicine in
1921 to address deaths reputedly caused by radiation. However, they con-cluded that most of the fears were unjustiﬁed, although they acknowl-edged that certain precautions should be taken when working with thesematerials. However, by 1925, a new report was generated by an investiga-tive commission. Curie was on this commission, and by this time she waswilling to recognize the potential danger in radioactive substances.
Radium as a cure for cancer had been on everyone’s lips for several
years. Unbeknownst to Curie, Missy Meloney had undergone radiumtreatment for cancer after Curie’s return from the United States. Meloneyexplained that she had failed to inform Curie because the doctors had toldher that it was an experiment. Another good friend, Loie Fuller, informedMarie that she had breast cancer. Most of the surgeons advised her to havea mastectomy, but one insisted that radium needles would give her an ex-cellent chance for survival. She asked for Curie’s opinion. All that Mariewas able to do was to refer her to Regaud, who was the director of themedical part of the Radium Institute. Radium did indeed offer hopeagainst cancer. The rays were able to kill cancer cells and keep them fromdividing. However, cancer cells were not the only ones attacked by radia-tion. Other permanent damage on healthy cells could occur, although thiswas not known for several years.
The death toll from radium increased. Reports of deaths in radium lab-
oratories and factories abounded. Although the evidence that radiationwas the offender was becoming more and more compelling, neither Marienor Irène was willing to admit that the evidence was unambiguous. AfterIrène, like her mother, received her doctorate from the Sorbonne, a re-porter asked her about the dangers of radium. Although she admitted thatshe had already suffered from a radium burn, she insisted that it was notserious. Marie still was unable to admit to her own laboratory workers herfears about radium’s effects. But at one point she acknowledged to a Pol-ish laboratory worker, Alicja Dorabialska, that she did not fully under-stand radium’s effect on health. She also conﬁded to Dorabialska her fearsthat radium was the cause of her cataracts and the reason for her uncer-tain gait. As information accumulated about the health dangers from ra-diation, neither of her two daughters seemed overly concerned.
Irène had always been the favorite daughter. Her interests and person-
ality were much like Marie’s. Eve, on the other hand, found the arts andhumanities more interesting than the sciences. She was an accomplishedLAST YEARS 129pianist and was interested in a career in journalism. She also was very soft
hearted, and when Marie Curie was conﬁned to her bed after several un-successful cataract operations, Eve provided the support for her mother.She remained with her throughout the surgeries and stayed beside her bedreassuring her mother and convincing her that all was well. From thistime on, Marie Curie had support from both of her daughters—Irène washer companion in scientiﬁc enterprises and Eve in domestic ones. Oneday, Irène dropped a ﬁgurative bombshell on her mother. She announcedone morning at breakfast that she was engaged to be married and that thename of the intended groom was Frédéric Joliot.
The news of Irène’s impending marriage came as a shock to Marie. Her
elder daughter had been her mainstay in the laboratory, and the prospectof sharing Irène with someone else frightened her. However, when shefound that the intended groom was Joliot, himself a brilliant scientist, shereluctantly accepted the marriage. Surely she recalled her early collabora-tion with Pierre Curie and recognized that her daughter was seeking thesame kind of relationship. Irène and Frédéric later decided to hyphenatetheir names and became known as the Joliot-Curies. Some friends andcolleagues feared that their disparate personalities would lead to an un-happy relationship. Marie Curie herself feared that the outgoing Frédéricwould hurt the daughter in which she had invested so much of herself.Whereas Irène was forbidding and socially inept, Frédéric Joliot was ajolly man who loved to be around people. However, they had their sciencein common and it seemed to be enough. Frédéric was probably the morecreative and brilliant scientist, but Irène was the better chemist and askilled laboratory worker. Just as Marie and Pierre Curie had jointly wonthe Nobel Prize in 1903, Irène and Frédéric Joliot-Curie went on to winthe coveted Nobel in 1935 for their work in artiﬁcial radioactivity. Theywere nominated for the physics Nobel Prize in 1934 but were passed overthat year. Eve’s husband, French diplomat Henry R. Labouisse, also won aprize, although not for scientiﬁc work. He accepted the Nobel Peace Prizefor the United Nations Children’s Emergency Fund in 1965.
As she grew older Marie Curie spent more and more time raising
money for her laboratory and less in creative research herself. It was vi-tally important to her that her laboratory had sufﬁcient funding to carryon Pierre’s and her legacy. Missy Meloney was her indefatigable ally in thefund-raising efforts. Meloney traveled to Europe and all around theUnited States many times and solicited money whenever an opportunityarrived. The friendship between the two women deepened, and withMissy’s aid, Marie herself developed a new appreciation of the importance130 MARIE CURIEof public relations to help with her money-raising goal. She visited many
countries in Europe, giving lectures and indicating the necessity of moneyto continue research in radioactivity.
After Marie Curie had assured herself that the science of radioactivity
in France was on secure footing, she turned her efforts toward Poland. Hersister Bronia had attempted to raise money for an Institute of Radium inWarsaw, but the results were disappointing compared to Missy’s success forthe French Institute. Bronia’s “Buy a brick for the Marie Sklodovska-Curie Institute” campaign had modest success but produced nothing likethe amount needed. Marie Curie went to Poland, amazing the citizens ofher native country with her still-perfect command of the Polish language.By 1925 the campaign had produced enough money so that a ceremonialcornerstone could be laid for the Institute. However, even though thebricks metamorphosed into walls, and Marie and Bronia had contributeda good portion of their savings to the institute, it was still lacking the nec-essary radium for cancer treatments. Curie turned again to the generousMissy Meloney. Meloney managed to accumulate enough money for a sec-ond gram of radium. Meloney again mobilized a group of Americanwomen to raise money to buy a gram of radium. Missy Meloney’s appeal tothe American public for radium for Poland was less important than thesupport for Marie Curie herself. The personality cult of Curie was success-ful, and Poland got its radium. However, it is also true that the timing wasprovidential. The money was raised before the stock market crash on Oc-tober 24, 1929, which sent the entire country into a tailspin.
On October 16, 1929, Marie Curie arrived in the United States to
thank its citizens once again for helping. Americans seemed to realize thatit was modesty that caused her to shun the limelight. If she had had herown way, she would have entered the country “unheralded, as an ordinarytraveler, and would seek to hide from the world the honors that lie in waitfor her.” Americans were not willing to let her hide, although they assuredthe press that she could go about her affairs without undue attention.
1
When she arrived on the French liner Ile de France, she sent word to a
large contingent of reporters and photographers that her health would notallow her to be interviewed or photographed. The activities planned forher visit included the least possible number of tiring public appearances.Marie herself explained her limitations in a statement that she made uponher arrival.
I am happy to come back to the United States. Deeply con-
scious of my debt to my friends in this country, it is with regretLAST YEARS 131that I realize my physical limitations will make it impossible for
me to do all of the things which my friends have been goodenough to arrange for me. It will be a great pleasure for me togo to Washington again and to meet the President and Mrs.Hoover, and I especially want to attend the third annual din-ner of the American Society for the Control of Cancer.
2
In spite of the attempts to protect Marie from a hectic schedule, her
popularity made it impossible to turn down certain invitations. One ofthese involved a visit to Schenectady, New York, where General Electricturned over its laboratories for her use for a day. She was invited to con-duct any experiment that interested her. Nobody but laboratory assistantswere allowed in the General Electric Laboratories during Mme. Curie’svisit, and “she was absolute mistress of the plant.”
3Of course, one wonders
what she could accomplish in a strange laboratory for one day, but itshowed General Electric’s respect for her and their attempt to “entertain”this bigger-than-life woman scientist. Students at St. Lawrence Univer-sity also did their part to entertain Curie. She was serenaded by studentssinging as well as a 30-piece student band. Although it was reported thatshe seemed to enjoy the serenade, on her way to still more activities in-cluding another honorary degree, she suffered from fatigue.
This fatigue, as well as a drenching in the rain at the recent Edison cel-
ebration in Detroit, left her vulnerable to a cold when she returned toMissy Meloney’s home in New York City. Although she was scheduled toattend the Roosevelt memorial dinner, she was forced to decline. Duringthis visit she and Missy Meloney were guests of President Herbert Hooverand stayed in the White House for several days. They arrived in Wash-ington on October 29, 1929, where they were met by the president’s mil-itary aide at the Union Station who escorted them to the White House.In a letter to Eve she wrote that she had been given “a little ivory ele-phant, very sweet, and another tiny one. It seems that this animal is thesymbol of the Republican party, and the White House is full of elephantsof all dimensions .... ”
4
The presentation of the radium gift of $50,000 was made the next day,
October 30, 1929. The gift itself was in the form of a bank draft encasedin silver. Unlike eight years previously when President Harding presenteda gram of radium to Mme. Curie, radium could no longer be bought in theUnited States. They would make the actual purchase in Belgium. In hispresentation speech, President Hoover expressed appreciation for her ser-vice to humanity. He stated that “I am sure that I represent the whole132 MARIE CURIEAmerican people when I express our gratiﬁcation to Mme. Curie that she
should have honored our country by coming here.” Curie responded bynoting that she was “conscious of my indebtedness to my friends in Amer-ica, who for the second time, with great kindness and understanding, havegratiﬁed one of my dear wishes. My work is very much my life, and I havebeen made happy by your generous support of it.”
5She expressed her con-
viction that “scientiﬁc research has its great beauty and its reward in itself:and so I have found happiness in my work.” The bonus, however was “anadditional happiness to know that my work could be used for relief inhuman suffering.”
6She concluded by stating that she considered the
American gifts of radium as a symbol of the enduring friendship that bindsthe United States to both France and Poland. After the ofﬁcial ceremony,she joined a magniﬁcent reception and a dinner to celebrate—all of thiswent against her physician’s insistence that she could only visit theUnited States if she would “attend no dinners, hold no receptions, andmake no speeches.” She broke her promise on all three counts!
7Of course,
ever since she had arrived in the United States, she had attended dinners,receptions, and various forms of entertainment provided by her hosts.After celebrating her sixty-second birthday on November 7, Marie de-parted the next day on the French liner Ile de France for Europe. Before
she left, she issued a personal statement expressing regret that her visitwas over. She also apologized for not being able to accept all of the invi-tations from people and groups who wanted to meet her. She also statedthat she would have liked to have visited more of the laboratories. OnNovember 15, 1929, a tired Marie Curie arrived in France with little fan-fare. She issued a statement of gratitude to the Americans for the gift of$50,000 and for the hospitality shown to her on her visit.
On May 29, 1932, Marie Curie visited Poland for the last time. At this
time she inaugurated the Radium Institute of Warsaw. Bronia’s organi-zation and Marie’s fund-raising for the radium had succeeded.
In spite of her increasingly fragile health, Marie refused to retire. Nev-
ertheless she was far less active in the laboratory than she had been previ-ously and the number of her new scientiﬁc papers diminished. Herscientiﬁc colleagues had long complained about her increased testinessand her decreased creativity as she aged. Her skills as a mentor, however,ﬂourished, and she nurtured the young scientists who came to her labora-tory. Newcomers in the laboratory were apprehensive when they ﬁrst metthis forbidding ﬁgure who appeared so cold and indifferent. Those whostayed, however, recognized that much of her apparent detachment wassimply shyness and a lack of social skills. After several weeks in the labo-LAST YEARS 133ratory, they realized that she saw them as being a part of a very special fra-
ternity whose members were responsible for each other. They, after all,were the scientiﬁc elite. Many of these workers became intensely loyal toCurie. She was also extraordinarily helpful to the scientists whom shedeemed worthy.
Gradually she was relinquishing some of her responsibilities as labora-
tory director to Irène and Frédéric, who were beginning a meteoric rise oftheir own. This occasioned some dissension among the laboratory work-ers as the Joliot-Curies were seen as heirs apparent to Marie’s position.Marie Curie continued to give her course at the Sorbonne, and the stu-dents ﬂocked to hear her just as they had during her ﬁrst lecture immedi-ately after Pierre’s death. Although she recognized that her time as acreator of new theories had passed, she still played an important part ininternational scientiﬁc affairs. For example, one of the projects that shebecame passionate about was the question of scientiﬁc ownership and therights of the scientists. When Pierre was alive she agreed with him thatthe scientist should not beneﬁt from his or her discoveries. She did notbeneﬁt from the discovery of radium, insisting that scientiﬁc discoveriesbelonged to the world. Gradually she began to change these ideas, possi-bly because of her exposure to American science, where industry hadoften replaced individual achievement, and proﬁt became a major motivefor research. At any rate, while working with the League of Nations’ In-ternational Committee on Intellectual Co-operation, she worked fer-vently on these ethical concerns. The same Marie Curie who declinedany kind of patent rights from radium insisted in the 1930s that govern-ments should reward creative scientists by establishing some type of roy-alty payment for those scientists whose discoveries beneﬁted humankind.Marie Curie and Jean Perrin became activists on the part of scientists.Perrin insisted that without changes, France would remain a third-classscientiﬁc power, whereas Germany would be a ﬁrst-class one. These ideasled to the formation of the French National Center for Scientiﬁc Re-search, the C.N.R.S. This organization was important in determining thecourse of French Science in the future and Frédéric Joliot became an im-portant guide in this organization.
As Marie became less able to work than she had previously, Irène and
Frédéric Joliot-Curie took on additional responsibilities. Just as Marie andPierre were partners, a new collaborative relationship was developed be-tween her daughter and son-in-law. In the case of Marie and Pierre, bothpartners were withdrawn and difﬁdent, whereas in the case of Frédéric andIrène two very different personality types were involved. Irène was like134 MARIE CURIEher mother, but Fred was outgoing and jolly. Nevertheless, both relation-
ships were very fruitful. When interviewed in 1933, Frédéric explainedthat they compared notes and exchanged thoughts constantly. So con-stantly, “that we honestly don’t know which of us is the ﬁrst to have anoriginal idea.”
8Irène nodded in agreement.
As Marie became more feeble, Irène and Frédéric Joliot-Curie had a
daughter, Hélène, born in 1927; they later had a son, Pierre, born in 1932.Both children became physicists. Although Marie Curie adored her smallgranddaughter, she was as unemotional when dealing with the child as shehad been with her own two daughters. However, as she grew older andmore inﬁrm, family became more important. Much of her enjoyment ofher granddaughter was second hand. She would watch Hela play at thebeach but seldom entered into the fun. She still enjoyed swimming, andalthough she had spent many years of her life as a semi-invalid, sheshowed remarkable resilience.
An accident in the laboratory seemed to be the beginning of her rapid
decline. In 1932, Marie fell and broke her right wrist. Although it was asimple fracture and should have healed quickly, it did not. After this acci-dent her overall health began to deteriorate alarmingly. The traumaseemed to have caused the health problems, which had laid dormant, tosurface. The radiation burns on her ﬁngers became more inﬂamed. Thethumping in her ears that she had experienced during her cataract prob-lems emerged again. Her head hurt. For long periods of time she was con-ﬁned to her bed. Marie Curie was convinced that she would not live muchlonger. She contacted her good friend Missy Meloney and invited, orrather demanded, that Missy visit her. The reason for her insistence wasthe recognition that her days were numbered. Always a private and some-what difﬁdent person, Marie conﬁded to Missy Meloney her most ferventwish—that the radium would remain in her laboratory after her death andthat Irène would inherit it. Practical Missy made the arrangements, andMarie was comforted in the realization that her precious radium would bepreserved in the way that she wanted.
According to an article in the January 1, 1933, Sunday New York Times
Magazine, Marie Curie was still the active head of the Curie Institute. In
Curie’s eyes, this Institut du Radium was one of her greatest achieve-ments, but one that was very expensive to maintain. Even in spite of hertwo lucrative American trips and funding from the French government,she was still dogged by money worries, for huge sums of money were necessary in order to keep the Institute running. Consequently, she was constantly involved in fund-raising, a task that always made her uncom-LAST YEARS 135fortable. She had never really overcome her aversion to crowds and was
always ill at ease on a lecture platform. The newspaper reported that “hermany years of exposure to radium have had their effect on MadameCurie’s health,” but that she, nevertheless, continued to administer theInstitute, personally direct her staff’s researchers, and gave two lectures aweek as a professor of physics at the University. This was partially true inJanuary 1933. Although she was often so fatigued that she could hardlydrag herself to the laboratory, by pure will she did what was necessary ashead of the Institute.
9
In December 1933, Marie suffered from a large stone in her gall blad-
der. Remembering that a gall stone operation had caused her father’sdeath, she was determined to avoid surgery. Instead, she chose the alter-native treatment of a strict diet and rest. She felt well enough to return tothe laboratory, to design and build a country house at Sceaux, and tomove to a new ﬂat. Although she had eschewed luxuries during her entirelife, as an aging, sick woman she did not hesitate to pledge herself to spendlarge sums of money for the luxuries that she had never before had.
Marie did not admit even to herself that her health was miserable. She
went ice skating and skiing during the winter of 1934 with Irène andFrédéric and the children. Her actions, however, suggested that at somelevel she realized that death was looming. She explained to Irène whereshe could ﬁnd the information that would serve as her will for the gram ofradium. She also explained that the American documents were there, aswell as a dossier, which included some letters. Marie, however, had de-stroyed all of the personal documents, especially those that were painfulto her. These included all of the documents from Paul Langevin. She didkeep Pierre Curie’s old love letters to her as a young woman.
During Easter of the next year, Bronia visited Marie in Paris, and the
two sisters went on an automobile trip to the south of France. Mariecaught a bad chill and was both physically and psychologically in despair.Even so, her inner strength conquered, and when she returned to Paris shefelt much better. But the improvement did not last. At times she was ableto go to the laboratory. At others she felt dizzy and weak. In spite of herdisabilities, she was cheered by the prospect of planning for her new villa.The bad days began to outnumber the good ones. She ran a fever almostconstantly, and her body periodically would be racked by chills. Ex-hausted most of the time, she ﬁnally was unable to drag herself to the lab-oratory. The doctors diagnosed her problem as a recurrence of tuberculosisand suggested a stay at a sanatorium. Eve accompanied her mother andserved as her nurse. Adhering to her mother’s almost fanatical desire for136 MARIE CURIEprivacy, Eve registered her at the sanatorium as Madame Pierre. By the
time they arrived at the sanatorium, Madame Pierre’s temperature hadrisen to 104 degrees, and she was so sick that she collapsed in Eve’s arms.To make matters worse, they found that she did not have tuberculosis andblood tests showed that both her red and white blood cell counts werefalling. The trip to the sanatorium that so sapped her strength was unnec-essary. She was too weak to write and was forced to give up her long-standing habit of documenting all of the events in her life, although shewas still able to read the lines on the thermometer.
To Eve and the doctors, it was evident that nothing could be done for
her. Waiting in agony for her death, everyone was agreed that extrememethods to save her life would not happen. Marie, herself, did not con-template the idea of dying. When on July 3, Marie Curie read the ther-mometer she was pleased to note that her fever had fallen. Although Eveassured her that this was the sign of her cure, it is actually the decrease intemperature that often precedes death. She began to hallucinate that herspoon was a delicate laboratory instrument. She would speak indistinctlyof the things that had been a major part of her life and moved away fromthe humans whom she had loved and who had loved her. When Irèneand Frédéric arrived she did not ask to see them. She fought hard not tolet go of the life that was hanging by a thread. Her heart remained strongbut the villain in the case, radium, proved stronger. On July 4, 1934,Marie Curie died at the Sancellemoz Sanatorium. The attending physi-cian, Dr. Tobe, wrote the following report: “The disease was an aplasticpernicious anaemia of rapid, feverish development. The bone marrowdid not react, probably because it had been injured by a long accumula-tion of radiations.”
10The same culprit that had brought down her
beloved Pierre so many years ago ﬁnally conquered the fragile appearingbut strong woman who had given it life. In March 1956 Irène, too, wasthe victim of radiation, suffering from the same symptoms that killed hermother.
The American public had taken Marie to its heart, and the newspapers
immediately reported the death of “their scientist.” She had twice visitedthe United States. She had appreciated the obvious love and respect ofthe American people. Ironically, she had died on the fourth of July. Afront page article in the New York Times hailed her as a “martyr to sci-
ence.” Americans were surprised to hear of her death, because earliernewspaper articles had portrayed her as the active director of the CurieInstitute. This article noted that “her death came as a surprise to all buther family and intimate friends, for the rare modesty of her characterLAST YEARS 137never deserted her and she did not allow the public to know how ill she
was.”11
At her death many scientists who had been critical of her work previ-
ously had nothing but kind words for her accomplishments. Albert Ein-stein, who was her friend and supporter although he was sometimesimpatient with her personality, stated that she was “one of the most re-markable scientiﬁc personalities of our time.” Praising her science henoted that “her ingenuity and her extraordinary energy enabled her tosolve some of the most important problems which led to the discovery andto the scientiﬁc understanding of the radioactive phenomena.” AlthoughMarie and Einstein were always good friends, they sometimes disagreedover nonscientiﬁc matters. According to Einstein, she “was an unusuallyindependent character,” a statement that implied that her “indepen-dence” sometimes made it difﬁcult for her to change her mind if she wascertain that she was correct. Sometimes he and others did not come to thesame solutions as she did regarding suitable ways to solve social and polit-ical problems. Her independence sometimes caused her to disagree withthose in power as well as her friends, for she insisted on what she insistedwas the best way to stand “wholeheartedly for justice and for progress insocial matters.”
12
Physicist Dr. Robert Millikan (1868–1953), head of the California In-
stitute of Technology, characterized Curie’s discoveries of radium and theradiation emitted by it as “a starting point of the newer developments inphysics.” He contended that it was her ideas that convinced the worldthat “the heavens are not eternal and changeless, but that atomic trans-formations are taking place in nature all the time.” He also paid tribute toher role in the cause for world peace as a member of one of the most im-portant committees of the League of Nations.
13
Sir J. J. Thomson, sometimes known as the “father of the electron,”
characterized Curie as one of the greatest physicists of modern times.After describing some of her accomplishments, the French scientist DukeLouis de Broglie (1892–1987) concluded by remarking “whether or notMme. Curie died as a martyr to science, her loss is inestimable and will bemourned by scientists through the world.”
14
Many other scientists added to the plaudits, praising Marie Curie. Physi-
cians represented another group who felt her loss very keenly. Many ofthose whom she had visited in the United States paid tribute to her work as“one of the foremost woman scientists and physicists of the world. Her pass-ing out of the ﬁeld of science has brought a great loss to the world.”
15
In accordance with the wishes of Marie and her family, the French gov-
ernment abandoned their plans for a national funeral. Marie Curie’s body138 MARIE CURIEwas brought to Paris on July 5, 1934, in the strictest privacy. On July 6, she
was buried in a brief, simple ceremony without a civil or a religious ser-vice. She was buried in a plain oak cofﬁn in the same grave where Pierrehad been placed so many years ago. Roses were distributed to the gatheredgroup, which consisted of 25 laboratory associates and 150 friends and sci-entists. Each mourner placed a rose on the closed cofﬁn as he or she passedby. Not a word was spoken during the ﬂower ceremony. Bronia and Józefcame from Poland and threw some Polish soil into the open grave.
On April 20, 1995, the remains of both Pierre and Marie were trans-
ferred from the tomb in Sceaux to the Pantheon in Paris. Marie Curie wasthe ﬁrst woman to be buried for her own accomplishments in France’s na-tional mausoleum.
NOTES
1. “Welcoming a Great Scientist,” New York Times, ” 15 October 1929, 30,
col. 5.
2. “Mme. Curie Arrives. ‘Happy to be Back’,” New York Times , 16 October
1929, 33, col. 3.
3. “Mme. Curie Examines Schenectady Plant,” New York Times, 24 October
1929, 3, col. 5.
4. Eve Curie, Madame Curie: A Biography (Garden City, NY: Doubleday,
Doran, & Co., 1938), 343.
5. “Mme. Curie Receives $50,000 Radium Gift; Hoover Presents It,” New
York Times , 31 October 1929, 1, col. 3.
6. Eve Curie, Madame Curie, 343.
7. Eve Curie, Madame Curie, 343.
8. “T wo Who Carry On the Curie Tradition,” New York Times Magazine , 1
January 1933, 6, col. 4.
9. “T wo Who Carry on the Curie Tradition,” New York Times , 1 January
1933, 6, col. 4.
10. Eve Curie, Madame Curie, 384.
11. “Mme Curie is Dead; Martyr to Science,” New York Times , 5 July 1934, 1,
col. 3.
12. “Scientists Mourn Mme. Curie’s Death,” New York Times , 5 July 1934, 16,
col. 3.
13. “Scientists Mourn Mme. Curie’s Death,” 16, col. 3.14. “Scientists Mourn Mme. Curie’s Death,” 16, col. 3.15. “Scientists Mourn Mme. Curie’s Death,” 16, col. 3.LAST YEARS 139