Chapter 7
“PIERRE IS DEAD? DEAD?
ABSOLUTELY DEAD?”
In April 1906 Pierre joined Marie and the children for a brief holiday in
the country. Even though spring in France can be cold and raw, theweather was ﬁne during these days. Although Pierre’s fatigue concernedMarie, the family basically had a pleasant relaxing time away from thepressures of Paris. Pierre returned to the city on April 14, but Marie andthe girls stayed on. After the weather turned cold and rainy they returnedon April 16. On that same night the Curies attended a dinner meeting ofthe physics society. One of the subjects of conversation at the dinner hadto do with spiritualism. During the late nineteenth and early twentiethcenturies, many scientists dabbled in spiritualism. Both Pierre and Mariehad attended séances given by the medium Eusapia Palladino. Pierre wasparticularly interested, and was disturbed that he could ﬁnd no obviousway to discredit the ghosts that she produced. He was not the only scien-tist who was fascinated with the spirit world. Other nineteenth-centuryscientists such as Sir William Crooks, Alfred Russel Wallace, and CharlesRobert Richet (1850–1935) also were believers. On April 17, Pierre at-tended another meeting of the physics society and put forth his thoughtson another new passion, the teaching of science. He was excited when hisideas were accepted and he was elected vice president of the new organi-zation.
The following day, Thursday, April 19, Pierre left his laboratory and
walked in the chilling rain to a meeting of the new group. After the meet-ing was over he felt exhilarated. His thoughts were on the people that hehad met and the way in which they had appreciated what he had to offer.The meeting broke up shortly after 2:00 in the afternoon. Because of thecold drizzle, Pierre put up his umbrella and headed toward the Institut de
France. As he neared his destination, both the rain and the trafﬁc becameheavy. He had been walking behind a cab, which provided him with someshelter. As he came to a very busy intersection he abandoned the cab andabsentmindedly stepped into the path of a horse that was pulling a wagon.At the same moment the wagon was passing the cab. The space betweenthe cab and the wagon shrunk dangerously. Pierre, whose mind was onanything but walking in trafﬁc, was surprised at the narrowing space.When it seemed that he would be crushed, he caught the horse by thechest in an attempt to hang on. The horse suddenly reared, and Pierreslipped on the wet pavement as the crowd shouted to the driver to stop.Although the driver pulled on the reins, the team of horses continued on.Pierre was on the ground but unhurt and lay very still at the feet of thehorses as the two front wheels of the wagon moved by without touchinghim. But salvation was brief, for the wagon’s left rear wheel hit andsmashed Pierre’s head. A crowd quickly gathered. Some of the gawkerstried to entice passing cab drivers to take the body to the police prefec-ture, but the drivers refused because they feared that the bloody bodywould stain their upholstery. Eventually two men brought a stretcher andPierre was carried to a nearby police station. At the station they examinedhis papers and realized who he was. Although his head was crushed,Pierre’s face was recognizable, and one of his laboratory assistants identi-ﬁed the corpse. When the crowd realized that the victim was their NobelPrize winning scientist, it turned on the driver of the wagon and the po-lice were forced to intervene in order to protect him.
It was decided that Paul Appell, Pierre’s senior colleague and dean of
the faculty of science, and Jean Perrin, the Curies’ next-door neighborand dear friend, would tell Marie about the accident. However, when theyarrived at the house Marie was not yet home. Dr. Eugène Curie, Pierre’sfather, was alone in the house. When he saw the looks on the faces of Ap-pell and Perrin, his ﬁrst comment was, “My son is dead.” He was heart-broken and through his tears accused Pierre of absentmindedness anduttered reproachfully, “What was he dreaming of this time?”
1Was the ac-
cident actually caused by daydreaming? Did his umbrella keep him fromseeing the vehicles? Or did the slick street, combined with his illness,make him less sure footed than usual? Although nobody knows exactlywhat happened, it seems most likely that it was a combination of all of theabove.
When Marie arrived home at six o’clock, she knew from the demeanor
of her friends that something was very wrong. Paul Appell reiterated the76 MARIE CURIEfacts. Marie remained motionless and listened numbly to what he had to
say. She did not cry; when she ﬁnally spoke it was to say “Pierre is dead?Dead? Absolutely dead?”
2As the drama unfolded, she still could not really
grasp that Pierre, her lover, companion, the father of her children, and herscientiﬁc collaborator was gone. The stress of dealing with Irène was toomuch, so she asked Mme. Perrin to care for her for several days, and gaveherself up to mourning. Eve remained at home cared for by others. Shecould not bring herself to explain to Irène that Pierre was dead, and whenshe and Irène talked across the fence Marie simply told her that her fatherhad hurt himself badly in the head and needed rest.
On the evening of Pierre’s death, friends brought Marie the few articles
found in his pockets: fountain pen, keys, wallet, and a watch. She sent aterse telegram to her family in Poland stating simply that Pierre was deadfrom an accident. André Debierne went to the police station to retrievethe body of his friend and brought it to Marie. Left alone with her hus-band, she kissed his face and refused to stay in a room away from Pierrewhile they washed and dressed the body. When Jacques Curie arrived, shewas ﬁnally able to express her grief and broke down in sobs. Jacques’ pres-ence was a great comfort. She later noted that they reread the old lettersand what remained of his journal.
Pierre Curie’s death was noted immediately in the United States. In a
headline the New York Times reported, “Prof. Curie Killed in a Paris
Street.” The subheading read “The Discoverer of Radium Run Over by aWagon.” An additional subhead read “Success Followed Early Hardship—Curie was Greatly Aided by Mme. Curie.” Further down in the obituarynotice, the article again mentioned Marie not as Pierre’s collaborator butonly as his assistant. “In his researches he was aided by Marie Sklodowska,a Pole, who was born at Warsaw, in 1868 . . . .” The author of the article
seemed convinced that a woman could only serve as an assistant to herhusband, not as a full partner. The article contained another mistake,mentioning that Professor Curie left only one child, a nine-year-olddaughter.
3
Keeping a journal provided Marie with the therapy that helped her
deal with the tragedy. She addressed the journal entries to Pierre. Begunon April 30, 1906, she wrote “Dear Pierre who I will never more see here,I want to speak to you in the silence of this laboratory, where I neverthought I would have to live without you.”
4The section describing
Pierre’s interment was especially poignant. She wrote that “your cofﬁnwas closed and I could see you no more. I didn’t allow them to cover itwith the horrible black cloth. I covered it with ﬂowers and I sat beside it.”“PIERRE IS DEAD? DEAD? ABSOLUTELY DEAD?” 77After they took the body to Sceaux for burial, she expressed her horror at
Pierre being placed in a deep hole. “They ﬁlled the grave and put sheavesof ﬂowers on it. Everything is over, Pierre is sleeping his last sleep beneaththe earth; it is the end of everything, everything, everything.”
5
The journal also expressed minor problems in their marriage. Small
tensions between the two emerged as Marie chided Pierre for working toohard and not spending enough time with the family. But she also recalledthe wonderful vacations that they had taken together. As she reminisced,she would be jerked back to reality. These times were at an end. Pierre wasdead. Biographer Susan Quinn reports that an entire page was torn out ofthe journal, but speculates that it was either Marie or someone in Marie’sfamily who censored it.
The day after the burial, Marie ﬁnally explained to Irène what had hap-
pened. Eight-year-old Irène was playing with her friend Aline Perrinwhen her mother decided that the time had come to tell Irène. At ﬁrst thenews seemed to wash over Irène’s head. She did not appear to understandand went back to playing with Aline. However, after Marie left, she burstinto tears and Henriette Perrin, Jean’s wife, took her back to her mother.Marie wrote, “She cried a great deal at home, and then she went off to herlittle friends to forget. She did not ask for any detail and at ﬁrst was afraidto speak of her father.” Józef and Bronia came to lend their support, butthe depth of Marie’s despair frightened them as well as Dr. Curie andJacques. In her journal she wrote “In the street I walk as if hypnotized,without attending to anything. I shall not kill myself. I have not even thedesire for suicide. But among all these vehicles is there not one to makeme share the fate of my beloved?”
6
Of the tributes to Pierre, none was more poignant than that of his close
friend and colleague Paul Langevin, published in the Revue du mois. He
observed that just as Pierre’s life was improving, and he could spend all ofhis time in his precious laboratory without teaching responsibilities, hewas cruelly killed.
Marie got ﬁnancial advice from Georges Gouy, who advised her not to
mention her own radium when she made an inventory of Pierre’s laboratoryfor the Faculty. He explained that radium had become so valuable that shemight have to pay death duties if she reported it. After suggesting that shesolicit the advice of a competent businessman to help with any issues the ra-dium might bring up, he admonished her to think of the futures of Irène andEve, even if she herself was uninterested in personal gain. Against the ad-vice of those who thought she should keep the radium (worth more than amillion gold francs), she gave it to the laboratory instead.78 MARIE CURIEAfter several weeks passed, new questions arose. What would happen
to Pierre’s research? Who would take over his teaching at the Sorbonne?The university agreed to give Marie, as Pierre’s widow, a pension, but sherefused to accept it. She ﬂatly stated that she was too young to accept apension; she could support herself and her children. The New York Times
reported on the pension, apparently unaware of Marie’s decision to de-cline it. The newspaper reported that the “Council of Ministers has de-cided to have the Minister of Education introduce a bill in the Chamberof Deputies for a pension for the widow and children of Prof. Curie, thediscoverer of radium, who was killed in Paris last Thursday by being runover by a wagon in the Place Dauphine.”
7This U.S. newspaper was still
convinced that Pierre had discovered radium.
Since Marie was still in a dazed state and was not prepared to make de-
cisions about the future, her family and friends took the initiative. Theyinformed the dean that Marie was the only French physicist competent tosucceed Pierre. Although no woman had ever held such a position, thecouncil of the Faculty of Science unanimously decided to offer her an as-sistant professorship. She also was given the chair especially created forPierre, which he had only occupied for eighteen months. Almost a monthafter Pierre’s death Marie reported in her journal that she had been ofﬁ-cially named Pierre’s successor. The entries in her journal stopped be-tween June and November, although she continued to write progressreports on the children in her notebook.
The time when Marie decided to recognize that Pierre was actually
gone and that she would return to living occurred in the middle of June.Eve recounts the evening when the decision was made. Marie motionedto Bronia, who had remained in Paris after Pierre’s death, to follow her toher bedroom. Removing a package wrapped in waterproof paper from thecupboard she asked Bronia’s help. She untied the string and opened theparcel and released a white cloth that wrapped a grotesque collection ofbloody clothes and dried mud. These were the clothes that Pierre hadworn when the wagon struck him. Marie took a pair of scissors and beganto cut up the coat, throwing the pieces one by one into the blazing ﬁre.She stopped when some fragments of brain tissue appeared, dissolved intotears, and kissed them passionately until Bronia grabbed the scissors andcontinued cutting and burning the remains of the clothing. After thisMarie made the decision to concentrate on her remaining family and herscience, although joylessly.
During much of the summer and early fall, Marie prepared to teach
Pierre’s course at the Sorbonne. Since she was the ﬁrst woman to teach“PIERRE IS DEAD? DEAD? ABSOLUTELY DEAD?” 79there, she was well aware that many people would be watching her lec-
tures with interest. In many ways, her success would reassure the worldthat a woman could be a successful professor at one of the most famousuniversities in the world, a reassurance some did not want. Several hun-dred people gathered for her ﬁrst lecture, many hoping for some drama.Perhaps she would break down in tears while giving a tribute to her latehusband. A few others secretly hoped that she would fail, conﬁrming theirprejudices that a woman should not hold such a prestigious teaching andresearch chair. Neither group got what it wanted. To a thundering ovationMarie stared straight ahead and calmly began her lecture: “When oneconsiders the progress that has been made in physics in the past ten years,one is surprised at the advance that has taken place in our ideas concern-ing electricity and matter.”
8These clear unemotional words affected the
audience more than hysterical weeping would have done. Many of the lis-teners felt tears slipping down their cheeks, for Marie had resumed thecourse at the exact sentence where Pierre had left it. After completing thelecture, she left the hall quickly.
In her biography of Pierre, Marie quotes some of the eulogies of Pierre
written by his friends and colleagues. The following two examples indi-cate the love and respect of two of his fellow scientists. His student andclose friend, Paul Langevin, praised his skills as a mentor. He wrote that“my ﬁnest memories of my school years are those of moments passed therestanding before the blackboard where he took pleasure in talking with us,in awakening in us fruitful ideas, and in discussion of research whichformed our taste for the things of science.” Henri Poincaré recalled thenight before his death when he sat next to him “and he talked with me ofhis plans and his ideas.” He continued by lamenting the “stupid accident”that took the man through whom he was better able to understand the“grandeur of human intelligence.”
9
The house in Paris seemed to Marie to be haunted by memories of
Pierre. The family, including Pierre’s father, moved to a house in Sceauxnear where Pierre had grown up. She had several reasons for movingthere, although she referred to her new home as a “house withoutcharm.”
10This charmless house had a place for old Dr. Curie to cultivate
a garden and an area where the girls could have a playground with a cross-bar, trapeze, rings, and a rope.
EDUCATION OF THE CHILDREN
Marie felt that physical exercise was an important part of a child’s edu-
cation. She insisted that Irène and Eve participate in sports such as gym-80 MARIE CURIEnastics, swimming, bicycling, horseback riding, rowing, skiing, and skat-
ing. Interestingly, given her propensity to overwork, she wanted to giveher girls respite from their books and time to play in the open air. In orderto assure that Irène (Eve was too young) got the kind of education thatshe approved of—one with a heavy emphasis on the sciences—she devel-oped a home schooling experiment. She organized a cooperative schoolwith approximately ten children attending and co-opted the parents ofthe pupils and willing friends to be teachers. Henriette Perrin taught his-tory and French; Alice Chavannes taught English, German, and geogra-phy; Henri Mouton of the Pasteur Institute taught natural science; andPaul Langevin was talked into teaching mathematics. Jean Perrin taughtphysics and Marie Curie taught chemistry using their own laboratories.Instead of class, the little group sometimes visited museums in Paris. Thehome schooling experiment lasted only two years, for their parent teach-ers were too overworked to continue the project. An additional factorhastened the demise of the experimental school. Because the studentswould eventually have to take a baccalaureate examination, it was impor-tant that they become involved in an ofﬁcial program.
Much later, Marie attempted to get Irène into an all-male school, the Ly-
caeum Lakanal. The New York Times of April 9, 1911, reported the incident
under a headline, “Mme. Curie Will Persist.” The article explained that“the co-discoverer of radium, has declared war on the old-fashioned Frenchprejudice against mixed schools ....” This created a furor among the profes-
sors of the institution. She asked the president of the Lyceum to admit thethen 16-year-old Irène to the regular course of study followed by youngmen. After his hasty refusal, she did not give up and brought it up before hissuperiors. Convinced that the men received a better education, she plannedto bring the question before the Minister of Education. The request was notgranted. The article suggested that it was not the parents of the male stu-dents who objected, but the professors. In an interview, one stated
The teaching of girls is the most dreadful ordeal for male pro-
fessors. In addition to being criticised for one’s appearance, theslightest negligence in dress, or the shortest hesitation as to adate, or such like, make a teacher liable to be held up toridicule and lose all his grip of discipline on the whole class.
He concluded by stating that he would rather lecture before 100 boys than
twenty girls.
11
Grandfather Curie kept the house from being a humorless, silent place.
Marie decided that she would protect the girls from sorrow by never men-“PIERRE IS DEAD? DEAD? ABSOLUTELY DEAD?” 81tioning their father’s name. Eve clearly felt that this was a mistake, writ-
ing that “rather than plunge them [Irène and Eve] into an atmosphere oftragedy, she deprived them, and deprived herself, of noble emotions.”
12
She was morose yet demanding of the girls. Eugène Curie, on the otherhand, was joyful, teasing, and full of fun. His blue eyes sparkled as heplayed with the girls. He also made natural history and botany enjoyablefor Irène (Eve was still too young) by combining instruction with fun. In1909, an illness conﬁned him to his bed for a year. He was a difﬁcult pa-tient and Marie spent much of her time pacifying and distracting himfrom his illness. He died on February 25, 1910. Marie requested that thegravediggers remove Pierre’s cofﬁn and place Eugène’s at the bottom ofthe grave with Pierre’s cofﬁn on the top. Even in death she wanted Pierrenear her.
Although the girls achieved a good academic education, their somber,
silent mother affected their social skills. Irène especially would hide whenstrangers would visit, and she would duck her head when spoken to. Evetells of the time that Marie punished Irène for impudence by not speakingto her for two days. In spite of the sad household, Irène and Eve lovedtheir mother as dearly as she did them. They spoke of her as “Darling Méor Sweet Mé.” Although Marie was too reserved to allow her grief to beseen, her sad eyes and nervous habit of rubbing her radium irritated ﬁngerstogether made the girls sympathetic. Eve showed some resentment whenshe described her childhood, explaining that “in spite of the help mymother tried to give me, my young years were not happy ones.”
13Irène and
Eve had very different personalities. Although Eve was prettier and moreapproachable, Irène was much more like her mother. Irène’s interests alsoparalleled those of Marie, but Eve loved to write and was musically in-clined.
NOTES
1. Eve Curie, Madame Curie: A Biography (Garden City, NY: Doubleday,
Doran, & Co., 1938), 246.
2. Eve Curie, Madame Curie , 246.
3. “Prof. Curie Killed in a Paris Street,” New York Times, 20 April 1906, 11,
col. 3.
4. Susan Quinn, Marie Curie: A Life (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1995),
232.
5. Eve Curie, Madame Curie, 249.
6. Eve Curie, Madame Curie , 252.82 MARIE CURIE7. “Pension for Curie Family,” New York Times , 22 April 1906, 9, col. 2.
8. Eve Curie, Madame Curie, 259.
9. Marie Curie, Pierre Curie , trans. Charlotte and Vernon Kellogg (New
York: Macmillan, 1923), 146–51.
10. Quinn, Marie Curie: A Life , 248.
11. “Mme. Curie Will Persist,” New York Times, 9 April 1911, pt. 3, 1, col. 6.
12. Eve Curie, Madame Curie, 268.
13. Eve Curie, Madame Curie , 272.“PIERRE IS DEAD? DEAD? ABSOLUTELY DEAD?” 83