Chapter 1
EARLY LIFE AND EDUCATION
The four surviving children of Bronislawa Sklodowska and Wladyslaw
Sklodowski1gathered around their gravely ill mother on May 8, 1878.
Bronislawa’s body was ravaged by the tuberculosis she had contractedsome time before 1871 when her youngest daughter, Maria (later to beknown as Marie Curie), was only four years old. At this time the onlyknown treatments for tuberculosis were rest, medicinal waters, and ahealthy climate.
2Bronislawa spent two years of Maria’s childhood away
from the family home in Warsaw, Poland, taking the “cure” in a Frenchspa. Even before their mother’s sickness and ultimate death, Maria’s child-hood had been difﬁcult. Some of the family’s problems were political. Al-though Poland had once been one of the largest nations in Europe, a seriesof wars divided it into three provinces, each controlled by a different coun-try. The Sklodowskis grew up in Warsaw, a city dominated by the Russiantsars. Although Wladyslaw was a loyal Pole, he was a mathematics andphysics teacher in a government school under Russian control. This situ-ation made his position in the school very precarious, for if he wanted tokeep his job he had to appear to be conforming to Russian requirements.If he allowed the students to speak Polish or used Polish himself, he wouldbe replaced by a Russian, since the Russian police kept a close watch overPolish teachers. And should he be suspected of harboring any revolution-ary ideas, he would be arrested and severely punished. The fear of reprisalshaunted the Sklodowski children throughout their lives.
Children whose lives are ﬁlled with pleasure, joy, and love react very dif-
ferently throughout their lives from those who are haunted by fear andanxiety. Well-to-do middle class American children ﬁnd it difﬁcult to un-derstand what it is like to be scarred by apprehension and hunger. To Iraqi,
Rwandan, and Bosnian children or to American inner-city children theseconditions are normal, and they live their lives accordingly. Throughouther life, Marie Curie felt a great loyalty to Poland, but the hardships thatshe endured as a child inﬂuenced the kind of adult that she became.
Poland’s problems stretched back over many years. With a government
that had long been inefﬁcient, chaotic, and corrupt, it was ripe for atakeover by its stronger, more efﬁcient neighbors, Austria, Russia, andPrussia. Eager to increase their own territories and thus their power,Poland was partitioned among these countries in the late eighteenth cen-tury. For a short time, the Poles saw powerful Napoleon as a potentialbenefactor. As he was racing around Europe conquering country aftercountry, Napoleon used Polish Legions in many of his battles. After he de-feated Austria and Prussia, Napoleon created the Duchy of Warsaw andhelped the Poles raise their own army. At the same time, Russia preparedits own plan for restoring the Polish state under the rule of the Russiantsar, Alexander I. Any hope that the Polish people had of regaining con-trol over their country through Napoleon was squelched after his disas-trous defeat by Russia (1811–1812). Napoleon’s Duchy of Warsaw wasreplaced by a Kingdom of Poland, connected to Russia by a union withthe tsar of Russia. This tsar also became King of Poland, which had itsown constitution, parliament, army, and treasury. The remaining territo-ries were united under Prussian rule.
Constant tension existed between the despotic administration in Rus-
sia and the constitutional regime in Poland. Young Poles conspiredagainst the government and planned an uprising. On November 29, 1830,the rebellion exploded. Even though the Polish army fought valiantly, inthe end it could not compete with the superior resources of Russia and wasforced to surrender in September 1831. After the failure of the revolt,many of the concessions the Poles had previously gained from the Rus-sians were taken away. The constitution was annulled, the army was liq-uidated, Warsaw University was closed, property was conﬁscated, andsuspected dissidents were deported. Many of the exiled leaders went toFrance, forming an expatriate community in Paris that Marie Curie wouldlater join.
Another failed uprising occurred in January 1863 and lasted through
1865. In the earlier rebellion (1830) as in this one, few peasants were in-volved. Since they had few rights, most peasants were not overly con-cerned about who ruled them. Most of the rebels were priests, clerks,burghers (merchants), gentry, and intellectuals. The rebellious Poles were2 MARIE CURIEso harshly defeated in 1865 that they gave up the idea of liberating Poland
through military means for many years and resorted to civil disobedienceinstead. Both the Poles and the Russians needed the support of the peas-ants in order to be successful. Russian authorities ﬁnally recognized thatthey must court the peasants if they wished to have Poland runningsmoothly. In 1864 the Russian tsar issued a decree enfranchising them.This long overdue freedom from their feudal obligations did not have theeffect that the Russians expected. Instead, the peasants gradually becamemembers of the National Polish Community—the goal of the rebelliousPoles.
It was into this political climate that Marie Curie’s parents met and
married. When Wladyslaw married Bronislawa Boguska in 1860 she washeadmistress of one of the best private school for girls in Warsaw. Bronis-lawa was the oldest of six children of a family of country squires. Althoughthe family belonged to the landowning nobility, its members had to workfor others in order to make a living. The family had enough money, how-ever, to give their daughter a good education in a private school in War-saw. After graduation, she became a teacher in the same school andeventually became its director. Although she had little money, she was abeautiful, accomplished, well-educated woman who was noted for hermusical abilities. Wladyslaw was also part of the minor nobility who, be-cause of the misfortunes of Poland, was poor. He studied science at theUniversity of St. Petersburg in Russia and returned to Warsaw where hetaught mathematics and physics. The marriage seemed suitable to all ob-servers, lacking only one thing—money.
The couple moved into apartments adjacent to Bronislawa’s class-
rooms. They lived there for seven years, during which time they had ﬁvechildren: Zoﬁa known as Zosia (b. 1862), Józef (b. 1863), Bronislawa,named for her mother and known as Bronia (b. 1865), Helena known asHela (b. 1866), and Maria known as Manya (b. 1867). Wladyslaw musthave convinced the Russians of his orthodoxy, for he received a promo-tion, which amounted to a second job that allowed Bronislawa to give upher position and stay home with her children. He served both as a profes-sor of mathematics and physics, and school under-inspector. Since theycould no longer live in the apartments owned by her school, they movedto quarters provided by Wladyslaw’s school. Maria was still a baby whenthey moved in 1868, but Bronislawa tutored the other children, especiallythe two older ones, Zoﬁa and Józef.
Because Bronislawa experienced the ﬁrst symptoms of tuberculosis
when her youngest child, Maria, was born she never held the little girlEARLY LIFE AND EDUCATION 3close or kissed her. Although she may have felt that physically distancing
herself from the child would protect her from tuberculosis, it had anotherless desirable effect on the small girl. Even though her mother smiled andgave her affectionate looks, these signs represented mixed messages toMaria. It was difﬁcult for the youngster to understand the lack of physicalcontact from a mother who professed a great love for her. Maria worshipedher mother, but when she pushed her clinging hands aside and suggestedthat she go outside to play in the garden she felt rejected. These child-hood experiences may explain why, as she grew older she found it very dif-ﬁcult to be physically close to people.
Maria was always a gifted child. Eve Curie in her biography of her
mother described some of the family dynamics. Maria’s older sister Broniaenjoyed playing teacher with her little sister Maria, the student. Oncewhen teacher Bronia was stumbling through a reading assignment, four-year-old Maria became impatient, grabbed the book, and read the open-ing sentence on the page perfectly. Bronia was humiliated, and Mariaburst into tears, claiming that she “didn’t do it on purpose.” As Broniasulked, Maria said that it wasn’t her fault; “it’s only because it was soeasy!”
3Instead of being delighted, her parents were concerned about her
precociousness. They would have preferred that she was a little girl whoplayed with blocks and dolls.
When Bronislawa became ill, much of her care devolved upon the old-
est daughter, Zoﬁa (known as Zosia). Her mother selected 11-year-oldZosia to accompany her to the spa where she served her mother as a nurse,maid, laundry woman, and entertainer. Zosia was considered to be “deli-cate,” and the family thought that bathing in the sulfur baths and takinglong naps would restore her health. However, it seems that Zosia had lit-tle time for these healthful activities. Her constant attention to the needsof Bronislawa resulted in a closeness between the two and contrasted withher mother’s behavior toward her younger daughter, Maria, with whomshe was physically distant. She did not seem to fret about exposing “deli-cate” Zosia to tuberculosis. Zosia attended a French school and was an ex-cellent student. Bronislawa was proud of Zosia’s school accomplishmentsand was overjoyed when Zosia announced that she was ﬁrst in her class.Perhaps it was her background as a schoolteacher, but to BronislawaSklodowska it was very important that her children do well in school.
After two years at the spa, it became apparent that Bronislawa’s health
was not improving, so she and Zosia returned home. As if their mother’sgrave illness was not enough, politics intruded upon their lives causingWladyslaw to lose his teaching position and position as under-inspector.4 MARIE CURIEUnder-inspector was the highest administrative position in the schools
that a Pole could expect to hold. Wladyslaw’s loyalty to Russia was alwayssuspect, and when the Russian policy became increasingly more severe, helost his job. The Russian government had embarked upon a policy knownas Russianization, where not only was Poland’s ofﬁcial language Russianbut Polish ofﬁcials such as Wladyslaw Sklodowski were replaced by Rus-sian immigrants. The family lost its living quarters, status, and income. Inorder to survive, Wladyslaw turned the family’s new home into a boardingschool for boys. The house was raucous and overcrowded, and the schooldid not solve the Sklodowskis’ ﬁnancial worries as they had hoped. Infact, it may have had a more dire consequence for the family. Both Zosiaand her younger sister Bronia contracted typhus in 1874. Often associatedwith wars and human disasters, typhus had existed in epidemic form inPoland ever since Napoleon’s troops ﬁrst invaded in the early nineteenthcentury.
4Possibly the conditions at the crowded boarding school provided
the source of the disease for Zosia and Bronia. Although Bronia recov-ered, 14-year-old Zosia, her mother’s pride and joy, died. It took two moreyears before their mother ﬁnally succumbed to tuberculosis, but she neverrecovered from the death of the daughter who had given so much to her.
Although Maria, the baby of the family, had spent the least amount of
time with their mother, the tragedy seemed to affect her more profoundlythan the others. Bronislawa died on May 9, 1878, the day after she hadcalled her children and husband into her bedroom to say goodbye. Ten-year-old Maria sobbed uncontrollably. In two years she had lost both a sis-ter and her mother.
EDUCATION
Maria was only six years old when her father was forced out of his sup-
plemental job as under-inspector. Her formal schooling had begun at theFreta Street School where her mother had been headmistress. In order toget to school Maria had to walk a long distance, so when she was in thethird grade her parents enrolled her with her sister Helena in another pri-vate school closer to home. By this time, her mother’s tuberculosis hadgotten much worse, and the family took in a boarder, Antonina Tupalska,a math and history teacher who helped around the house and walkedMaria and Helena to school. The children thought that bossy Miss Tupal-ska was hardly a suitable substitute for their mother. Once they arrived atthe Madame Jadwiga Sikorska’s private school, the girls received an ex-cellent education. Both she and her sister Helena were in the same classEARLY LIFE AND EDUCATION 5in school, although Helena was a year older. It must have been difﬁcult for
Helena to ﬁnd her younger sister surpassing her in class. Many years later,Helena recalled an incident in which Maria had forgotten to memorize along passage in German. Since German was her third class, she used thetwo ten-minute breaks between classes to learn the passage. Helena com-plained that it had taken her several hours to learn the same passage. Allof the Sklodowski children were ﬁne students, but there is little doubtthat Maria’s special abilities caused some problems with her brother andsisters.
Although she was required to teach only in Russian, Madame Sikorska
was able to conceal what she was really doing from the Russian authori-ties. While she was actually teaching the Polish language, geography, andhistory both teacher and students engaged in an elaborate cover-up. Forexample, home economics on the ofﬁcial program really stood for Polishhistory. Everyone in the school understood the deception. When the Rus-sian inspectors came students and teachers returned to the required courseof study. During Maria’s year at school the inspector was quite benign andseemed to empathize with the school’s Polish sympathies. At one time heeven warned them that the superintendent was coming the next day andthat the children should not bring their Polish books to school. However,some of the subsequent inspectors were much more menacing.
Although Maria was the youngest student, she was also the brightest.
Since she spoke Russian well she was often chosen to recite when the in-spector came to visit. She wrote that “this was a great trial to me, becauseof my timidity; I wanted always to run away and hide.” Maria later de-scribed her feelings as anger not timidity. I “wanted always to raise my lit-tle arms to shut the people away from me, and sometimes, I must confess,I wanted to raise them as a cat [raises] its paws, to scratch !...”
5
Maria’s stern but kindly teacher Mlle. Tupalska was a patriotic Pole.
She illegally taught the children Polish history in Polish. The entire classwas trained to hide its books when a bell signaled the arrival of the Rus-sian inspector. One morning when they were deeply engrossed in studyingPolish history in the forbidden Polish language, the bell sounded. Imme-diately all remnants of Polish history vanished; the students were calmlysewing buttonholes in squares of material. The inspector asked theteacher to call on one of the students. The frightened victim was Maria.She was always selected because of the extent of her knowledge. Afterbeing satisﬁed that she answered all of his questions correctly, the inspec-tor went off to another classroom. Maria was so upset after he left that sheburst into tears.6 MARIE CURIEFrom her father, Maria developed a love not just for science but also for
literature, especially poetry. She easily memorized long passages from thegreat Polish poets and became proﬁcient in French, German, Russian andlater English. Bronislawa was an accomplished musician, but Maria notedthat although her mother had a beautiful voice, her own “musical studieshave been very scarce.”
6She regretted the fact that when her mother was
no longer available to encourage her, she abandoned her music. Her fa-vorite subjects, however, were mathematics and physics. Her father encour-aged her interests, but as she recalled in her autobiography, “unhappily, hehad no laboratory and could not perform experiments.”
7
A dark cloud hovered over Maria after her mother’s death. As Bronis-
lawa became increasingly ill, she spent more and more of her time inchurch. Maria began to be a little jealous of a God who took so much ofher mother’s time away from the family. She also felt angry with this Godwho allowed bad things to happen to those she loved. Several years later,after her mother’s death, Maria rejected religion completely.
After Bronislawa died, joy and laughter were very rare in the house-
hold. Maria’s father mourned by becoming preoccupied with his work.The period of mourning lasted for several years, as was the custom inPoland. The windows had black curtains, women wore black veils, andnotepaper was edged with black. The atmosphere was not a very healthyone for a sensitive young girl. Madam Sikorska realized that Maria wasemotionally distraught and suggested to Wladyslaw that she stay out ofschool for a year. Her father rejected the kindly Sikorska’s advice and in-stead pulled her out of the nurturing environment of the private school.He enrolled her in the government-run Advanced High School (Gymna-sium) Number Three in downtown Warsaw in order to expose her to amore rigorous education. Even though Maria repeated the previous gradeshe was still younger than the other students. Prior to Russiﬁcation thisschool had been German. German schools were well known not only fora cold academic environment, but for their appreciation of learning, andMaria was exposed to some excellent teachers. In spite of the fact thatMaria received a superb education, especially in physics, Russian litera-ture, and the German language, she at ﬁrst despised the school. Maria andher friend Kazia found the superintendent of studies, Mlle. Mayer, partic-ularly detestable. Their disrespect infuriated “Mayer” as they called her.Mayer was ﬁxated on Maria’s curly hair that refused to be conﬁned intosmooth braids. When reprimanded, Maria would look innocently at herteacher. This look further annoyed her teacher, who sputtered that Mariamust not look down at her. Maria, who was a head taller than Mayer,EARLY LIFE AND EDUCATION 7replied that she could hardly do anything else. Maria and Kazia were dis-
covered dancing in joy among the desks after the assassination of the Rus-sian Tsar, Alexander II, an incident that did not endear them to Mayerand the Russian authorities.
Maria did not want to admit that she was beginning to enjoy school. In
a letter to Kazia during vacation, she admitted her guilty secret. “I likeschool. Perhaps you will make fun of me, but nevertheless I must tell youthat I like it, and even that I love it.”
8Maria loved learning but took great
delight in various pranks that she and Kazia played on their governmentteachers and students. Yet Maria was often under stress. Fear of the Rus-sian inspectors, a compelling need to be the best in her class in all sub-jects, and continuing sadness over the deaths of her mother and sisteradded to her discomfort. She was on an emotional roller coaster vacillat-ing between almost frenzied joy and deep depression.
As time went on, Maria found herself deeply involved in Poland’s prob-
lems. Although one might expect that the oppressive conditions imposedupon the Poles by the Russians would stimulate another revolution, manyPolish leaders decided that insurrection would not only be dangerous butwould not work. Instead they decided to forego their goal of working forindependence immediately and sought to supplant it with an attempt tostrengthen the country through more subtle means, including education,economic development, and modernization. In other words, they wantedto fortify the country from the grass roots up. Many who supported thisview considered it a stopgap measure while they awaited an eventual op-portunity to become self-governing. Maria suffered along with Poland.But none of her personal hobgoblins interfered with her progress inschool.
In 1883 she graduated from Gymnasium Number Three. Like her sib-
lings Józef and Bronia, she ﬁnished ﬁrst in her class and was awarded agold medal. Fifteen-year-old Maria was younger than her fellow students.After graduation, the stress of her determination to be the best academi-cally, the loss of her mother and sister, and the state of Poland caught upwith her. As she wrote in her autobiography, “the fatigue of growth andstudy compelled me to take almost a year’s rest in the country.”
9The
country life at the estate of one of her two Boguski uncles without thepressure of responsibilities seemed to be the ideal cure.
Maria traveled south through the ﬂat plains of Poland toward her un-
cles’ houses. Although the ﬁrst part of her journey was by train, the ﬁnalpart was over rutted roads in a horse and wagon. While bouncing alongshe was able to get a clear view of the Poland that she loved so well with8 MARIE CURIEits beauty smudged by the poverty of the people. She saw examples of
peasant hardship with shoeless men and women plowing the ﬁelds. If theywere fortunate they had oxen, if not they pushed the heavy plows byhand.
She ﬁrst went to her mother’s brothers, Henryk and Wladyslaw Bo-
guski. Charming though they were, the two brothers were considered theblack sheep of the family. Her other relatives criticized Uncle Henryk as adilettante—a Jack of all trades and master of none who lived on his wife’sincome as the manager of the village store. Not very kindly, they de-scribed his wife as a simple woman. Uncle Wladyslaw, on the other hand,married a woman with a dowry but became involved with his brother infailed moneymaking schemes. Maria was not aware of the ﬁnancial prob-lems that her uncles were facing, and she found the atmosphere intoxi-catingly merry. Interesting people came to visit, and the house was ﬁlledwith books, music, and entertainment of all kinds.
The time with her uncles was carefree with little responsibility to work
or study. Maria wrote to her school friend Kazia that “aside from an hour’sFrench lesson with a little boy I don’t do a thing, positively not a thing—for I have even abandoned the piece of embroidery that I had started.”Sometimes she slept late or, if she felt like it, got up at four or ﬁve o’clockin the morning to walk in the woods; roll hoops; play battledore and shuttlecock, cross-tag, the game of Goose, and “many equally childishthings.” The books that she read were “only harmless and absurd littlenovels . . . .” During this time, Maria’s intellectual interests lay dormant.
“Sometimes I laugh all by myself, and I contemplate my state of total stu-pidity with genuine satisfaction.”
10
As summer passed, Maria traveled to the house of another uncle, this
time her father’s brother Zdzislaw. Uncle Zdzislaw and his wife, AuntMaria Rogowska, lived in the foothills of the Carpathian Mountains withtheir three daughters. The lively group elevated Maria’s spirits evenhigher. One of their most enjoyable activities was the kulig, a combina-
tion costume party, ball, music, and sleigh ride. Maria wrote: “I have beento a kulig. You can’t imagine how delightful it is, especially when the
clothes are beautiful and the boys are well dressed.” Sixteen-year-oldMaria observed that “there were a great many young men from Cracow,very handsome boys who danced so well! It is altogether exceptional toﬁnd such good dancers.” The party lasted all night, and “at eight o’clockin the morning we danced the last dance—a white mazurka.”
11
Maria returned to Warsaw, but in the spring she was able to extend her
year of relaxation and fun. With her sister Helena, Maria was invited toEARLY LIFE AND EDUCATION 9spend the summer at the country estate of a former student of their
mother. The manor house was beautifully appointed. Maria described itall to Kazia.
I shall only say that it is marvelous . . . there is plenty of water
for swimming and boating, which delights me. I am learning torow—I am getting on quite well—and the bathing is ideal. Wedo everything that comes into our heads, we sleep sometimesat night and sometimes by day, we dance, and we run to suchfollies that sometimes we deserve to be locked up in an asylumfor the insane.
12
NOTES
1. In Polish, the family name of the man ends in an “i” and the woman “a.”
Thus Wladyslaw’s (Maria’s father’s) family name is Sklowdowski, whereas Bro-nislawa’s (Maria’s mother) is Sklowdowska. When speaking of the entire family,Sklowdowski would be used.
2. Not until 1882 did Robert Koch discover that tuberculosis was a conta-
gious disease caused by a bacterium. An effective treatment was only developedmany years later.
3. Eve Curie, Madame Curie: A Biography (Garden City, NY: Doubleday,
Doran, & Co., 1938), 9.
4. Typhus is caused by an organism, Rickettsia prowazekii and is transmitted
by the human body louse. The louse becomes infected when feeding on the bloodof mammals that have acute typhus fever. Infected lice then excrete the micro-scopic rickettsia when feeding on another mammal. Humans or other animals areinfected through scratching, resulting in rubbing louse fecal matter or crushedlice into a scratch, bite, or other type of wound.
5. Susan Quinn, Marie Curie: A Life (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1995),
45.
6. Marie Curie, “Autobiographical Notes ,” in Pierre Curie, trans. Charlotte
and Vernon Kellogg (New York: Macmillan, 1923), 160–61.
7. Marie Curie, “Autobiographical Notes ,” 161.
8. Eve Curie, Madame Curie, 36.
9. Marie Curie,  “Autobiographical Notes ,” 163.
10. Eve Curie, Madame Curie, 40.
11. Eve Curie, Madame Curie, 43.
12. Eve Curie, Madame Curie, 43–44.10 MARIE CURIE