Chapter 9
THE SECOND NOBEL PRIZE,
ITS AFTERMATH, AND WAR
In the midst of the furor surrounding the scandal, Marie, Bronia, and
Irène went to Stockholm to attend the Nobel ceremonies. She gave heracceptance speech with dignity, and from her demeanor no one wouldhave realized her inner turmoil. Standing in front of her scientiﬁc peerswho clearly had reservations about her receiving the prize, Marie began
Some 15 years ago the radiation of uranium was discovered by
Henri Becquerel, and two years later the study of this phenom-enon was extended to other substances, ﬁrst by me, and thenby Pierre Curie and myself. This study rapidly led us to the dis-covery of new elements, the radiation of which, while beinganalogous with that of uranium, was far more intense. All theelements emitting such radiation I have termed radioactive,
and the new property of matter revealed in this emission hasthus received the name radioactivity.
1
Curie continued by stating that the task of isolating radium (for which
she received the prize) “is the corner-stone of the ediﬁce of the science ofradioactivity.” Noting that because radium “is the most useful and power-ful tool in radioactivity laboratories” the “Swedish Academy of Scienceshas done me the very great honour of awarding me this year’s Nobel Prizefor Chemistry.”
2In this speech, Curie used the ﬁrst person more than
usual, noting that I did this or I did that, although she gave extensivecredit to others who had done work on radioactivity. To all outward ap-pearances the recipients of her lecture were accepting and the scandal didnot seem to play a part in the way the conservative scientists listened to
her speech.
Physically, however, her health broke down, and she was rushed to a
hospital 18 days after her Nobel lecture. She was gravely ill with a severekidney ailment. Marie’s close friends thought that her collapse was precip-itated by the fallout from the Langevin affair. However, her doctors diag-nosed an infection in the kidney and ureter caused by some old lesions.Although they recommended surgery, the doctors preferred to wait to seeif the infection would go away without the more radical treatment. DuringJanuary 1912, she was cared for by the Sisters of the Family of Saint Mary.The acute disease lessened and she returned home and was reunited withIrène and Eve. Although she still needed kidney surgery she went back towork in her laboratory in early March in a weakened state. She was espe-cially frail when the time came for the operation in late March. Althoughthe surgery was a success, her health was compromised for many months.
The next months were a nightmare for Marie. Physically, she was still
weak, but her state of mind was more important. She sank into a deep de-pression, and her friends feared that she might take her own life. In Marchshe returned to the hospital for surgery to remove the lesions. Afterwardsshe was so ill that she believed that death was impending. She even madeplans for the disposition of her affairs, including her radium. The recoveryfrom the surgery took much longer than was expected. In 1909 she hadweighed about 123 pounds but after her operation she weighed only 103pounds. She moved from one convalescent center to another, often leav-ing her daughters behind. She was subject to painful spasms that kept heraway from teaching much longer than she had expected. But it was notjust her physical pain that haunted her.
Feeling that she had disgraced the name Curie, she kept her address se-
cret from everyone but her family and a few close friends who were caringfor the children. The habit of recording every mundane detail of her liferemained with her even in this dark period of her life. She still noted theprice for laundry, drugs, and lessons and clothes for the children. In spiteof the hateful letters and malicious articles that appeared in the press,many strangers and friends rallied around Marie. Her brother Jòzef andher sisters Bronia and Hela rushed to France to give her their support. Per-haps her most ardent defender was Jacques Curie, who might have beenexpected to react adversely. Bronia rented a small house for her outside ofParis under the name of Dluska. Her physical problems were not over. InJune, she had a relapse and was taken to a sanatorium in the mountains ofSavoy.100 MARIE CURIEMarie’s illness and disgrace was especially difﬁcult for Irène. The mix-
ture of child/young woman that Irène was at this time made the sufferingof her beloved mother extremely hard to endure. Irène was deeply hurtwhen her mother told her that she was not to use the name Curie whenaddressing her letters, but Madame Sklodowska.
During her visit to the Royal Institution in London in 1903, Marie had
met a second collaborative couple (in addition to Margaret and WilliamHuggins), the English woman scientist Hertha Ayrton (1854–1923) andher husband. The two women became good friends. Although Marie’s andHertha’s scientiﬁc accomplishments had little in common, there weresimilarities in other aspects of their lives. For instance, both women weremarried to scientists with whom they collaborated. Ayrton was married toW . E. Ayrton (1847–1908), a fellow of the Royal Society, a pioneer inelectrical engineering, an avid advocate for technical education, and azealous supporter of women’s rights. Hertha entered science through in-vention. Based on an idea of her cousin Ansel Lee, she invented an appa-ratus fashioned to divide a line into any number of equal parts, aninstrument she claimed was useful to artists, decorators, engineers, andship’s navigators. The backgrounds of the two women were quite differ-ent, although each had encountered adversity in her younger years.Hertha, born Phoebe Sarah Marks, was born in Portsea, England. Her fa-ther, Levi Marks, was a Polish-Jewish refugee who had trouble makingends meet in his clock making/jewelry trade. Levi died in 1861 andHertha’s mother tried to support the family by her needlework. Herthahelped care for her siblings and learned to sew, cook, and keep house sothat her mother could spend all of her time on needlework. The only waythat she was able to get an education was through an aunt who ran aschool in London. Marie Curie and Hertha Ayrton appeared to be quitedifferent in their personalities. Whereas Marie was shy and retiring, Ayr-ton was self-assured and appeared to many to be abrasive. As an expres-sion of independence, Ayrton rejected her given name and adopted a newone, Hertha, suggested by her friend Ottilie Blind.
Both women, however, were stubborn and dedicated to science. Both
had shunned the religion in which they were raised. For Marie, this reli-gion was Catholicism and for Hertha, Judaism. Marie was a devout Cath-olic in her younger days before the deaths of her mother and sister. Theirdeaths led her to question why God would have allowed these tragediesto happen. Like Marie, Hertha, a devout Jew in her younger days, be-came a skeptic after her association with her atheistic cousin MarcusHertog.THE SECOND NOBEL PRIZE 101Because of ﬁnancial problems both women found it difﬁcult to obtain
an education. Hertha found her educational savior in the form of BarbaraBodichon, an eccentric philanthropist who was interested in women’scauses and who was one of the founders of the women’s college, GirtonCollege, Cambridge. Both Marie and Hertha worked as governesses tosave money for their university educations. After working for six years asa governess, Hertha explored ways to continue her education at the newlyestablished Girton College. She was introduced to Bodichon, who sug-gested that she take the scholarship examinations. However, she failed towin either of the two openings. Nevertheless, Barbara Bodichon with thehelp of other friends managed to scrape together enough money to allowher to enter Girton.
Hertha met her physicist husband Professor Ayrton during her brief
teaching career after she left Girton. Unlike in the case of Pierre andMarie, W . E. Ayrton was much older than Hertha. He was a widower withone daughter, Edith, and believed in equality of opportunity between menand women. The strongly independent personalities of both Ayrtonsmade their relationship more of a mutually supportive one than an actualpartnership such as characterized the Curies’ association. But the womenin the case of both couples found succeeding in science much easier be-cause of their scientist husbands. Some of their experiences as scientistsalso were similar. Hertha Ayrton had been denied membership in theRoyal Society as had Marie Curie in the Académie des Sciences. In addi-tion to W . E. Ayrton’s daughter, Edith, the Ayrtons had one daughter to-gether, Barbara Bodichon Ayrton.
Just as Marie Curie had been passionately involved in social justice is-
sues, particularly those involving Polish independence, Hertha Ayrton wasalso a political activist. Ayrton became a supporter of women’s causes.However, as she became older, Marie gave up her political activism for purescience. Hertha, on the other hand, supported the independence of Irelandand became more and more active in the English suffrage movement. Herﬁerce independence, her educational experiences, her husband’s egalitarianattitudes, and her success at penetrating male-dominated institutions nur-tured her inclinations. Her research, particularly that on the electric arc,while not theoretically important was respected.
Even before Marie’s troubles, she had planned to visit Hertha Ayrton
during the summer of 1912. During the spring of 1911, Ayrton had visitedCurie in Paris when Hertha presented her work on sand ripples to the So-ciété. After the presentation and a luncheon, Marie invited Hertha tovisit her at her home in Sceaux and they discussed a future visit to En-102 MARIE CURIEgland. Ayrton deplored those who had attacked Marie and sympathized
with her in her health problems. She also congratulated her on her NobelPrize. In a continuous spate of letters, Ayrton implored Marie to come toEngland with Irène and Eve. Ayrton explained that she would rent ahouse by the sea in Devonshire, so that Marie and her daughters wouldnot have to go to London ﬁrst. The trip was basically a success. Herthawas able to keep Marie’s identity secret from the press and, although shewas still often in pain, she managed to gradually increase her strength.
By the beginning of October, Marie was sufﬁciently strong to take the
ferry from Dover to Calais in France and to continue on the train toParis. Even though she was supposed to be careful, Curie quickly leaptinto the scientiﬁc scene. She was upset with some of the work of Sir Wil-liam Ramsay (1852–1916), who, like Curie, had published the atomicweight of radium. She complained to Rutherford that although they botharrived at the same results, he had the audacity to conclude that his workwas the ﬁrst valuable work on the subject. His comments about her ex-periments on atomic weights were unﬂattering and malicious, and shewas furious.
There was also a problem regarding the radium standards. Rutherford
was quite concerned because two individuals, a Viennese, Stefan Meyer,and Marie Curie, both had prepared primary radium standards. If eachhad worked accurately the standards would be identical. If not, an un-pleasant international incident could have occurred. While Marie was ab-sent, Debierne set up the apparatus to test the standards against eachother. To everyone’s relief the standards agreed.
During the ﬁrst part of December 1912, Marie began her experimental
work again. By this time the Langevin/Curie affair was over. To Irène’s de-light she dropped the name Sklodowska and again became MadameCurie. However, from 1911 to 1913 when Marie Curie was unable to con-centrate on radioactivity, many new advances had been made.
Although Curie did not make any new discoveries herself during this
period, she remained current on the many new concepts that were ﬂoat-ing around. She and Einstein corresponded and she accepted many of thenew ideas, including Rutherford’s vision of the nuclear atom and NielsBohr’s quantum theory. Her own research during this time did not breakany knowledge barriers and her involvement was mainly in the ﬁeld of ra-diochemistry. Certainly her personal difﬁculties hindered her productiv-ity. It must remain a matter of speculation whether she would haveaccomplished anything spectacularly new if her life had been different.Although Curie had many good friends in the scientiﬁc community, thoseTHE SECOND NOBEL PRIZE 103whom she had offended were full of snide remarks and were contemptu-
ous of her scientiﬁc abilities.
The year 1913 was much better for Curie than those immediately past.
She attended the Solvay Conference in Brussels, traveled to Warsaw todedicate a radium institute built in her honor, and went to Birmingham,England, to receive an honorary degree. She seemed to be less preoccu-pied with her health, although she was still too tired to spend as muchtime as she would have liked in the laboratory.
Marie began to entertain more often in her home. For example, she
hosted Albert Einstein and his wife, Mileva, for a long visit in March1913. In his thank-you note for the visit, Einstein was effusive about herhospitality. In fact, they so enjoyed each other’s company that theyplanned a hiking vacation for the summer of 1913 in the Swiss Alps. Theparty included Curie and her daughters Irène and Eve, their governess,and Einstein and his son, Hans. Marie was inﬂuential in assuring that Ein-stein got a job in Zurich, so he was somewhat in her debt. This did notstop him from being critical. Einstein claimed in a letter to his cousin,Elsa—whom he was courting to be his second wife—that the main waythat both Marie and Irène expressed their feelings was by grumbling.Susan Quinn believes that Einstein was trying to assure Elsa that his out-ing with another woman was not any fun at all.
WORLD WAR
Many European countries were in the throes of setting up radium insti-
tutes. Their major interest was in the use of radiation for treating cancer.As the cost of radium skyrocketed, both physicists and medical re-searchers became more dependent on this precious commodity. The med-ical researchers were ﬁrst in line to acquire radium, because of its potentialto cure cancer. When Marie reported to the University of Paris in the1912–1913 academic year, she complained tartly that the funds for basicresearch on radioactivity were disgracefully low. By this time, the Sor-bonne seemed to have pushed the Langevin affair into the background,and accepted the idea that the Pasteur Institute and the Sorbonne (Uni-versity of Paris) should establish an institute devoted to the science of ra-dioactivity. This institute was to be built on a new street honoring Pierre,the Rue Pierre Curie. As the workmen were apt to cut corners, Marie wasvigilant in order to be certain that the building was built according to herspeciﬁcations.
On July 31, 1914, the new institute was completed. However, it was
not to be used as a laboratory for over four years, for World War I was104 MARIE CURIEabout to begin. In August 1914, war mobilization began, followed by Ger-
many’s declaration of war on France. The men on the laboratory staff andthe students were mobilized, leaving only Marie and the mechanic whoseserious heart trouble kept him from joining the army. The French govern-ment was moved from Paris to Bordeaux, and many other Parisians fol-lowed—with many of the well to do going to the countryside.
Marie was forced to make a decision both about how to protect her
family, and the gram of radium stored in the Rue Curie laboratory. Abouta week before the mobilization, Irène (16 years old), Eve (9) and a Polishhousekeeper and Polish governess went to the seacoast in Brittany for aholiday. Marie had planned to join them for a month’s vacation. Their lit-tle ﬁshing village of l’Arcouest was peaceful and they were surrounded byMarie’s scientiﬁc friends, the Perrins and Borels. Although Irène was ex-cited about the possibility of war, sensitive Eve was upset about theprospect. Realizing that she would not be able to get to l’Arcouest, Marieinstructed Irène to do as the Perrins and Borels suggested. Irène tried torebel and begged her mother to allow her to return to Paris. Realizing thatthey were better off where they were, on August 6, Marie wrote
My dear Irène, I too want to bring you back here, but it is im-
possible for the moment. Be patient. The Germans are crossingBelgium and ﬁghting their way. Brave little Belgium did notallow them to pass without defending itself.
3
As the danger of a German attack on Paris became more imminent,
Curie had to protect her other child, the radium that was still in her lab-oratory. She was charged by the government to take it by train to Bor-deaux (where the government in exile was hiding) for safekeeping. Theradium was in a lead-protected bag that was so heavy that she couldhardly lift it. After secreting the radium in Bordeaux, Curie returned toParis on the train where people seemed gratiﬁed to see someone returningto Paris. When she arrived in Paris, she learned that the important battleof the Marne had begun. Terribly concerned about being separated fromher daughters for so long, she, nevertheless, made the choice to remain inParis at the Institute. During the ﬁerce ﬁghting the French almost weredefeated. However, the Paris taxis saved the day by rushing 6,000 reservetroops to the front line. This battle was over on September 10, 1914. Al-though the French and British eventually won, from the standpoint of theloss of life, it was an unsatisfactory victory. The French had about 250,000casualties, the Germans lost about the same number, and the Britishabout 13,000 men. The importance of this battle was that the French andTHE SECOND NOBEL PRIZE 105British forces were able to thwart the German plan for a speedy victory.
Marie felt a great relief when, after that long battle, the French andBritish were victorious; however, because the German army retreated andwas still capable of ﬁghting, all prospects for a short war vanished. Never-theless, this victory made it possible for Curie to bring Irène and Eve backfrom Brittany and continue with their schoolwork.
Marie was a loyal Frenchwoman by this time, but she never forgot that
she was also a Pole. Poland was partially occupied by the Germans and shehad not heard from her family. Marie desperately wanted to ﬁnd some-thing that she could do to aid the allied war effort. She chose a projectthat took her away from her beloved radium but one in which she wasuniquely qualiﬁed to serve. Although she had never worked with Rönt-gen’s X rays, she had the theoretical knowledge to apply them to a practi-cal use. Marie decided that her war work would consist of organizingradiology services for military hospitals.
By the beginning of World War I, physicians realized that X rays would
make visible the exact location of bullets, giving the wounded a greaterchance to survive. Although at the beginning of the war the army healthservice had X-ray equipment in some of the large hospitals and even a fewmobile units, it did not have units near the battle zones. The ofﬁcial view,shared by the front-line surgeons, was that there was no need for such fa-cilities. The surgeons agreed with the ofﬁcial opinion because they hadlittle conﬁdence in the usefulness of radiology. Curie, on the other hand,was convinced that many lives would be saved. Through her passion, shewas able to convince a private organization, the Patronage des blesses, to
give her funds for the project. Using her ofﬁcial title, technical director ofradiology, she located individual donors who saw the importance of thescheme. Even as the project developed, she still had difﬁculties with thearmy. It put roadblocks in her way at every turn, but on November 1,1914, she ﬁnally received the needed permission.
Marie gathered together all of the apparatus that she could ﬁnd in lab-
oratories and in storage. Then she recruited and trained volunteer helpersto work in several stations throughout France. Although these stationswere very useful, they were not sufﬁcient to satisfy the need. Her solutionwas to outﬁt a radiologic car in collaboration with the Red Cross. Usingan ordinary touring car she transported the radiologic apparatus. It in-cluded a dynamo worked by the engine of the car to furnish the electriccurrent necessary to produce X rays. This mobile unit could be availablewhen any of the hospitals in the environs of Paris called.
Curie proved to be an efﬁcient fund-raiser and established or greatly
improved 200 radiological installations. In addition she was able to equip106 MARIE CURIEand give the army twenty radiologic cars, whose frames were donated by
various people. Curie explained that these cars were especially importantin the ﬁrst two years of the war when the military possessed few radiologicinstruments.
When mobilization ﬁrst occurred, she wrote Irène that the two of them
would try to make themselves useful. Irène beseeched her mother to allowher to return to Paris immediately. Marie replied that although she coulduse Irène’s help it was still to dangerous for her to return. She admonishedIrène to be patient and to look after her little sister. Looking after Eve wasthe last thing that Irène wanted to do. She continued to verbally assaulther mother with ways in which she could help in the war effort. She sug-gested nursing with the Red Cross, serving as a secretary, or even teach-ing. Her peace of mind was not helped when her fellow teenagers accusedher of being Polish and not a loyal French girl.
Continual nagging eventually wore her mother down, and 17-year-old
Irène arrived in Paris at the beginning of October 1914 to help her mother.She had ﬁnished her preparatory studies and was ready to enter the Sor-bonne but had to postpone her entry because of the war. Because she wantedto be useful, she studied nursing and learned radiology. Seeing the horriblyinjured young soldiers, many no older than Irène herself, must have been ashocking introduction to the horrors of war. Seeing the ambulance bring inthe screaming blood- and mud-covered boys and men must have had a pro-found effect on Irène. However, she learned not only to be as detached as hermother but also how to deal with the ofﬁcious military physicians who foundit inconceivable that a woman could know more than they did.
Although Marie recalled that the conditions during these war years
were especially difﬁcult, she also noted that both she and Irène had pleas-ant memories of the hospital personnel, many of whom went out of theirway to be helpful. Marie found that if she wanted the operation to gosmoothly she had to look after each detail herself. She had to go throughthe bureaucracy to obtain passes and permission to move with her radio-logic cars. She recalled
many a time I loaded my apparatus on to the train myself, with
the help of the employees, to make sure that it would go for-ward instead of remaining behind several days at the station.And on arrival I also went to extract them from the encum-bered station.
4
Curie’s personal supervision ensured that the well-equipped cars were
quickly assembled. The military chiefs were especially appreciative, be-THE SECOND NOBEL PRIZE 107cause their appeals to the Central Health Service were answered, if at all,
with snail-like speed. Finding competent radiologists to operate the equip-ment was more of a problem than obtaining the apparatus. Both theFrench and English army had recruited scientists without considering thepotential loss of talented lives. Several of France’s most talented scientistswere killed. On the other hand, Curie recognized that wartime radiologicpractice did not require a great deal of medical knowledge. She insistedthat an intelligent person who had some idea about electrical machinerycould be trained to be competent. She was especially pleased to train pro-fessors, engineers, and university students, insisting that they often madegood manipulators. Another impediment was that she had to look forpeople who were not in the military or who were stationed close to the lo-cation where they were needed. As the war dragged on, the army recog-nized the need for more radiology technicians. It had even opened aschool for X-ray technicians. Curie objected to the quality of the trainees,claiming that they were not selected because of aptitude and were often,at best, mediocre. The army ﬁnally agreed to ask Curie to conduct acourse for technicians, but the facilities were so bad that she found an-other answer. Since women were not directly involved in ﬁghting, her so-lution was to train women to do the radiologic work.
After the Health Service accepted Curie’s proposal to add a radiology
department to the newly founded nurses’ school at the Edith Cavell Hos-pital, they began by training one hundred and ﬁfty X-ray operators. Manyof the young women had only an elementary education, but they werewilling and able to undergo rather rigorous training. Not only did theyhave extensive practical training, but they also were given instruction inanatomy and provided with some theoretical principles. The teacherswere volunteers including Irène Curie. Even though the graduates weresupposed to be aids to physicians, some showed that they were capable ofdoing independent work.
Curie’s experience during the war led her to write a small book, La ra-
diologie et la guerre (Radiology and the War) .On the title page of this
book, she calls herself “Mme. Pierre Curie” indicating that the long daysof fearing that she had shamed the name of Curie were really past. In thisbook she stressed the importance of radiology, and compared its develop-ment during war to its peacetime uses. This book contains plates of radio-graphs. In the ﬁrst chapter she described X rays and the apparatus to beused in x-raying broken bones and ﬁnding foreign materials such as bulletsembedded in the body; in chapter 2 she explained the procedure used toproduce X rays, and in the third chapter, discussed the X-ray installations108 MARIE CURIEin the hospitals. She then included a long chapter that outlined the radi-
ological work in the hospitals, and in the last two chapters she discussedthe radiological personnel. She ended the small book with an explanationof radiotherapy and radium therapy.
5
Once Curie had her radiology stations set up and her radiological cars
in action, she turned back to her true love, radium. In 1915, she retrievedthe radium that she had deposited in Bordeaux and brought it back toParis. This was the same radium that she and Pierre had originally sepa-rated. Since she had no time for pure research, she decided to use the ra-dium for medical purposes. She had long been aware of the fact thatradium was useful in treating cancer. She decided that it had specialwartime potentials. It could be used to treat scar tissue, arthritis, and dif-ferent ailments. Since radium itself had become immensely valuable, shedid not want to risk the loss of any of the rare material. Thus the materialthat she placed at the disposal of the Health Service was not the radiumitself but the emanation that it sporadically emitted. This emanation wasthe gas radon. If the radon was drawn off from the radium that formed itand was sealed in thin glass tubes, these tubes could be inserted into thebody wherever they were needed leaving the radium itself intact. Curiecalled these tubes emanation bulbs. Since she had no assistants she mademost of the emanation bulbs herself. At this time she recognized that theemanations could have harmful effects, although she was certain thatthey were short term. Protecting her technicians was another reason thatshe prepared most of them herself. She insisted that the Health Boardtake special methods to protect the laboratory where the bulbs were pre-pared from shells. As Curie noted “the handling of radium is far frombeing free from danger (several times I have felt a discomfort which I con-sider a result of this cause).” Although she insisted that measures be takento prevent the harmful effects of the rays on the persons preparing the em-anation, she still thought that the discomfort, tiredness, and irritabilitythat resulted from work with radium was temporary and would disappearas soon as the work ceased.
Amid the hard work of the war years, Marie obtained great pleasure in
corresponding with the young soldiers. One of her favorite correspon-dents was her nephew, Maurice Curie, Jacques’ son. Maurice wrote of thedemoralized men who spent weeks, or sometimes even months, in frigid,soggy trenches infested with rats and lice. They were constantly exposedto enemy ﬁre and had little opportunity to ﬁght back. In April 1915, Ger-many introduced poison gas into the war. The French soldiers were forcedto test gas masks in an enclosed room. Maurice wrote of the terribleTHE SECOND NOBEL PRIZE 109headaches that resulted. Although Maurice survived the war, other young
men with whom Marie corresponded were not as lucky. When the Ger-man army collapsed in the fall of 1918, the mood of the troops improvedand a spirit of celebration was evident throughout France at the signing ofthe armistice on November 11, 1918. Marie herself celebrated with herfriend Marthe Klein. After an unsuccessful search for ﬂags, she boughtred, white, and blue material and hurriedly produced homemade ﬂags.She and Marthe joined the celebration by riding through the streets ofParis in her radiology car waving their ﬂags.
After a war is over, as mothers, siblings, and wives mourn their dead,
comfort their wounded, and repair broken relationships, people cannothelp but ask the question “why?” Why did we ﬁght the war? Was it worththe price paid? After World War I, these questions were asked by manywho were affected. Many people considered that both sides had much toanswer for. Marie Curie, on the other hand, was convinced of the cor-rectness of the Allied side. Perhaps her experience under the totalitarianRussian regime in Poland convinced her that living in freedom was themost important of values. She felt vindicated when her X rays were ableto save lives, conﬁrming her views that pure science had the power to pos-itively inﬂuence humankind.
The Treaty of Versailles, the treaty that ended the war, had in its
essence the seeds of disaster. Curie, however, was gratiﬁed to ﬁnd her na-tive Poland again a sovereign state in its own right for the ﬁrst time in 123years. Other provisions of the treaty were less propitious. The formationof the League of Nations meant to ensure that war was obsolete, failed tobe ratiﬁed by the United States and without U.S. support was a toothlesstiger. The terms of the treaty forced Germany to reduce its armed forcesdrastically and did not allow it to use conscription. Many former Germanlands were given to Belgium, France, Denmark, and (of course) Poland.The land given to Poland became known as the “Polish Corridor” and itseparated the main part of Germany from East Prussia. Germany lost all ofits colonies. Most devastating for the future, Germany was forced to payhuge reparations to the Allies for the damages caused by the war and ac-cept all of the blame for the war. New countries were created that upsetthe balance of power in Europe. Parts of two small countries were given to Italy and another new country was formed on the Adriatic coast called Yugoslavia, which included Serbia and Bosnia. Lithuania, Latvia,Estonia, and Finland were formed from the land lost by Germany’s allyRussia. Czechoslovakia and Hungary were created out of the old Austro-110 MARIE CURIEHungarian Empire. A new republican form of government, the Weimar
Republic, was created based on proportional representation. Although itwas intended to keep Germany from being taken over by a dictatorship, itled to the formation of more than 30 political parties. No one party waspowerful enough to form a government on its own. Proud Germany wasforced to its knees. These provisions led to utter humiliation. The peoplesuffered under inﬂation, and when the opportunity arose to regain self-respect, Hitler appeared and promised them the moon and the stars; theywere ready to follow him.
Even during the midst of the war, Marie made plans for the future. In
1915, the new laboratory building was completed, but she had no moneyor help to move the equipment into the new facility. Marie overcame thatsmall obstacle by moving it herself with the help of Irène and the me-chanic when he was not ill. One of her ﬁrst concerns was to have treesplanted on the laboratory grounds. She explained that she wanted tomake things pleasant for those who would work in the new building. Inaddition to the trees, they planted beds of ﬂowers and roses. The plantingand organization took several years, but all was completed by the begin-ning of the school year 1919–1920, when the country was demobilizing.During the spring of 1919, she planned special courses for American sol-diers whom, she pronounced, “studied with much zeal the practical exer-cises directed by my daughter.”
6
The radiological services that were established during the war, such as
the radiographic Nurses’ School and the emanation service, were contin-ued during peacetime as well. However, Paris was so devastated thatmoney was not available for the laboratory work. Marie worried that shewas no longer young. “I frequently ask myself whether, in spite of recentefforts of the government aided by some private donations, I shall eversucceed in building up for those who will come after me an Institute ofRadium, such as I wish to the memory of Pierre Curie and to the highestinterest of humanity.”
7
NOTES
1.Nobel Lectures in Chemistry: 1901–1921 (Amsterdam: Elsevier, for the
Nobel Foundation, 1966), 202.
2.Nobel Lectures in Chemistry , 203.
3. Eve Curie, Madame Curie: A Biography (Garden City, NY: Doubleday,
Doran, & Co., 1938), 290.THE SECOND NOBEL PRIZE 1114. Marie Curie, “Autobiographical Notes ,” in Pierre Curie, trans. Charlotte
and Vernon Kellogg (New York: Macmillan, 1923), 214.
5. Marie Curie, La radiologie et la guerre (Evreux: Imprimerie Ch. Herissey,
1921).
6. Marie Curie, “Autobiographical Notes,” 221.7. Marie Curie, “Autobiographical Notes,” 223–24.112 MARIE CURIE