Chapter 6
A YEAR OF CONTRASTS:
GOOD NEWS, BAD NEWS
The year 1903 was one of contrast for the Curies. As discussed in the last
chapter, it was the year in which Marie’s beloved father died. Yet it wasalso the year in which she brilliantly defended her doctoral thesis and be-came the ﬁrst French woman to earn a doctorate. An examining commit-tee comprised of two physicists and one chemist (including two futureNobel prizewinners) declared that she had defended her thesis with “dis-tinction.” But this year, more than most, seemed to have more than itsshare of ups and downs for the Curies. Pierre, accompanied by Marie,made a trip to London to present an invited lecture at the Royal Institu-tion. Pierre’s health had become increasingly fragile during the previousyear. Immediately before the lecture Pierre became so ill that he even haddifﬁculty dressing himself. However, once he started to speak he seemedto revive. His talk was well received and his party tricks with the radiumthat had probably caused his sickness were especially appreciated. Thelecture that could have been a disaster because of his health turned out tobe a great success. During one demonstration, he spilled a minusculequantity of radium; ﬁfty years later the level of radioactivity in the build-ing was sufﬁcient to require decontamination. While Pierre was lecturing,Marie, who had done much of the work that he was describing, sat in theaudience, giving the audience the impression that Pierre was the more im-portant scientist. However, Pierre himself was careful to acknowledge hiswife’s essential role in their collaborative work.
While they were in England, Marie and Pierre met the elite of British
science: Sir William Crookes (1832–1919), Lord Rayleigh (1842–1919),Sir Oliver Lodge (1851–1940), H.E. Lankester (1814–1874), Ray Lan-kester (1847–1929), and, of course, Lord Kelvin. Although Kelvin never
believed that radium was a new element, he was very kind to the youngcouple. He showed them through his laboratory and seemed greatly inter-ested in their research. During this trip they were hosted by the as-tronomers Sir William (1824–1910) and Lady Margaret (1848–1915)Huggins. This experience was especially meaningful to Marie, because theHugginses were also a collaborative scientiﬁc team. Their collaborationwas different from the Curies’ because Margaret had no formal training, al-though she had as a child exhibited a passionate interest in astronomy. Itstill was gratifying to ﬁnd another couple working so successfully together.Margaret developed many skills and the couple’s common interest in spec-troscopy that brought them together persisted throughout their careers.Although Margaret was usually characterized as William’s assistant, helater recognized her very real contributions. In a paper on the Orion Neb-ula he noted “I have added the name of Mrs. Huggins to the title of the pa-pers, because she has not only assisted generally in the work, but hasrepeated independently the delicate observations made by the eye.”
1Marie
was very impressed by the way Margaret and William worked together.
In this same year Marie lost a child, born prematurely after one of their
bicycle rides. During her pregnancy, she had been exposed to extremelyhigh doses of radiation, although she did not relate it to the miscarriage.She wrote to Bronia on August 25, 1903, about her disappointment at thebaby’s death. She explained that the little girl was still living when bornand that she “had wanted it badly.”
2Friends had previously urged Marie to
take better care of herself. A colleague, Georges Sagnac, had written toPierre during the previous spring, berating the couple for not eating prop-erly. Sagnac’s recipe for a cure involved regular meal times without read-ing or talking physics. Looking back on this and other warnings as well aswhat she knew herself, Marie decided that her lifestyle was to blame forthe miscarriage. This self-blame caused an almost debilitating guilt.
Another calamity affected Maria greatly. Bronia lost her ﬁve-year-old
son later that same year to meningitis. She wrote to brother Józef aboutthe tragedy. The little boy who died had been the picture of health, and“if, in spite of every care, one can lose a child like that, how can one hopeto keep the others and bring them up?” Fearing a similar fate for Irène, shecontinued, “I can no longer look at my little girl without trembling withterror.”
3
After her miscarriage and the death of her nephew, Maria was ill during
the remainder of the summer and well into the fall. While she was conva-lescing, they took a long vacation on the Ile d’Oléron. By the end of Sep-64 MARIE CURIEtember Marie pronounced herself cured, although the doctors found her
anemic. Anemia can be brought on by exposure to radium, and it was sev-eral months more before she had the strength to go back to work.
On the positive side, several honors and prizes came to Marie and
Pierre this year. Some of their French colleagues began to recognize theimportance of their work. Previously (1902) the Académie des Sciencesof the Institute had awarded the Curies 20,000 francs for isolating radium.Then in 1903 they presented the coveted Gegner prize for the third timeto Marie for scientiﬁc promise. During the same year, Pierre won the10,000-franc biannual Prix La Caze .In November 1903, the Curies re-
ceived the Davy Medal presented by the Royal Society of London whileMarie was still recuperating.
In the June 25, 1903, issue of an American popular journal, The Inde-
pendent, Marie Curie described her investigations on radioactive sub-
stances. The editor established her credibility as a scientist by explainingthat “she has published two or three works on physical subjects” andwould soon be defending her thesis before the Sorbonne (University ofParis). After the defense, he asserted, she would have her doctor’s degree,“the highest degree given in France.” The editor claimed that “this is theﬁrst magazine article, we believe, that has appeared on the radio-active el-ements from either Madame Curie or her husband.”
4Marie’s article was
among others on topics popular at the time, including “Servia: Its Presentand Its Future,” “The Hotel Martha Washington,” “Women in ChurchWork,” and “Latin-American Revolutions.” Obviously, the editor recog-nized the importance of the Curies’ work and saw ﬁt to publish it in a formthat the general public could understand. What was so amazing, he re-ported, was that “when the new wonders of radium were announced tothe world a few months ag o...there was a rumor that a woman was asso-
ciated with the remarkable discovery.” Some people, he noted, were re-luctant to believe that Marie had an important part in the discovery. But“a perusal of the following pages will show that Professor Curie is ratherthe helpmate of his wife in this magniﬁcent piece of scientiﬁc work.”
5
Marie Curie demonstrated to the American public in this short articlethat she could succinctly present her ideas and discoveries in such a waythat the general educated public could understand them.
THE NOBEL PRIZE, 1903
TheNew York Times ’s headline for December 11, 1903, listed the Nobel
recipients for the year, noting that the prize for physics was divided be-A YEAR OF CONTRASTS 65tween Henri Becquerel of Norway and the Curies of Paris. The article
noted that the Curies were the best known of the prize recipients. Becausethey were not proﬁting ﬁnancially from the work, “their admirersthroughout the world will be delighted to hear of this windfall for them.”
6
Even though Marie’s accomplishments were recognized from as far away
as the United States, she almost missed out on the most prestigious awardof them all, the Nobel Prize. In December 1903, the Curies and Henri Bec-querel were jointly awarded the Nobel Prize for physics. Pierre Curie wasnominated by four members of the Académie to share the Nobel Prize forphysics with Henri Becquerel, completely leaving Marie out. One of theprize committee members, Gösta Mittag-Lefﬂer, a great supporter of womenscientists wrote to Pierre and explained that only he and Becquerel were tobe nominated for the prize. Pierre answered Mittag-Lefﬂer’s letter stating“if it is true that one is seriously thinking about me [for the prize], I verymuch wish to be considered together with Madame Curie with respect toour research on radioactive bodies.”
7However, since Marie Curie had not
been nominated for the 1903 prize it seemed as if she would be ineligible.The situation was saved because Marie had received two votes for the pre-vious year’s prize. By allowing one of these nominations to be valid for1903 she was permitted to share the prize with her husband and Becquerel.As the Swedish Academy of Sciences discussed the Curies’ nomination,they changed their original intent, which was to award the Curies the prizein physics for their discovery of spontaneously radioactive elements. Thechemists, however, objected because they wanted to leave the door openfor the Curies to receive a second prize, in chemistry, for the discovery ofradium. Thus, they decided to give the Curies the prize in physics in 1903“for their joint researches on the radiation phenomenon discovered byProfessor Henri Becquerel.”
8There was a tacit understanding that a prize
in chemistry might eventually be forthcoming.
As a woman Nobel Laureate, Marie Curie was an oddity in 1903 and
would still be so today. In three scientiﬁc disciplines (physics, chemistry,and physiology and medicine) women Nobel Prize winners are still veryscarce. From Marie Curie’s 1903 prize in physics through Christiane-Nusslein-Volhard’s prize in physiology and medicine in 1995, there havebeen only eleven women Nobel Prize winners in the sciences, comparedto over 400 men from 1901 (when the ﬁrst prize was given) through 2000.Marie Curie was more acceptable because she worked in collaborationwith her husband.
In the prize presentation speech given by H. R. Törnebladh, the presi-
dent of the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences, he noted that the suc-66 MARIE CURIEcess of the Curies illustrated an old proverb, “union is strength.” He also
quoted a Biblical passage stating “it is not good that the man should bealone; I will make him a help meet for him.” He continued by noting “thislearned couple represent a team of differing nationalities, a happy omenfor mankind joining forces in the development of science.”
9
The prize forever destroyed the Curies’ voluntary isolation. The prize
catapulted them into fame and forced this shy retiring couple into theunasked for and unwanted limelight. In a letter to Georges Gouy(1854–1926) on January 22, 1904, Pierre excused himself for not writingsooner “because of the stupid life I am living now.” He continued:
You have seen this sudden fad for radium. This has brought us
all the advantages of a moment of popularity; we have beenpursued by the journalists and photographers of every countryon earth; they have even gone so far as to reproduce my daugh-ter’s conversation with her nurse and to describe the black-and-white cat we have at home. Then we have received lettersand visits from all the eccentrics ....  W e  have had a large num-
ber of requests for money ....  W ith all this, there is not a mo-
ment of tranquility in the laboratory, and a voluminouscorrespondence to be sent off every night. On this regime I canfeel myself being overwhelmed by brute stupidity.
10
Marie wrote to her brother that “our life has been altogether spoiled byhonors and fame” and to her cousin Henrietta that “our peaceful and la-borious existence is completely disorganized: I do not know if it will everregain its equilibrium.”
11
Becquerel went to Stockholm to receive his award, but the Curies, who
were both unwell, blamed their teaching schedules as the reason for theirabsence. It was not until June 1905 that the Curies were able to travel toSweden, where Pierre, dressed in formal clothes and trembling with shy-ness, gave the lecture required of Nobel recipients. His voice initially qua-vered, but once he began to explain their discoveries he captivated theaudience.
The fact that Marie shared the prize with two men is taken for granted
today. But when the Curies were doing their research it was widely as-sumed that Marie was merely Pierre’s assistant. Both Pierre and Mariewanted to be certain that the male dominated scientiﬁc community gaveMarie the recognition that she deserved. Pierre was modest and unassum-ing about his own accomplishments. Collaboration was second nature toA YEAR OF CONTRASTS 67him, because his earliest work in science had been done with his brother,
Jacques. He enjoyed sharing ideas and, as Marie wrote in her biography ofPierre, his years of collaborating with Jacques were both “happy and fruit-ful.” Thus Pierre was prepared to see Marie as an equal partner. Marie ex-plained that “their devotion and their common interest in science were tothem both a stimulant and a support.”
12Even more important than
Pierre’s attitude, was Marie’s own self-conﬁdence. Because of her belief inher own abilities she did not hesitate to publish under her own name theworks for which she alone deserved the credit independently. She alsorecorded the experimental results in her notebooks that related to herown work. In 1898 she published a note under her own name announcingthe discovery of thorium’s radioactivity as well as the hypothesis thatpitchblende contained a new element. Concerning the latter conclusion,she wrote that since two minerals found in uranium ore, pitchblende andchalcolite were more active than uranium itself this “leads one to believethat these minerals may contain an element much more active than ura-nium.”
13
Her later accounts of radioactivity always mentioned her independent
contributions. She was also careful to credit Pierre with his independentwork as well as his publications that resulted from collaborating with oth-ers. In 1898 they submitted one of many joint papers to the French Acad-emy. This one was on polonium. In this, as in all of their joint papers, theywere careful to credit their individual contributions.
14This publication
policy effectively enhanced the Curies’ reputation as a collaborative cou-ple as well as helping to solidify Marie Curie’s reputation as an indepen-dent scientist. Still, when Pierre and Marie collaborated, Pierre took overthe role as the lead scientist. His name appeared ﬁrst on their joint papers.Although the couple was concerned about assuring that Marie was recog-nized for her work, they did not openly challenge the early twentieth-century ideas that supported the male scientist over the female.
CUTTING THE UNCUTTABLE
Even though Marie Curie had postulated that radioactivity was atomic
in nature, she still did not know what caused a substance to be radioac-tive. Others were equally perplexed. Once the explanation was ﬁnally un-derstood, scientists used her original idea of radioactivity as an atomicquality to build a new physics. However, the idea of the atom was not newat all. Ever since the time of the ancient Greeks (ﬁfth century 
B.C.E.), peo-
ple proposed two ways of looking at matter. They either assumed that the68 MARIE CURIEuniverse was completely full—made up of a continuum with no empty
spaces—or that it was composed of tiny indivisible particles moving inspace (a void). The latter idea was known as atomism. The very wordatom comes from the Greek atomos meaning uncut. Some of the evidence
from the work on radiation implied that this ultimate particle could betransformed into even smaller units. Although the grand old man of nine-teenth-century physics, William Thomson, Lord Kelvin (1824–1907) in-sisted until the end of his life that the atom was indestructible, otherswere evolving an entirely new theory of matter. They reluctantly con-cluded that the atom was not the indivisible particle hitherto assumed.The ﬁrst “cut” in the uncuttable atom was made by Joseph John Thomson(1856–1940). From an experiment deﬂecting cathode rays, he postulatedthat these rays were streams of particles much smaller than atoms. Heconcluded that these very light particles were universal constituents of matter. Although Thomson called these particles “corpuscles,” theterm “electron” that previously had been invented by G. J. Stoney(1826–1911) ultimately became accepted for this negatively charged par-ticle. At this point an atom seemed to consist of negative electrons plusthe rest of the atom.
Another scientist, the New Zealand–born Canadian scientist Ernest
Rutherford (1871–1937), contrived an experiment that resulted in an ad-ditional cut in the uncuttable atom. Rutherford had worked under J. J.Thomson at Cambridge. Rutherford went to McGill University in Canadawhere he devised an experiment that led to the notion that the atomcould be cut into yet another part. At his suggestion, his colleagues HansGeiger (1882–1945) and Ernest Marsden (1889–1970) shot alpha (posi-tively charged) particles at a thin sheet of gold, assuming that the parti-cles would go straight through the foil with little deﬂection. According tothe accepted theory (known as the plum pudding model of the atom), thenegative electrons (the plums or raisins) would be spread evenly through-out the positive matrix (the pudding). They were surprised to ﬁnd that al-though most of the positive alpha particles went straight through the foil(98%), a small percentage were deﬂected at large angles (about 2%), and.01 percent bounced off the gold foil. Since alpha particles have about8,000 times the mass of an electron, it became clear that very strong forceswere necessary to deﬂect the particles. Rutherford interpreted these re-sults to mean that most of the mass of an atom was concentrated into acompact positive nucleus with electrons occupying most of the atom’sspace. Accepting this model meant that most of the atom was space—very different from the plum pudding model.A YEAR OF CONTRASTS 69Later, the French scientist Paul Villard (1860–1934) showed that ra-
dioactive substances produced a third set of penetrating radiations whichwere later called gamma rays and had a neutral charge. These discoveriesmade it apparent that the indestructibility of the atom was a myth. Theuncut atom was now hypothesized to be composed of three different par-ticles, a positive proton, a neutral neutron, and a negative electron. By1913, a picture of the atom was conceived that resembled the one that isaccepted today with a nucleus composed of protons and neutrons sur-rounded by electrons. Niels Bohr combined the quantum theory withRutherford’s model of the atom to provide a model of the atom that is fa-miliar to us. In spite of the fact that today the atom is still being cut intoadditional subatomic particles, scientists still use the ancient term atom(uncut). We know that neither the ancient Greeks nor modern scientistshave ever directly seen an atom (by the human eye). Nevertheless, scien-tists are conﬁdent of its existence. This brings up the question of the na-ture of science. If science is an attempt to explain natural phenomena bycreating theories that agree with observations, then what we know aboutthe existence of the atom makes sense. We create a theory to explain theobservational or experimental results. If the theory fails this test, then sci-entists may attempt to resurrect it by adding additional postulates or, if allelse fails, replace it by a new theory. In the case of the atom, in order toexplain the increasingly complex observations, it has been necessary tocut the uncuttable atom into increasing numbers of subatomic particles.
One of the Curies’ early observations needing an explanation was the
observation that radium gave out heat in large enough amounts to bemeasured by simple laboratory techniques. They asked where the heat en-ergy came from. This observation seemed to break a basic law of physics,the law of conservation of energy. This law states that energy can neitherbe created nor destroyed. If the heat energy was not being created, wheredid it come from? Marie Curie proposed two possible explanations—ei-ther the radioactive substances were borrowing energy from an externalsource and then releasing it, or that the radium was the source of the en-ergy itself. Rutherford was familiar with the Curies’ results and their the-oretical speculations. He blew air across samples of thorium and foundthat he could collect a radioactive gas, which he called thorium emana-tion. He found that it diminished over time. Others found different ra-dioactive substances also produced emanations. If an emanation cameinto contact with a substance that was not radioactive, the radioactivityof the emanation would be transferred to the new substance. We have al-ready seen that collaboration with a colleague can be a potent way to70 MARIE CURIEsolve a scientiﬁc problem. Teamwork in the case of the Curies’ research
was essential.
Another case in point is the collaboration between Rutherford, the
physicist, and Frederick Soddy (1877–1956), the chemist. Working to-gether they showed that radioactive elements by giving out either alphaor beta rays would break down into intermediate elements. Each of the in-termediate elements broke down at a speciﬁc rate so that half of any quan-tity disappeared in a ﬁxed amount of time. Rutherford called this time thehalf-life of the substance. By building on the work of the Curies and oth-ers, they had made a discovery that explained the nature of radioactivity.They had accomplished something that alchemists had attempted for athousand years—to transmute (change) one element into another. Theearly alchemists were convinced that with the proper techniques, basemetals such as lead could be transmuted into beautiful and valuable gold.In Rutherford and Soddy’s work, putting the substances through elaboratedistillations, water baths, and dung baths, as the early alchemists did,proved unnecessary. The radioactive materials could transmute all bythemselves. Since alchemy was in disrepute by this time, Rutherford andSoddy hesitated to use the term transmutation.
AFTER THE PRIZE (1904–1905)
Although the Nobel Prize money relieved the Curies of their most bur-
densome ﬁnancial problems, and the next two years had both positive andnegative aspects. Both Pierre and Marie suffered physically from the ef-fects of radiation, although they still did not recognize why they felt so ill.Pierre felt underappreciated for in spite of the Nobel Prize he still did nothave a coveted professorship at the Sorbonne. When he was told thatthere was a possibility that he would ﬁnally get a chair, he was concernedthat he would again be disappointed. This time, however, he was success-ful. The French Parliament created a new professorship especially for him.It included a laboratory and a small support staff with Marie as laboratorychief. For the ﬁrst time in her career, she had ofﬁcial rights in Pierre’s lab-oratory. She was appointed director of Pierre’s research laboratory begin-ning on November 1, 1904. She received an annual salary of 2,400 francs.
Although Marie pined for the child she had miscarried in the ﬁfth
month, she soon became pregnant again. While pregnant, she temporar-ily gave up her teaching post at Sèvres but continued her research. Preg-nancy was always difﬁcult for Marie, and this time was no exception.Although she was exhausted after the birth, Eve Denise, a perfect babyA YEAR OF CONTRASTS 71girl, was born on December 6, 1905. The “perfect baby girl” was not an
easy baby to care for. In a letter to Józef, Marie reported that Eve was sel-dom interested in sleeping and protested vehemently if left in her cradleby herself. She noted that Eve and Irène were very different physically.Whereas Eve had dark hair and blue eyes, Irène had light hair and green-brown eyes.
After Eve’s birth, Marie returned to her teaching post at Sèvres, although
the prize money made it unnecessary. She enjoyed teaching young womenand associating with her colleagues there, especially with Paul Langevin, aphysicist whom she and Pierre knew under other circumstances and whotaught at Sèvres. Inexperienced when she ﬁrst began to teach, Marie wasridiculed by her students both because of her accent and her style of teach-ing. After examining her own teaching methods, she came to the conclu-sion that the students needed hands-on experience rather than abstractlectures. The happy result of her laboratory-based classes resulted in her be-coming one of the most popular teachers at the school.
Although her life was very busy with home, children, husband, teach-
ing, and research (not to mention dealing with the press and those whowere fascinated by her prize), Marie still found more time than previouslyto socialize with friends. Both Curies still attended the salon evenings ofMarguerite Borel, the wife of the mathematician Émile Borel, who some-times found the couple intimidating. Although Marie remained carefulwith money, after the prize she bought new clothes for herself, Pierre, andthe children. The American dancer Loie Fuller, who made a huge splashin Paris by dancing with veils illuminated by colored lights, presented ashow especially for the Curies at their house. There were many less-formaloccasions at the Curie house where scientists, artists, and authors dis-cussed a variety of ideas. Their close neighbors were Jean and HenriettePerrin. Jean was a scientist and political activist. Henriette Perrin wasMarie’s closest woman friend at this time.
Once again, Pierre was bullied into becoming a candidate for the
French Academy of Sciences. Although the vote was very close, this timehe was successful. The narrow win did not help his ego. In a 1905 letter toGeorges Gouy he wrote
I ﬁnd myself in the Academy without having desired to be
there and without the Academy’s desire to have me. I onlymade one round of visits, leaving cards on the absent ones, andeverybody told me it was agreed that I would have ﬁfty votes.That’s probably why I nearly didn’t get in.
1572 MARIE CURIELater he again wrote to Gouy complaining “I have not yet discovered
what is the use of the Academy.”16
Neither Marie nor Pierre agreed to patent commercial radium produc-
tion. They thought it crass to use science for commercial purposes. When-ever they were asked for information on the radium separation process,they gave it freely. Their view was that scientists were supposed to shareideas and techniques with others. Others managed to beneﬁt ﬁnanciallyfrom their generosity. By commercializing the process they invented, lessidealistic entrepreneurs were getting rich, while the Curies were forced toask a rich benefactor for money to continue their research. By 1906,Pierre’s sickness had gotten decidedly worse. It is ironic that the last pub-lished paper in his lifetime (1904), written with two medical colleagues,was concerned with the experimental effects of radioactive emanationson mice and guinea pigs. When they performed postmortems on the ani-mals, they found profound pulmonary congestion and distortions in thewhite blood cells (leucocytes) that protect the body from infectious dis-eases. It was obvious that radium gas had devastating effects on the ani-mals. But they did not seem to apply this information to illness inlaboratory workers or to themselves.
NOTES
1. William and Margaret Huggins, “On the Spectrum, Visible and Photo-
graphic of the Great Nebula in Orion,” Proceedings of the Royal Society 46 (1889):
40–61.
2. Susan Quinn, Marie Curie: A Life (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1995),
184.
3. Eve Curie, Madame Curie: A Biography (Garden City, NY: Doubleday,
Doran, & Co., 1938), 191.
4. Madame Sklodowska-Curie, “The Radio-Active Elements,” The Indepen-
dent: A Weekly Magazine 15 (25 June 1903): 1498–1501.
5. Madame Sklodowska-Curie, “The Radio-Active Elements,” 1498–1501.6. “Nobel Prizes Awarded,” New York Times , 11 December 1903, 8, col. 6.
7. Sharon Bertsch McGrayne, Nobel Prize Women in Science: Their Lives,
Struggles, and Momentous Discoveries , 2nd ed. (Washington, DC: Joseph Henry
Press, 1998), 25.
8. Sharon Bertsch McGrayne, Nobel Prize Women in Science , 26.
9. H. R. Törnebladh, president of the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences,
“Presentation Speech. Nobel Prize in Physics, 1903,” in Nobel Lectures in Physics:
1901–1921 (Amsterdam: Elsevier, for the Nobel Foundation, 1967), 50–51.A YEAR OF CONTRASTS 7310. Eve Curie, Madame Curie, 216.
11. Eve Curie, Madame Curie , 217.
12. Marie Curie, Pierre Curie , trans. Charlotte and Vernon Kellogg (New
York: Macmillan, 1923), 48.
13. Marie Curie, “Rayons émis par les composés de l’uranium et du thorium,”
Comptes rendus de l ’Académie des Sciences 126 (1898), 1101–2.
14. Pierre and Marie Curie, “Sur une substance nouvelle radio-active, con-
tenue dans la pechblende,” Comptes Rendus 127 (1898): 178–80.
15. Eve Curie, Madame Curie , 235.
16. Eve Curie, Madame Curie , 235.74 MARIE CURIE