Chapter 10
MARIE AND THE UNITED
STATES OF AMERICA
After the war, Marie Curie understood that most of her wishes—a stable
France that would allow her to work on her science and a Poland withoutthe heavy load of foreign occupation—were realized. The problems in-herent in the peace settlement did not surface immediately after the endof the war in France. Armistice Day was celebrated by cheering throngswith the strains of the French National Anthem, “La Marseillaise,” blast-ing through the streets. But for Marie Curie, it meant that she could getback to her scientiﬁc work. However, immediately after the war she tooka much-needed vacation. After spending time at the warm coast, she re-turned to the laboratory, and science, refreshed. Her new laboratory wasfurnished sparsely. Even though she herself was perfectly happy with aSpartan laboratory, she wanted something very different for her workers.If the rest of the laboratory was to host a new French school of radioac-tivity, she would need sophisticated expensive equipment. She would alsoneed an additional supply of radium.
After pleading with many of the government agencies, she found her
attempts to get funds fruitless. She found that one word—cancer—hadthe potential to bring in funds. Her international fame rested on her rep-utation as one who discovered a treatment for cancer. After World War I,an economically unscathed United States of America emerged as a worldpower. In 1920, women had won the right to vote in this country, and thisprecipitated events that led to an interview with an American women’smagazine, The Delineator. The editor of this magazine, Marie Mattingly
Meloney, known as Missy, had prodded writers who visited Paris to inter-view Marie Curie. Curie had her secretary turn every one of them away,explaining that she only discussed scientiﬁc matters. After Curie’s unfor-
tunate experience with the press over the Paul Langevin affair, she wasvery wary of journalists in any form. In desperation, the persistent Missywent to Paris herself. After agonizing over how to word a letter that wouldproduce positive results and destroying 10 unsatisfactory drafts, she ﬁnallywrote Marie the exact kind of note that produced results. Marie agreed tomeet her for a brief interview.
Although she was a trained interviewer, Missy Meloney confessed that,
when confronted with Marie Curie, she felt exceedingly timid. It wasMarie who put Missy Meloney at her ease, rather than the other wayaround. During their discussion of radium, Curie explained that althoughthe United States possessed about ﬁfty grams of radium, France had onlyabout one gram. Meloney quizzed her further and asked how much she her-self had. Curie answered that she had none; the one gram belonged to herlaboratory. Amazed, Meloney suggested royalties on her patents that wouldmake her a rich woman. Missy felt shamed when Curie replied “radium wasnot to enrich anyone. Radium is an element. It belongs to all people.”
1
In response to Meloney’s question as to what she would choose if she
could have anything she wanted, she replied that it would be a gram of ra-dium. This question and its response led Meloney to research the price ofa gram of radium. She found to her dismay that the market price was$100,000. She also found that although Curie’s laboratory was almostnew, it lacked sufﬁcient equipment, and that the radium found there wasonly used for the extraction of the emanation (radon gas) of radium forhospital use in cancer treatment.
When radon gas was found in many homes in the United States, it re-
ceived a considerable amount of bad publicity. Radon gas is produced bythe natural disintegration of radioactive heavy metals such as uraniumand thorium. As the atoms of radioactive heavy metals disintegrate, theychange into increasingly lighter radioactive heavy metals until they endup as stable, non-radioactive lead. There are many ways in which natu-rally occurring radon can enter buildings. When radon gas is allowed tobuild up in an enclosed area such as a mineshaft or a basement, the ra-dioactive hazard increases hugely because of the buildup of the productsfrom the decay of radon gas. This product that we now see as dangerouswas the same emanation that Marie Curie used for treating cancer.
Missy Meloney was impressed, as she knew she would be, by Marie. For
her part, Marie was pleasantly surprised when she met Missy. The twowomen liked each other immediately, and a friendship was born. ThroughMarie, Missy saw the possibility of making a difference in the world; Marie114 MARIE CURIEsaw Missy in the same way. Although they were similar in their goals and
in some other respects, they also had important personality differences.Both had serious health problems and were slight of build. Missy, how-ever, was an extrovert, albeit one who suffered bouts of depression,whereas Marie was a recluse. Ever since the Langevin ﬁasco, Marie hadhesitated to conﬁde in men. The degree of trust that Marie felt in Missywas so great that she conﬁded the hurt that she felt from the Langevin af-fair. Missy was determined to raise the money to buy Marie her gram of ra-dium. Convinced that there should be no difﬁculty in persuading wealthyAmerican women to provide the bulk of the money, she resolved to con-vince 10 wealthy women to give $10,000 each.
Marie Curie was still not popular in France even though she was rec-
ognized by some as the preeminent woman in that country. The Langevinincident still haunted her in her adopted home country. Meloney wasconvinced that if Curie would come to the United States, she could col-lect the gram of radium in person. Curie’s distrust of the press convincedher that the American newspapers would leap upon the affair, and shewould have to relive the previous horrible years. She conﬁded her fears toMeloney, who assured Marie that she had nothing to fear from the Amer-ican press. This statement almost backﬁred. Missy was able to put out theﬁres by visiting every leading New York newspaper editor and asking fortheir cooperation.
A series of articles in the New York Times indicate how well Missy had
succeeded. This newspaper publicized the fundraising activities, and asthe time for the trip drew near the coverage increased. On February 7,1921, a headline read “Radium Gift Awaits Mme. Curie Here.” The sub-headings continued “Prominent Women to Make Presentation to Fore-most Woman Scientist on Visit to America” and “National Tour isPlanned.” The announcement of the visit was made by Dr. Francis C.Wood of the Croker Memorial Cancer Research Laboratory. Although
she was convinced of the practical use for radium, it was a fascination forpure science that motivated Marie Curie. However, her absorption withthe basic structure of matter would not have appealed to the general pub-lic as much as radium’s potential to ﬁght the dreaded disease, cancer. Thisunderstanding was apparent in the way that the radium campaign waspresented to the people and in their choice of a physician to announcethe trip. The article also lists the 21 medical men on the committee, in-cluding Dr. Will J. May, president of the American Medical Association.At the time of this article, they still had not raised the money for the ra-dium. Marie was described asMARIE AND THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 115fairly tall and slender, with a pale face. Her features are of the
Polish type, the lips thin and suggesting the hardships whichshe and her husband endured in the difﬁcult years before theirgreat discovery. Her eyes are remarkable in their piercingness,her forehead of exceptional height, and her hair is golden andabundant.
2
T wo days later, Dr. Francis C. Wood corrected an impression from the
February 7, 1921, article, which implied that the money for the radiumhad already been raised. He stressed that this “ﬁnancial optimism” was“far from justiﬁed.” He provided some optimism himself when he reportedthat there “is not the slightest doubt that the money will be obtained. Butit has not been obtained as yet .... ”
3It seems obvious that he wanted to be
certain that people would not stop giving, thinking that the money hadalready been raised.
Marie’s approval of the gift plan was also reported in the New York
Times. She wrote “Permit me to thank you very sincerely for all the trou-
ble taken with the object of securing for me a gift which would permit meto increase my work.”
4Reports with headlines such as “Cancer Deaths
Here Are Increasing,” in the March 7, 1921, New York Times helped spur
interest in the fund drive. Even the president of the United States, Her-bert Hoover, endorsed the movement to present a gram of radium toCurie. The New York Department of Health ofﬁcials released a report cit-ing a 6.6 percent increase in the number of cancer deaths in the city. Evenmore depressing to New York’s citizens was the report that the rate of thiscity’s increase was more than double that for the rest of the country. Can-cer had surpassed tuberculosis as the chief cause of death from 1901–1921,having increased over 34 percent in that time period. With ﬁgures such asthese, it was not surprising to ﬁnd gifts to support what people regarded asa cure for this dread disease. The March 3, 1921, New York Times reported
that a woman cured of cancer by radium contributed a $10,000 check forthe Marie Curie fund. Other articles followed, all being very supportive ofCurie and radium. One reported that the committee wanted the $100,000to come from many small contributions rather than a few large ones. Theymade it clear that Curie never patented her processes and never exploitedher products commercially. “She works for science, not for money, and itmight be said with truth that she will be the trustee rather than the ownerof this American gift.”
5As the time for Marie to come to the United
States approached, the appeals became more insistent. Dr. Wood statedeven more strongly than before that if the money was raised, Curie “pro-116 MARIE CURIEposes to devote her great scientiﬁc knowledge to the attempt to discover
new methods for making radium more useful in the treatment of cancer.She is willing to devote her energy to the cause of suffering humanity.Will not the women of America make this possible?”
6Still, by March 14,
1921, only $41,000 had been raised. As Marie was to sail on May 7, thesituation was becoming more critical.
Missy Meloney was a complex person, combining social conservatism,
hero worship, and an excellent business sense. In her publications, she chas-tised women who worked outside of the home and who left their childrenin the care of others. Missy herself had left her editorial post for 10 years tocare for her only child. In the same issue of The Delineator , which editorial-
ized about radium for Marie Curie, there was an article by Vice-PresidentCalvin Coolidge railing against the radicals who inﬁltrated the women’scolleges. And by radicals, he meant those who would break down the tradi-tional roles of men and women. Meloney sent Curie a ﬁctional book aboutchildren whose lives were ruined because their mother worked outside thehome. Marie mildly protested the author’s conclusion. Since Meloney wor-shiped Curie, she interpreted anything that Marie said that went againsther own preconceptions as really agreeing with her. Missy commented onMarie’s absence from her children during the war as a necessity that grievedher constantly. One of Marie’s excuses not to come to the United States wasthat she would be away from her children. Missy considered this praisewor-thy. However, if the truth were known, Marie’s many absences from herchildren were choices that she made, not born of necessity.
Missy was a woman with a mission. The Marie Curie that she had con-
structed in her own mind and had dramatically presented to readers inAmerica was not a real person. Nevertheless, Missy was so convinced thather idol did not have feet of clay that she managed to persuade others. AtMissy’s suggestion Marie wrote a brief autobiography. The myths perpetu-ated by Missy Meloney included the notion that Curie was herself still suf-fering from poverty. She was not. The most dangerous misconceptionproposed by Meloney was that Marie Curie would ﬁnd a cure for cancer.Meloney was ﬂamboyant and wallowed in overstatement. Nevertheless,she got what she wanted. Marie herself refused to be involved in the fund-raising, but wrote that if Missy was successful she would try to arrange tocome to the United States to receive the gift. Missy overcame Curie’s ob-jections to traveling without her daughters by inviting Irène and Eve tocome. The girls, of course, were delighted.
The news of how Marie was to be received in the United States led to
the rehabilitation of her reputation in France. A fete was organized at theMARIE AND THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 117Paris Opera. She entered the auditorium amid thunderous applause and
sat on the stage surrounded by some of France’s most distinguished scien-tists. Sarah Bernhardt recited an “Ode to Madame Curie.” The other en-tertainment was just as distinguished. France’s press seemed to haveforgotten the earlier scandal and members of the press core now almosttripped over one another to see who could supply the most elegant praise.After all the farewell ceremonies in France, Marie, Missy, and the twogirls boarded the ship the Olympic, for their transatlantic crossing.
Missy and Marie had very different ideas about what the trip to the
United States would involve. In Missy’s eyes, the trip would involvewhirlwind activities consisting of conferences, honorary degree cere-monies, and award acceptances. Marie, on the other hand had envisioneda shorter and simpler visit. Although Missy thought she had scaled downthe activities to satisfy Marie, they were only slightly curtailed. Missy hadarranged for so many events that they could have been reduced in halfand still have been too strenuous for Marie. The American public openedup its exuberant self to the drab little Polish/French woman. Plans beganto take place long before the Curies actually sailed. They were to be metby the representatives of 100,000 college women. Representatives of theAssociation of College Alumnae and the Woman’s University Clubwould host a reception on May 18, 1921, and each of the alumnae wouldbe asked to donate $1.00 to the radium fund. Additional plans, withoutMarie’s concurrence, had her staying in the United States for ﬁve weeksas a guest of the Marie Curie Radium Fund Committee. She was sched-uled to visit cities of the East and the Midwest, as well as the GrandCanyon. The National Institute of Social Sciences was to award its goldmedal to Curie on May 26, 1921. The award recognized her discovery ofradium and its subsequent beneﬁt to humanity.
On May 7, Marie, Irène, and Eve boarded the ship the Olympic . Their
cabin was luxurious, but Marie who had to be coerced by daughter Eve tobuy several new dresses for the trip, preferred simpler surroundings. In aletter to Henriette Perrin, she explained that she felt some apprehensionabout leaving France “to go on this distant frolic, so little suited to mytaste and habits.” She found the crossing unpleasant, although she wasnot exactly seasick. By staying in her apartment she was able to avoidtalking to curious strangers. Her daughters, however, were having a ﬁnetime. She also had high praise for Missy Meloney, who traveled with themand who “is as amiable and as kind as it is possible to be.”
7
The New York Times of May 11 announced their arrival. Not only had
the Americans collected the $100,000, they had oversubscribed. If the118 MARIE CURIEfund continued to grow as it had been, the article suggested that a labora-
tory would be built for her on the outskirts of Paris under the direction ofthe University of Paris. When Marie ﬁnally arrived in New York, she wasgreeted by an intrusive swarm of paparazzi: journalists, photographers, andmovie operators. Marie and her two daughters were dazed as countlessmobs of curious people pushed and shoved each other in their attempt tosee the woman whom the newspapers called the benefactress of thehuman race. One could distinguish Girl Scouts and schoolgirls as well aswomen who represented the Polish organizations of the United States.American, French, and Polish ﬂags ﬂew proudly.
The press hovered around Marie and her daughters. Her benefactors all
wanted to entertain her. The day after the long voyage, she felt obliged toattend an event given in her honor. The curious press did not know thename of the hostess, but reported that Mrs. Andrew Carnegie’s motorcarcalled for Marie shortly before noon and the assumption was that she wasentertained at the Carnegie mansion. The next day she was even moretired and “denied herself to callers and remained at the home of Mrs. Wil-liam B. Meloney.” Meloney’s house was ﬁlled with tributes from her ad-mirers. A horticulturist whose cancer had been cured by radium sentCurie an enormous bouquet of roses that, he explained, “he had been cul-tivating and training for two months.” Curie’s hope for radium as a cancercure had been misinterpreted by the press. She hastened to explain thatradium was not a cure for all forms of cancer but was speciﬁc for certainforms.
8As tired as she was, Marie and her daughters left Missy’s house and
set off for Northampton, Massachusetts, where she was to receive an hon-orary degree from Smith College.
Although most of the American colleges and universities were vying
with each other for the privilege of awarding Curie honorary degrees, notall of the universities were enthusiastic. Charles Eliot, a former presidentof Harvard University, refused to meet Marie Curie in New York or to par-ticipate in a formal reception for her. Perhaps Harvard’s Eliot was too in-ﬂuenced by Boltwood’s assessment to offer her an honorary degree.
One U.S. college, Vassar, was especially receptive to Madame Curie.
She bestowed upon Vassar the singular honor of addressing its studentsand faculty on May 14, 1921. Edna Carter, chair of the Department ofPhysics at Vassar, explained that this was the only extended address thatCurie made while visiting the United States. Carter prefaced the pam-phlet that printed Curie’s talk by reporting that “one realized how, closelyenvironed by all the great realities of human experience, in the face oftremendous difﬁculties and with limited resources, she had pursued un-MARIE AND THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 119daunted her search for truth.”9For her part, Marie was very gracious in
thanking the American women who made it possible for her to continuethe research.
The strenuous American tour tired Marie. The buildup by Missy had
been so enthusiastic that people expected a vibrant woman who wouldappreciate the boisterous American ceremonies. What they actually gotwas a tired, gaunt woman who avoided people and publicity whenever shecould. Dowdy Irène was not popular with the public. She found the entirepublicity circuit boring and used every opportunity to escape. Eve, on theother hand, loved the limelight. She was pretty, wore brightly coloredclothing, and was pleasant to people. In spite of the troubles, Missy wasable to not only raise enough money for a gram of radium but over$50,000 to spare.
On May 19, the day before Curie was to be presented with the radium,
Missy bestowed upon her the formal document. As Missy read the entiredocument aloud, Marie was displeased with what she heard. One sentencethat was of vital importance to Marie had been left out of the document.This sentence involved the ownership of the radium and the rights of suc-cession after her death. She insisted that the document be modiﬁed toread that the radium was “for free and untrammeled use by her [Curie] inexperimentation and in pursuit of knowledge” and that it would becomethe property of her laboratory after her death.
10Although it was late at
night, she insisted that they must ﬁnd a lawyer who would process thedeed of gift. Among the witnesses was Vice-President Calvin Coolidge’swife. At this point, it is possible that the American women who hadworked so hard to help Curie felt a bit cheated. Marie was crotchety, stub-born, and insistent about getting her own way. Anticipating future trou-ble, they had the completed document translated into French. They stillhad not arrived at a solution as to the disposal of the leftover dollars.Marie insisted that since the money had been given in her name she,alone, should determine how it was to be used. Her benefactors thoughtthat they should have some say in it, and the problem was not resolveduntil several years later. Marie, as usual, eventually triumphed.
The high point of the trip occurred on May 20, 1921 at 4:00 p.m. when
President Warren Harding presented Mme. Curie with her gram of ra-dium, really a facsimile. The actual radium remained in the factory. Thepresentation ceremony occurred in the East Room of the White House,where the French ambassador Jules Jusserand introduced Curie. In mak-ing the presentation, President Harding referred to Curie as a noble crea-ture, devoted wife, and loving mother who “aside from her crushing toil,120 MARIE CURIEhad fulﬁlled all the duties of womanhood.”11He praised her as “foremost
among scientists in the age of science, as leader among women in the gen-eration which sees woman come tardily into her own.” Marie Curie re-sponded to the president’s presentation address “with a little speech ofthanks delivered in broken English.”
12
If it had been up to her, Marie Curie would have cancelled the rest of
the trip. She despised crowds and was feeling ill. She managed to escape anumber of her obligations by having Missy cable the institutions that shewas scheduled to visit explaining that she was too ill to come. Irène andEve attended the ceremonies and collected her honorary degrees in placeof their mother. On May 23, Marie became so ill in Washington, D.C.that she could not go to Philadelphia in time to be presented with twohonorary degrees: one was an honorary doctor of law degree from the Uni-versity of Pennsylvania, and the second was an honorary M.D. degreefrom the Women’s Medical College. This M.D. degree was the ﬁrst of itskind that Curie had received, although she already had accepted aboutsixty honorary degrees. Irène and Eve arrived in Philadelphia aroundnoon, and Irène, clad in a black academic gown, accepted the degree fromthe Medical College for her mother. In her simple acceptance speech shethanked the college for awarding her mother—“who was sorry not to beable to come here”—the degree.
13
On May 25, 1921, the New York Times expressed concern about Marie’s
heavy schedule. Although those who planned the activities had only thebest intentions in mind, they “subjected that distinguished woman towelcomes and honors so many and for her so heavy, that she is literallyworn out.” The article suggested that there should be a better way of wel-coming and honoring a foreign visitor rather than subjecting the guest toendless receptions. It would have been much less strenuous for her if theacademic degrees could have been conferred at a single ceremony. Shethen would have been free to follow her personal inclination “instead ofbeing bound to a schedule of travel that covers the whole of every day forweeks on end.”
14Marie was ill off and on for most of the trip. Rumors were
ﬂoating around that her illness was caused from handling radium, but sheand the doctors concluded that it was only the strain of the trip. On May29, it was announced that because of her exhaustion, all social plans forher upcoming trip to the West would be cancelled, and that the length ofthe trip would be shortened.
Missy herself was ill, but kept from Marie the fact that she was suffering
from a possibly malignant tumor. In place of the previously scheduled hec-tic trip, she and Marie planned a quiet tour through the western UnitedMARIE AND THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 121States including the Grand Canyon. On June 2, they left New York for
the western trip. It was apparent that the trip would not be as restful asproposed, when it was stated that she would visit a number of cities on herway back to the East. Her sought-after anonymity on the trip was impos-sible. When confronted by curious crowds, Marie came close to sufferingpanic attacks. The Curies and Missy gradually made their way back toNew York. Curious to know her impression of the United States, the New
York Times interviewed her the day before she was due to leave. The news-
paper was gratiﬁed when she reported that “I feel that I have three coun-tries—the land of my birth, the land of my adoption, and the land of mynew friends.” She praised the kindness of the people of the United Statesand said that she had only one regret about her trip—her physical inabil-ity “to do all the things I would wish to do and to meet all of the Ameri-can people I much desire to meet.”
15The friendship between Marie and
Missy had continued to strengthen, and they embraced with tears runningdown their cheeks as Marie and her daughters prepared to board theOlympic to return home.
On June 25, the Olympic departed with Marie Curie and her two
daughters aboard. She told reporters that she felt refreshed by her visit tothe United States. They arrived in Cherbourg, France, on July 2, whereshe was greeted by government ofﬁcials and school children bearing ﬂow-ers. The French seemed to have forgotten the scandal of years past. Asquad of detectives took charge of the gram of radium and took it to Paris.
There were many beneﬁts from Curie’s trip to the United States. One
of the most important ones was publicizing the idea that women could bescientists. The director of the Rockefeller Institute for Medical Research,Simon Flexner, appealed to young women who were graduating from BrynMawr to consider careers in the sciences. He noted that these careers werecongenial, useful, and proﬁtable. He referred to Marie Curie as a womanwho did important research. He did not, however, imply that all womenwere capable of original research. In fact, he stated that the majority ofwomen had not developed a “scientiﬁc” mind. This lack was not, he as-serted, caused by an innate inferiority to men but a lack of education.
An American woman scientist, Christine Ladd-Franklin (1847–1930),
who had studied at Johns Hopkins for four years and fulﬁlled the require-ments for a doctorate there, was not awarded the degree from Hopkinsuntil 1926, ﬁve years after Curie’s visit. The publicizing of Curie’s out-standing work may have made the Johns Hopkins faculty aware of the 
potential of women as scientists. On June 4, 1921, a letter from Ladd-Franklin appeared in the New York Times lauding the fact that Curie had122 MARIE CURIEbeen honored by having her name used as a common noun—curie, be-
cause of her distinguished contributions. The curie (the amount of radiumemanation which is in equilibrium with one gram of radium) joined thewatt, the ohm, the volt, the farad, the coulomb, the henry, and the am-pere to honor the distinguished contributions of their discoverers. MarieCurie’s name was the only woman to be so honored, but, Ladd-Franklinimplied, not the last one.
When she returned to France, Marie noted that her work had been
made easier by the gift of radium, and it inspired her to work all the harderto obtain more funding. She began to rethink her views about the rela-tionship between the discoverer and the discovery. Both she and Pierrehad been adamant in their views that science was for the beneﬁt of hu-mankind. An invention or a discovery did not belong to the scientist norshould he/she reap any material beneﬁt from it. In her autobiography,Marie questioned the wisdom of that approach, but eventually concludedthat it had been the correct one. When she observed others proﬁtingmonetarily from the fact that the Curies had openly shared their processesand techniques, she could not help but wonder if they had done the rightthing. Industries were becoming rich because the Curies were morally op-posed to taking out patents. Noting the high price of radium, she pon-dered the fact that in refusing to accept money, they had deniedthemselves and their children a fortune. And if they had guaranteed theirrights, they could have had the ﬁnancial means to support a satisfactoryInstitute of Radium. Yet even after this reconsideration, she was certainthat they had made the correct ethical decision.
NOTES
1. Eve Curie, Madame Curie: A Biography (Garden City, NY: Doubleday,
Doran, & Co., 1938) ,323.
2. “Radium Gift Awaits Mme. Curie Here,” New York Times, 7 February
1921, 11, col. 3.
3. “Radium for Mme. Curie,” New York Times, 9 February 1921, 8, col. 6.
4. “Mme. Curie Likes Gift Plan,” New York Times, 28 February 1921, 15, col. 4.
5. “The Offer of a Gift Well Earned,” New York Times, 9 March 1921, 12,
col. 5.
6. “Appeals for Radium Fund,” New York Times, 10 March 1921, 13, col. 4.
7. Eve Curie, Madame Curie, 326.
8. “Radium Not a Cure for Every Cancer,” New York Times, 13 May 1921,
16, col. 3.MARIE AND THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 1239. “The Discovery of Radium,” address by Madame M. Curie at Vassar Col-
lege, 14 May 1921.
10. Document dated 19 May 1921. Bibliothèque Nationale, Paris, quoted in
Robert Reid, Marie Curie (London: Collins, 1974), 263.
11. 19 May 1921 document, quoted in Reid, Marie Curie, 263.
12. “Radium Presented to Madame Curie,” New York Times, 21 May 1921, 15,
col. 6.
13. “Honors for Mme. Curie Received by Daughter,” New York Times, 24 May
1921, 19, col. 8.
14. “Worn Out By Her Welcome,” New York Times, 25 May 1921, 16, col. 5.
15. “Mme. Curie Finds America a Marvel,” New York Times, 25 June 1921,
11, col. 5.124 MARIE CURIE