Chapter 5
THE DISCOVERY OF RADIUM:
A SCIENTIFIC
BREAKTHROUGH
Believing as she did in the importance of science, Marie Curie was deter-
mined to obtain a doctoral degree—a requirement if her research was to be respected by her peers. At this time no woman in Europe had completed this degree. An unmarried German woman, Elsa Neumann(1872–1902), was writing a thesis in electrochemistry and would eventu-ally ﬁnish it, but it seemed impossible for Curie to complete the arduousresearch necessary for the degree. The challenges that she faced as wife,mother, as well as scientist appeared insurmountable. Even more dauntingwas the disapproval of her colleagues who were convinced that a marriedwoman, and especially a woman with children, could never earn a doc-torate. Nevertheless as she prepared her monograph on steels for publica-tion, she began to search for a suitable topic for her doctoral thesis.Familiar with the scientiﬁc literature, she was aware of Wilhelm Rönt-gen’s (1845–1923) discovery of X rays on November 8, 1895.
Röntgen realized that the name electrode referred to a conducting ma-
terial used to make electrical contact with part of a circuit and could becharged either positively or negatively. A positively charged electrode iscalled the anode and the negatively charged electrode (the source of whatwe now call electrons) is known as the cathode. While head of the physicsdepartment at the University of Würzburg, Röntgen investigated theproperties of cathode rays, or negatively charged particles (electrons)emitted by a high-vacuum discharge tube, which had been perfected inthe 1850s. When activated by a high-voltage current, the electrons wouldrace from the cathode to the positive electrode known as the anode.Sometimes the electrons were invisible and at other times they appearedas blue streaks. When the rays touched the glass wall of the tube, they cre-
ated a green or blue luminescence. Röntgen became interested in the lu-minescence (glow) that the cathode rays produced. Röntgen tried toreproduce the work of a German researcher, Phillip Lenard (1862–1947),who had observed the behavior of cathode rays when they escaped fromthe vacuum tube. He found that they would illuminate a substance somedistance away from it when coated with a phosphorescent material (a sub-stance that emits light without appreciable heat). This phenomenon fas-cinated Röntgen, who tried to repeat and modify the experiment. Hismethod of studying the phenomenon was to wrap the cathode ray tube inblack cardboard to exclude all light, darken the room so that he could seea faint light, activate the tube with a high voltage current, and observethe gleam. When he activated the tube and observed a ﬂash of light, heunexpectedly found that the light did not come from the tube. He ob-served that a sheet of paper coated with the compound barium platino-cyanide glowed (luminesced or phosphoresced) even when the tube wasblocked off by the black cardboard and could not possibly have reachedthe barium platinocyanide.
When the coated part of the phosphorescent screen was turned away
from the discharge tube, it still phosphoresced. Röntgen postulated thatthe resultant radiation could not have been caused by the cathode rays be-cause these rays could not penetrate the cardboard. He turned off the tubeand the coated paper darkened. He turned it on again and it glowed. Un-certain as to whether to believe his own eyes, he carried the coated paperinto the next room, closed the door, and pulled down the blinds. As longas the tube was in operation, the paper continued to glow. These rays ap-parently had the ability to penetrate substances and even pass throughwalls. He established that these rays passed unchanged through cardboardand thin plates of metal and were not deﬂected by electric or magneticﬁelds, as were cathode rays. Although he clearly had observed a new typeof radiation, he was unable to establish its nature and coined the term X rays (unknown rays) for the new rays. These rays actually came from theglass walls of the tube when struck by cathode rays. In subsequent experi-ments he immobilized his wife’s hand over a photographic plate in thepath of the rays. After he developed the plate he saw an image of herhand, which showed the shadows thrown by the bones of her left handand that of a ring as a dark blob on her fourth ﬁnger. Although it is prob-able that X rays had been produced by others before Röntgen, he ﬁrst re-alized their existence and ﬁrst investigated their properties.
Röntgen’s breakthrough excited lay people and scientists alike and net-
ted its discoverer the ﬁrst Nobel Prize in physics in 1901. The most spec-44 MARIE CURIEtacular property of these rays was their ability to penetrate ﬂesh but not
bone. The medical and entertainment possibilities seemed endless. At ademonstration of X rays at the Royal Society on May 6, 1896, the scien-tist Lord Kelvin’s hand was x-rayed illuminating the underlying bones.The idea that a process had been found that enabled one to see throughsolid objects seemed marvelous indeed. Röntgen became a reluctant hero,for it was no longer possible for him to do his research in solitude andquiet. Exciting medical potentials for the new ray were apparent, but thepossibility of harmful results was unsuspected. Frivolous uses were com-mon. One such device, a ﬂuoroscope, was used to assure that children’sshoes ﬁt properly. Most shoe stores had one, and children were amused bylooking at the bones of their feet. By stepping on a platform with newshoes on, a child and his/her parents could look through a lens and seethese bones. No one had any idea that danger might be involved. In themeantime, several generations of children were entertained by lookingthrough a viewer at their feet encased in new shoes and being amazed atseeing the underlying bones.
Although shortly after the original discovery was made several scien-
tists postulated that X rays were electromagnetic rays similar to visiblelight but with shorter wavelengths, the actual nature of these rays was notﬁrmly established until 18 years later. The search for proof provided re-search opportunities for numerous scientists and technicians. These newrays caught the imagination of the public, and many popular articles ap-peared. Scientists, too, jumped on the bandwagon. Many people joinedthe search for another heretofore undiscovered new form of radiation.T wo French investigators, Gustave LeBon (1841–1931) and René Blond-lot (1849–1930), claimed to have made such a discovery. LeBon hadnamed his new radiation “black light,” and his discovery was not givenmuch credence by other investigators. Blondlot, on the other hand,claimed that he had produced his “N rays” (named after his native city ofNancy) by placing a hot wire inside an iron tube. The rays were then de-tected by a calcium sulﬁde thread that glowed slightly in the dark whenthe rays were refracted through a prism of aluminum with sides angled atsixty degrees. Blondlot claimed that a narrow stream of N rays were re-fracted through the prism and produced a spectrum. The N rays were in-visible except when they encountered the thread. Conﬁrmation quicklyfollowed, as scientists from laboratories all over the world claimed to havegenerated N rays.
The British journal Nature was suspicious of Blondlot’s claims because
German and English laboratories had not been able to replicate his re-sults. The journal sent the American physicist Robert W . Wood of JohnsTHE DISCOVERY OF RADIUM 45Hopkins University to investigate. Unbeknownst to Blondlot or his assis-
tant, Wood removed the prism from the detection device. When Blond-lot’s assistant conducted the next experiment he found N rays, which, ofcourse, he should not have. Wood tried to sneak the prism back in place,but the assistant saw him and thought he was removing it. The next timehe tried the experiment the assistant averred that he could not see any Nrays, but of course he should have if the experiment was valid. The N rayepisode does not mean that Blondlot was attempting to deceive, norshould blame be directed entirely toward the assistant. These points areimportant to remember today, for it still happens that when a scientistbadly wants something to be true, he or she may ignore evidence to thecontrary. An example is the cold-fusion ﬁasco of 1989. Fusion is the pro-cess that takes place in the sun’s core where at extraordinary high tem-peratures hydrogen atoms are compressed to form helium and a massiveamount of energy. This is the same kind of thermonuclear explosion thata hydrogen bomb releases. If a controlled form of fusion could be discov-ered, an unlimited, cheap, pollution-free form of energy would be avail-able. T wo experimenters at the University of Utah, Martin Fleishmannand Stanley Pons, thought that they had achieved this fusion in the labo-ratory at room temperature. The two investigators rushed into print andseveral other laboratories reported the same results. The consensus amongscientists was that the two investigators had not deliberately perpetrateda hoax, but that they saw what they wanted to see.
Although the N ray claims of LeBon and Blondlot were spurious, the
discovery of another new type of radiation was not. After Röntgen’s 1896paper was published, Henri Poincaré (1854–1912) attempted to explain itin a report to the French Academy of Sciences. Much like Röntgen, Poin-caré was fascinated by the process known as phosphorescence—the glowcaused by light on certain substances. Even after he removed the lightfrom these substances, the glow continued. Poincaré noted that X rayscaused phosphorescence both on the wall of the vacuum tube and on ascreen outside the tube, which was coated with a phosphorescent sub-stance. Another scientist, Alexandre-Edmond Becquerel (1820–1891),had invented an instrument to identify new substances with phosphores-cent qualities—even when they only phosphoresce for a very short time.Although Alexandre Becquerel was dead before the meeting when Rönt-gen reported on his new X rays, his son, Antoine Henri (1852–1908), lis-tened to Röntgen’s and Poincaré’s results and became fascinated withphosphorescence, his father’s interest. Although Henri had a doctoratefrom the Sorbonne and was a member of the Academy, he was not activein research until he heard Poincaré’s report on X rays.46 MARIE CURIEBecquerel and three other scientists hypothesized that the phosphores-
cent substance itself could produce X rays and that the cathode ray tubewas unnecessary. The three other scientists were convinced of the cor-rectness of their hypothesis and found evidence to corroborate it. HenriBecquerel, on the other hand, did not ﬁnd X rays when he experimentedon phosphorescent substances. After negative results, he tried a differentphosphorescent substance—a sample of uranium salts. These salts imme-diately produced radiation. Becquerel prepared a written report to theFrench Academy and explained his methodology. He reported that hehad taken a photographic plate and wrapped it in two sheets of thickblack paper to protect the plate from the sunlight. Then he placed a plateof phosphorescent substance above the paper and exposed the entirepackage to the sun for several hours. He observed that when the photo-graphic plate was developed the silhouette of the phosphorescent sub-stance appeared in black on the negative. He then placed a coin betweenthe phosphorescent material and the paper, and exposed it to the sun andfound that its image appeared on the negative. He concluded that thephosphorescent substance that he used emitted rays that could penetratepaper impervious to light.
Becquerel assumed that it was the sun that allowed the material to
phosphoresce and to penetrate the photographic plate. But being a care-ful scientist, Becquerel went to his laboratory to prepare another experi-ment to corroborate his ﬁrst results. For this trial, he placed a thin coppercross between the black paper covering the plate and the uranium salts.He, of course, postulated that when the package was exposed to the sun,the pattern of a cross would appear on the plate. However, bad weather inParis during February delayed the experiment, because the sun steadfastlyrefused to shine. Becquerel placed the entire setup in a dark cabinet untilthe weather changed for the better. Though the sun still declined to ap-pear, Becquerel became impatient and developed the plate. Since the sunwas supposedly the agent that would cause the plate to darken, Becquerelwas amazed to ﬁnd that the plate was not blank, as he had assumed that itwould be. Instead, the plate had darkened as if it had been exposed to sun-light, and the image of the cross stood out in white against the blackbackground. He was forced to conclude that sunlight was not necessaryfor the impression to appear on the photographic plate. He concludedthat it was the uranium in the mixture that caused the reaction. Contin-uing to explore the situation in his next four papers, Becquerel was con-vinced that it was the uranium that caused the image to be produced onthe photographic plates. However, he never gave up his previous concep-tion that phosphorescence was involved in some way in the phenome-THE DISCOVERY OF RADIUM 47non. He assumed that an energy (which he called a form of phosphores-
cence) was stored in the uranium and concluded that the emission pro-duced by the uranium was the ﬁrst example of a type of invisiblephosphorescence. Although he had actually discovered radioactivity,Becquerel neither named it nor explained its source. Physicist Jean Perrin(1870–1942) concluded that Becquerel was a prisoner of the previous hy-pothesis of phosphorescence, although he was able to move further fromit than the other three scientists.
Giving up a well-entrenched idea is one of the most difﬁcult things for
a scientist to do. In order to keep the established hypothesis he or she willsometimes ignore contradictory results or will add new postulates in orderto save the theory. Thus in Becquerel’s case, he was convinced that phos-phorescence was involved even when the evidence he went out of his wayto collect seemed to indicate that something different was happening.
Becquerel was not the only one experimenting along these lines. While
Becquerel was working in France, Silvanus P . Thompson (1851–1916) inLondon put a small quantity of uranium nitrate over an aluminum-covered photographic plate and observed its effect. After putting theplate on the window sill he developed the plate and discovered it haddarkened at the place where the uranium salt had been. Surprised thaturanium could affect his plate through the aluminum shield, he wrote toGeorge Stokes (1819–1903), the president of the Royal Society to tellhim about his results, which he christened hyperphosphorescence. Stokeswas enthusiastic and urged him to publish immediately. But unfortunatelyfor Thompson, Becquerel published ﬁrst and received the credit. As sooften happens in science, it seems that the time was ripe for an idea. Dis-coveries in science are usually very complex occurrences based on ideas,instruments, or techniques developed in speciﬁc social and cultural situ-ations. When Sir Isaac Newton (1642–1727) postulated his gravitationalhypothesis, Robert Hooke (1635–1703) and others were working on theproblem and had worked along very similar lines to Newton, although notas completely. When Charles Darwin (1809–1882) produced his hypoth-esis of evolution through natural selection, Alfred Russel Wallace(1823–1913) had arrived at a very similar hypothesis. Although it is pos-sible to ﬁnd information on these “also rans,” they seldom get the creditthat they deserve. Thus by a quirk of luck, it is Becquerel, not Thompson,who is remembered and his experiment cited as producing the seminalwork in radioactivity. Recognition by contemporaries reﬂects the impor-tance of a discovery on subsequent researchers. For example, althoughLeonardo da Vinci’s (1452–1519) science is recognized today it had little48 MARIE CURIEimpact on Renaissance science because he kept his discoveries secret.
Thompson did not deliberately keep his work secret but because Bec-querel was better known, he got the credit. However, unlike Röntgen’s Xrays, Becquerel’s experiment did not get immediate attention. One manin particular, though, William Thomson, Lord Kelvin (1824–1907), fur-thered Becquerel’s experiment by asking whether uranium rays electriﬁedthe air, as did X rays. Using his electrometer (an instrument for the mea-surement of electric currents), Kelvin conﬁrmed that they did.
Becquerel’s new kind of ray intrigued Marie Curie, as she was searching
for a subject for her doctoral thesis. She found it interesting that Bec-querel’s rays had not appealed either to popular or to scientiﬁc sensibili-ties. She wrote in her autobiography that she and her husband wereexcited by the new phenomenon and that she resolved to “undertake thespecial study of it.”
1She wanted to understand the nature of Becquerel’s
radiation. However, in order to explore these rays she had to have a suit-able laboratory available. After Pierre approached the director of hisschool, Marie was given the free use of a glassed-in room on the groundﬂoor that was more like a storeroom than a laboratory. The room wasdamp and humid in the summer and bitterly cold in the winter. It was to-tally unsuitable for scientiﬁc instruments or for Marie’s health.
Marie ﬁrst planned to detect a way of determining whether other sub-
stances besides uranium caused the air to conduct electricity. She usedtwo of Pierre’s inventions, the electrometer and the piezoelectric quartzbalance, to test the substances. Together, she and Pierre developed a tech-nique. She put the powdered uranium on one metal plate and opposed itwith a second plate. The plate with the uranium was charged, and sheused the electrometer to determine whether an electric current passedthrough the air between the plates. After she had perfected the techniqueshe began to test other elements to see if any had properties similar to ura-nium. After testing dozens of materials, she found that thorium and itscompounds caused the air to conduct electricity and produced rays simi-lar to those from uranium.
Her doctoral project began to change from merely a descriptive one in
which she measured the electric current emitted by different materials toa theoretical one where she speculated on a cause for the radiation. In avery understated way, she reported her preliminary results on uranium asfollows:
My determinations showed that the emission of the rays is an
atomic property of the uranium, whatever the physical orTHE DISCOVERY OF RADIUM 49chemical conditions of the salt were. Any substance contain-
ing uranium is as much more active in emitting rays, as it con-tains more of this element.
2
In other words, she realized that the activity of the uranium compoundsdepended solely on the amount of uranium present. It did not matter ifthe uranium salt was dry or wet, lumpy or powdery or what other elementswere present in the salt. If she did nothing else, this discovery would placeher in the ranks of ﬁrst-rate scientists. She had demonstrated that the ra-diation was not caused by an interaction between molecules—it was notan ordinary chemical reaction where light or heat was given off as a prod-uct of the reaction. It issued from the atom itself. Radiation was an atomicproperty, proportional to the amount of the radioactive substance beingmeasured.
At this time she did not speculate on the signiﬁcance of this interpre-
tation, and continued to measure the conductivity of the air using twoother minerals containing uranium, chalcolite, and the uranium ore,pitchblende. She determined that pitchblende was four times as active asuranium, and chalcolite two times as active. She concluded that thesetwo substances must contain other substances that were much more ac-tive than uranium. In her autobiography she made it evident that thisidea was hers and not Pierre’s. When writing about it she uses the ﬁrst per-son singular, “I.”
There must be, I thought, some unknown substance, very ac-
tive, in these minerals. My husband agreed with me and I urgedthat we search at once for this hypothetical substance, think-ing that in beginning this work we were to enter the path of anew science which we should follow for all our future.
3
In addition to analyzing the pitchblende by known chemical methods,
the couple used Pierre’s delicate electrical apparatus to examine differentportions for evidence of radioactivity. Marie was positive that the strongradiation that they observed came from a new chemical element. Sheconﬁded her conviction to Bronia. She also told her sister that the physi-cists with whom they had spoken were convinced that they had made anerror in experimentation. Marie realized that only by actually isolatingthe element would she ever persuade the skeptics.
The general method that they followed was to grind up the pitch-
blende and then dissolve it in acid. Afterwards, they broke it down into50 MARIE CURIEdifferent components using standard chemical techniques. They then
measured the radioactivity of the products. The next step was to use spec-troscopic analysis to attempt to ﬁnd the highly active unknown element.Robert Bunsen (1811–1899) and G. R. Kirchhoff (1824–1887) ﬁrst de-veloped a method for using spectroscopy to identify unknown elements inthe 1860s, and since that time eight previously undescribed elementswere discovered. Their friend Gustave Bémont, who had the laboratoryexpertise that they lacked, heated a new sample of pitchblende in a glasstube and distilled a small quantity of the material on the glass. This mate-rial was far more active than pitchblende. However, when the Curiestested their sample, it was not sufﬁciently pure to show the characteristicspectral lines of a new element. They did not scrap their new element hy-pothesis, but assumed that they had to produce a purer form from thepitchblende in order to demonstrate its presence.
Marie tried a tedious technique called fractional crystallization to sep-
arate out different substances from a solution of pitchblende. This proce-dure depends on the fact that different substances in the same solutionform crystals at different temperatures. Those with lower atomic weightscrystallize ﬁrst. Marie ﬁrst boiled the pitchblende solution, then graduallycooled it, and ﬁnally tested the crystals that were formed for radioactivitywith the Curie electrometer. She discarded the crystals that were formedﬁrst, which were not radioactive or only slightly so. She repeated thistechnique over and over again on the solution, retaining the more ra-dioactive fraction and discarding the less active crystals. With each frac-tional crystallization, the crystals became increasingly more radioactive.
The element bismuth in the pitchblende stubbornly refused to be sep-
arated from what Marie presumed was the new element. Marie was just asobstinate as the clinging bismuth, which she attempted to separate. OnJune 6, 1898, she took a solution of bismuth nitrate that she was con-vinced contained her new element and added hydrogen sulphide to it.She collected the solid (bismuth sulphide) that was precipitated and mea-sured its activity and found that it was “ 150 times more active than ura-
nium. ”
4Not happy with the impure product, bismuth sulphide, that they
had collected, Pierre heated a small sample of this substance in a glasstube. The bismuth sulphide remained in the hottest parts of the tube,while a black powder was deposited on the glass at slightly cooler temper-atures. He and Marie continued working and eventually came up with aproduct that was 330 times more active than uranium. Although they stilldid not obtain the pure form, they were convinced that they had a new el-ement. Marie wrote, “In July, 1898, we announced the existence of thisTHE DISCOVERY OF RADIUM 51new substance to which I gave the name of polonium, in memory of my
native country.”5
In the paper that they produced in 1898, the term “radioactive” was
ﬁrst used to describe the behavior of uranium-like materials. Because ofthe connection with her native country, Marie felt that the discovery ofpolonium would be her most signiﬁcant contribution. However, the en-tries in their laboratory notebook in November make it very clear thatthey had previously made another discovery that was to be even more sig-niﬁcant. They found that the remaining liquid when they had gotten ridof both bismuth and polonium was still extremely radioactive. The re-maining impurity in the liquid was the element barium, which was knownnot to be radioactive. Concluding that they had discovered not only onebut two radioactive substances in the pitchblende they named their sec-ond new element radium. Radium was far more radioactive than polo-nium and 900 times more radioactive than uranium. It was to be radium,not polonium, that gave Curie her instant and lasting fame.
It is one thing to postulate new elements and still another to actually
isolate them. In order to convince chemists of the correctness of her as-sumptions, Marie felt it necessary to produce a pure form of the new ele-ments. Pierre, whose background was in physics, was more content to relyon his mind rather than his senses to tell him that a new element was themost reasonable explanation for the radiation. Thus, it was Marie who feltit necessary to go through the tedious procedures in order to have physi-cal evidence of their hypothesis. Before they would believe that she actu-ally had discovered a new element, her fellow chemists wanted her toascribe an atomic weight to polonium and radium. She could only ﬁndthese weights if she could isolate the pure elements. As they worked to-ward ﬁnding the unknown substances, the Curies did not know any of itschemical properties. Since they only knew that it emitted rays, the raysrepresented their starting point.
In order to isolate the new elements, Marie needed a large quantity of
a source material. Pitchblende was a heavy gooey black compound thatwas mined on the German-Czech border in the Joachimsthal region. Thisregion ﬁrst became famous for its silver mines. The discovery of silver ledto the minting of about two million large silver coins called Joachim-sthaler. The name was later shortened to thaler, which is the source forour word dollar. In the late eighteenth century a chemist, Martin Hein-rich Klaproth (1743–1817), extracted a gray metallic element from one ofthese mines. He named this element uranium after the planet Uranus thatthe astronomer William Herschel (1738–1822) had recently discovered.52 MARIE CURIEUranium was important economically because it produced a superb agent
for coloring ceramic glazes. It gave a velvety ﬁnish to porcelain. It also wassometimes used to toughen steel.
It was not the practical use of uranium that interested the Curies.
Marie, with Pierre’s blessing, set out to hunt for the active substance inthe uranium ore, pitchblende. Because of its practical utility, pitchblendewas very expensive. The Curies realized that they would have to treathuge quantities of the material in order to isolate their new metals. Over-coming obstacles was nothing new to Marie and Pierre. They assumedthat after the valuable uranium was extracted from the ore, traces of polo-nium and radium would remain in the residue. Useless for most purposes,this residue was very cheap. Still, they realized that it would be futile toask the University of Paris or the French government for a grant to buy it,for they were notoriously stingy. After getting permission from the direc-tors of the mine of St. Joachimsthal, the Curies went to their meager sav-ings and retrieved enough money to buy the crude material and pay for itstransportation to Paris.
Their next problem was to ﬁnd a place where they could store huge
quantities of the radioactive substance. When it arrived in 1899, they hadit dumped in the yard of the School of Physics. The storeroom that theyhad previously used for their research clearly was inadequate for the de-posited sacks of pitchblende. The new director of the School of Physicswas not nearly as tolerant and helpful as the previous one had been, andif it had not been for Marie’s quiet insistence he probably would not havecomplied with their request for a different space. An abandoned shed witha dirt ﬂoor, formerly used as a medical-school dissecting room, was put attheir disposal. The sacks remained in the yard and the shed served for theanalytical work. Marie observed that it
surpassed the most pessimistic expectations of discomfort. In
summer, because of its skylights, it was as stiﬂing as a hothouse.In winter one did not know whether to wish for rain or frost; ifit rained, the water fell drop by drop, with a soft, nerve-rackingnoise, on the ground or on the worktables, in places which thephysicists had to mark in order to avoid putting apparatusthere. If it froze, one froze.
6
Since to Pierre Curie it seemed superﬂuous to engage in the enormous
physical struggle to demonstrate what they already knew, much of the ex-hausting labor was left to Marie. When the physicist Georges UrbainTHE DISCOVERY OF RADIUM 53(1872–1938) returned from a visit he reported that he “saw Madame Curie
work like a man at the difﬁcult treatments of great quantities of pitch-blende.” She moved the heavy containers, transferred the contents fromone vat to another, and, “using an iron bar almost as big as herself,” spent“the whole of a working day stirring the heating and fuming liquids.”
7They
worked under these circumstances from 1898 to 1902. Even under theseabominable conditions, Marie noted that it was in this “miserable oldshed” that she experienced the “best and happiest years of our life.”
8
By 1901, the Curies had divided their research into two parts, the iso-
lation of radium and the study of the rays associated with radioactivity.Marie embraced the methods of the chemist, and Pierre, tired of the end-less extraction process, preferred the methods of the physicist. In 1898,Pierre, Marie, and Bémont noted in Comptes Rendus, a journal of the
French Academy of Sciences, that
T wo of us have shown that by purely chemical processes one
can extract from pitchblende a strongly radioactive substance.This substance is closely related to Bismuth in its analyticalproperties. We have stated the opinion that pitchblende maypossibly contain a new element for which we have proposedthe name polonium.
9
In an earlier article, the Curies had announced the existence of polo-
nium, but in this later article, besides reminding their readers of polo-nium, the Curies also laid the foundation for their future assertion thatpitchblende contained another extremely radioactive element, radium.They described the properties of radium and explained why it could notbe a previously known element. They concluded in this paper “the vari-ous reasons which we have just enumerated lead us to believe that thenew radioactive substance contains a new element to which we proposeto give the name radium. ”
10
Persistent Marie continued her efforts to purify radium. Finally in 1902
after treating over a ton of pitchblende residues, Marie produced one-tenth of a gram of almost pure radium. She prepared it from a radium salt(radium chloride) and determined that its atomic weight was 225.93. Itpleased both Marie and Pierre to observe that their new element was ra-diantly beautiful, exuding a blue luminosity that was spectacular. Afterannouncing the result in her own name, Marie began to write her doc-toral thesis, “Researches on Radioactive Substances.” She defended herthesis on June 25, 1903. In a thesis defense it was customary to have out-side people attend in order to support the candidate. More than the usual54 MARIE CURIEnumber of outsiders attended Marie’s thesis defense. In the crowded ex-
amination hall, curiosity seekers as well as family, friends, and colleagueswere present. After the examination she was awarded the degree of Doc-tor of Physical Science at the University of Paris, with the added accoladeoftrès honorable. Her thesis was published in the same year.
Although the isolation of radium scientiﬁcally took second place to
the early conclusion that radioactivity was atomic in nature, the isola-tion of the glowing blue radium was the stuff of legends and led others tofall under its charm. In 1900, the Curies collected all of the research onradioactivity that they could ﬁnd and published it in a long paper. Al-though they described the properties of these rays, the source of this cu-rious energy remained unknown. They wrote that the spontaneity of theradiation was a subject of great astonishment. It seemed to violate one ofthe most sacred laws of physics, the ﬁrst law of thermodynamics. This lawstates that energy cannot be created or destroyed although it can be con-verted from one form to another. Radium did not seem to undergo anychange but just emitted energy. In this paper they asked questions aboutthe source of energy coming from the rays. Does it originate within theradioactive bodies, or is it imposed from without? Every conclusion thatthey came up with seemed to violate one of the most important assump-tions of nineteenth-century physics. Up until the discovery of radioac-tivity, physicists could explain all phenomena in nature by gravitationalattraction and electromagnetic force. New forces contained within the nucleus of the atom would later be called upon to account for ra-dioactivity, but in 1900 the behavior of radioactive substances was anenigma.
11
Although most people assume, as did physicist Ernest Rutherford, that
the Curies’ collaboration consisted of Marie doing the chemistry andPierre the physics, another scholar sees their collaboration in a differentway. Rutherford wrote
While at this stage, M. and Mme. Curie did all their scientiﬁc
work together, it is natural to assume that Mme. Curie, as the chemist of the combination was mainly responsible for thechemical work involved. She alone was responsible for thelarge-scale chemical work required to separate radium from ra-dioactive residues in sufﬁcient quantity to purify it and obtainits atomic weight.
12
But it can be argued that their successful collaboration was much morethan Marie serving as the chemist and Pierre, the physicist, and that theirTHE DISCOVERY OF RADIUM 55“success as a scientiﬁc couple included, but was not limited to, the part-
ners’ different commitments to chemistry and physics.”13
HOME LIFE DURING THE RADIUM YEARS
During the summer of 1898 after the discovery of polonium, Marie,
Pierre, and baby Irène went on vacation in Auroux in the Auvergne, avery mountainous region of France. Even though they hiked, swam, andplayed, Marie and Pierre never left their “ ‘new metals,’ polonium and ‘theother’—the one that remained to be found—‘behind.’ ” Although theyenjoyed leaving the sultry summer heat of Paris, they were pleased to re-turn to their research in September.
14In the fall of that year, Bronia and
Kazimierz left Paris for Poland, leaving Marie without a direct family con-nection to her beloved Poland. She wrote Bronia, “it seems to me thatParis no longer exists, aside from our lodging and the school where wework.” She asked advice about how often the green plant they left behindshould be watered. She reported on the family, writing
We are well, in spite of the bad weather, the rain and the mud.
Irène is getting to be a big girl. She is very difﬁcult about herfood and aside from milk tapioca she will eat hardly anythingregularly, not even eggs. Write me what would be a suitablemenu for persons of her age ....  
15
Marie treated her household activities in much the same way that she
did her scientiﬁc experiments. For instance she wrote annotations in themargins of a cookbook about making gooseberry jelly.
I took eight pounds of fruit and the same weight in crystallized
sugar. After an ebullition [boiling] of ten minutes, I passed themixture through a rather ﬁne sieve. I obtained fourteen pots ofvery good jelly, not transparent, which “took” perfectly.
16
She recorded every detail of Irène’s life much as she recorded meticulouslyevery detail of her laboratory work. In a notebook she wrote that Irène“can walk very well on all fours.” She also carefully noted her weight gainday by day, her diet, and the appearance of each tooth. During their sum-mer vacation trip to Auroux, she recorded that Irène “plays with the catand chases him with war cries. She is not afraid of strangers any more. Shesings a good deal. She gets up on the table when she is in her chair.”
1756 MARIE CURIEBoth Marie and Pierre were convinced that having a baby need not
cause Marie to give up her scientiﬁc work. She wrote that “such a renun-ciation would have been very painful to me, and my husband would noteven think of it ;...Neither of us would contemplate abandoning what
was so precious to both.” Marie was lucky to have a built-in baby sitter inDr. Eugène Curie. While Marie was in the laboratory, Irène was in thecare of her grandfather, who “loved her tenderly and whose own life was made brighter by her.”
18His help was especially appreciated because
Marie was never a skilled homemaker, and could see little virtue in suchhumble tasks. The strong support that she had from a close family madean ordinarily impossible situation much more tolerable. “Things were par-ticularly difﬁcult only in case of more exceptional events, such as a child’sillness, when sleepless nights interrupted the normal course of life.” Marienoted, however, that they had little time for ordinary social relationships.Their friends were scientists like themselves. A social evening would con-sist of talking with these friends in their home or in the garden. Marie didﬁnd time to sew for Irène. She never bought ready-made clothes for her,for she thought them too elaborate and impractical.
Pierre should have been in a good position to ﬁnally attain an academic
chair. His work on crystallography, piezoelectricity, symmetry, and mag-netism were admired and well known. His joint work with Marie resultingin the discovery of radium and polonium was widely accepted. Thus,when the chair of physical chemistry became available at the Sorbonne in1898, Pierre asked for it and had good reason to think that he would beappointed. Again, he was disappointed and had to settle for the post of as-sistant professor (repetiteur ) at the École Polytechnique to supplement
their income. If he would have been appointed, the results would havebeen prestige, a better laboratory, and a modest increase in salary. Pierre,however, was not surprised when he did not get the position of chair.Since he was not a graduate of either the Normal School or the Polytech-nic, he suspected that he would be passed over. For without the supportthat the large schools provide their graduates, nongraduates were often ig-nored in spite of their accomplishments. In this case a younger colleague,Jean Perrin, who had the advantage of a prestigious education got the ap-pointment.
The Curies’ disappointment almost resulted in their leaving Paris. The
University of Geneva offered Pierre a chair with a high salary and a labora-tory to be designed to his own speciﬁcations. They also promised an ofﬁcialposition to Marie. They seriously considered the offer and went to Genevato evaluate the new opportunity. In her biography of Pierre, Marie notedTHE DISCOVERY OF RADIUM 57that it was a “grave decision for us to make.” However, although Pierre was
tempted by the offer, he ﬁnally decided to remain in Paris because he“feared the interruption of our investigations which such a change wouldinvolve.”
19It was a fortuitous opportunity that another position opened at
the Sorbonne, teaching physics to medical students. With the encourage-ment of his colleagues, in particular the inﬂuential Henri Poincaré whowanted to keep him in France, Pierre was hired. Although this made him amember of the faculty of the Sorbonne, the course served medical studentsand was peripheral to the prestigious Faculté des Sciences where Pierrewanted to be. Although their income increased, the working conditionswere not good. Pierre had a double teaching load and was often fatiguedwith teaching so many students. One of the worst problems with the newposition was that it did not include a laboratory. All that he had at his dis-posal was a little ofﬁce and a workroom. Since he was determined to con-tinue with his research, he had to go back and forth on his bicycle betweenhis new ofﬁce, the makeshift laboratory, and the École de Physique andChemie. When another chair opened up in mineralogy, for which Pierrewas qualiﬁed, he was refused a second time. Pierre was simply a poor politi-cian. He refused to ﬂatter those who made personnel decisions and tendedto blame his failures on his lack of a prestigious school background.
At the same time that Pierre accepted the physics teaching position at
the Sorbonne, Marie also got a new paid position. She was the ﬁrstwoman to be named to the faculty of the Normal School (École NormaleSuperieure) for Girls at Sèvres. This school was the elite preparatoryschool for teachers in France. Marie’s ﬁrst year of teaching at the schoolwas difﬁcult, for students made fun of her Polish accent and her somewhatawkward sentence structure. More important, however, it was her dry lec-ture presentations that acted as a put off for her students. Between her ﬁrstand second year of teaching she seems to have undergone an epiphany.She used experiments instead of lectures. The students then would discussthe meaning of the experiments. She went from being a pariah to themost popular teacher at the school.
During these years their social life was modest but did exist. They oc-
casionally visited Marguerite and Émile Borel at their frequent eveningparties. For a special occasion, Marie would dress up for a night at the the-ater. When they had a visitor from another country they would go out tolunch and dinner and show him or her the sights of Paris, including a tripup the Eiffel Tower. These occasions were rare, however, and most of theirsocial life consisted of conversations with scientists and close friends whohad children about the same age as Irène.58 MARIE CURIEPierre’s friends worked to prepare him for a desirable professorship.
They convinced him to present himself as a candidate for membership inthe prestigious Academy of Science (Académie des Sciences) where theyassured him that his election was certain. Since the physicist members ofthe Academy promised to support him, he reluctantly agreed to apply formembership. However, as in the case of the professorships he was to bedisappointed. The process of becoming accepted was demoralizing for theshy and difﬁdent Pierre. It was customary for the candidate to visit thecurrent Academy members. He found the entire process humiliating. Ajournalist later wrote of Pierre’s visits to the academicians as follows:
To climb stairs, ring, have himself announced, say why he had
come—all this ﬁlled the candidate with shame in spite of him-self; but what was worse, he had to set forth his honors, statethe good opinion he had of himself, boast of his science and hiswork—which seemed to him beyond human power. Conse-quently he eulogized his opponent sincerely and at length, say-ing that M. Amagat was much better qualiﬁed than he, Curie,to enter the Institute.
20
When the results of the election were received, M. Émile Amagat re-
ceived 32 votes, Pierre 20, and a third candidate 6. Pierre told his friendthat he was not disappointed—that the only thing that concerned himwas the time spent away from his research making the visits.
Pierre’s new dean, Paul Appell (1855–1930), mounted a new attempt
to get Pierre recognized. In response to a request from the ministry askingthe dean to propose names for the Legion of Honor, he wrote Pierre beg-ging him to allow his name to be submitted. In an attempt to convincePierre to accept the award, Appell wrote to Marie, implying that accep-tance would bring a bigger laboratory and the equipment that he soneeded. Pierre found it ridiculous to have his laboratory needs contingenton having the Legion of Honor’s little enameled cross hung on the end ofa red silk ribbon. Therefore, he replied to the dean to “please be so kind asto thank the Minister and to inform him that I do not feel the slightestneed of being decorated, but that I am in the greatest need of a labora-tory.”
21
As early as 1897, the Curies had begun to have health issues. They, as
well as their friends, blamed the problems on overwork and refusal to eatand rest properly. A colleague and friend, Georges Sagnac (1869–1926),complained that they ate very little. He asked if even “a robust constitu-THE DISCOVERY OF RADIUM 59tion wouldn’t suffer from such insufﬁcient nourishment?” His suggested
cure was to have regular meals and avoid “discussion of distressing ordispiritying [sic] events. You must not read or talk physics while you areeating.”
22Since there was a history of tuberculosis in her family, Marie was
diagnosed with a suspected tubercular lesion of the lung. However, thisproblem did not develop beyond the initial symptoms. Although theynever acknowledged it, the timing suggests that the decline in theirhealth was related to the new rays that they were studying. Being Marie,she kept an accurate account in her notebook of all of her symptoms.
Sagnac’s good advice would have been of little help if it indeed was ex-
posure to heavy doses of radiation that caused their sickness. Although itwas understood that radium could cause local burns, the more serious andwidespread systemic effects were unknown. Pierre and Henri Becquerelpublished a paper in 1901 in which they described burns on their skincaused by contact with radioactive material. Becquerel was accidentallyburned while carrying a glass tube of radium in the pocket of his waistcoat.Pierre duplicated an experiment by two Germans who were the ﬁrst to re-port burns from radioactive materials in print. After placing thicklywrapped radioactive barium on his arm for ten hours, he observed that theskin was red. The redness increased for several days and on the forty-second day the skin began to heal around the edges of the wound. On theﬁfty-second day, all was healed except for a small gray spot that Pierreblamed on a deeper injury. Although the Curies and Becquerel had prob-lems with their hands and ﬁngers they dismissed the burns as minor prob-lems that had to be dealt with. In fact, it seemed that radium would beactually useful. They postulated that by destroying diseased cells, radiumcould cure certain forms of cancer. It seemed that radium might be a med-ical miracle.
Although both Curies worked very hard, they took time off for a vaca-
tion each summer from 1900 through 1903. Marie was especially con-cerned about Irène’s health and felt that these summers away from Pariswere essential to her well-being. When they returned to Paris each year,both parents suffered from extreme exhaustion but did not blame radiumfor their symptoms. In May 1902, Marie’s beloved father, Wladyslaw, died.Before he became ill, Marie and Pierre had visited him in Warsaw severaltimes. In 1899 the entire family (Wladyslaw, Bronia, Kazimierz, Helena,and Józef) were reunited in Zakopane in the Carpathian Mountains wherethe Dluskis were building a new modern tuberculosis sanitorium. Shortlyafter that visit, Marie’s father was struck by a truck and suffered a debili-tating fracture. Although he recovered somewhat, shortly thereafter he60 MARIE CURIEhad a gallbladder attack and had surgery to remove large gallstones. As
soon as she heard of his illness, Marie took a train to Warsaw, but en routeshe learned that he had died. His death affected her greatly, particularlybecause she was not able to be at his side when he died. She was some-what comforted in the knowledge that he who had wanted to do scientiﬁcwork as a young man was proud of the scientiﬁc success of his daughter.
NOTES
1. Marie Curie, “Autobiographical Notes ,” in Pierre Curie, trans. Charlotte
and Vernon Kellogg (New York: Macmillan, 1923), 180.
2. Marie Curie, “Autobiographical Notes,” 181.3. Marie Curie, “Autobiographical Notes,” 182.4. Robert Reid, Marie Curie (London: Collins, 1974), 86.
5. Marie Curie, “Autobiographical Notes,” 184.6. Eve Curie, Madame Curie: A Biography (Garden City, NY: Doubleday,
Doran, & Co., 1938), 169.
7. Reid, Marie Curie, 96.
8. Marie Curie, “Autobiographical Notes,” 186.9. M. P . Curie, Mme. P . Curie, and M. G. Bémont, presented by M. Bec-
querel, “Sur une nouvelle substance fortement radio-active, contenue dans lapechblende,” Comptes Rendus 127 (1898): 1215–17. The English translation of
the title is “On a New, Strongly Radioactive Substance, Contained in Pitch-blende.” The translation is by Henry A. Boorse and Lloyd Motz, eds., The World
of the Atom, vol. 1 (New York: Basic Books, 1966).
10. M. P . Curie, Mme. P . Curie, and M. G. Bémont, presented by M. Bec-
querel, “Sur une nouvelle substance fortement radio-active,” 1215–17.
11. Marie and Pierre Curie, “Les nouvelles substances radioactives et les
rayons qu’elles emettent,” rapport presente au Congres international de physique(Paris: Gauthier-Villars, 1900), in Susan Quinn, Marie Curie: A Life (New York:
Simon and Schuster, 1995), 450.
12. Ernest Rutherford, “Mme. Curie,” Nature, 21 July 1934, 90–91.
13. Helena M. Pycior, “Pierre Curie and ‘His Eminent Collaborator Mme.
Curie,’ ” in Creative Couples in the Sciences, ed. Helena M. Pycior, Nancy G.
Slack, and Pnina G. Abir-Am (New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press,1996), 39.
14. Eve Curie, Madame Curie, 162.
15. Eve Curie, Madame Curie , 163.
16. Eve Curie, Madame Curie, 163.
17. Eve Curie, Madame Curie, 163.THE DISCOVERY OF RADIUM 6118. Marie Curie, “Autobiographical Notes,” 179.
19. Marie Curie, Pierre Curie , trans. Charlotte and Vernon Kellogg (New
York: Macmillan, 1923), 108–9.
20. Eve Curie, Madame Curie, 184.
21. Eve Curie, Madame Curie , 186.
22. Quinn, Marie Curie: A Life , 179.62 MARIE CURIE