Chapter 8
SCANDAL!
Marie soon regretted her generosity in giving away her personal radium.
She positively impressed American Andrew Carnegie, the wealthy phi-lanthropist and author of The Gospel of Wealth, whom she met in Paris
shortly after Pierre’s death, and he decided to endow her research. She wasgrateful, because it allowed her to ﬁnance a research staff around whichshe could build a school of radioactivity in Paris. The endowment suitedher very well, because she could accept the money for her students, not forherself.
By 1906 almost everybody accepted radium as a new element. But
there was one important exception. The grand old man of English sci-ence, Lord Kelvin, had never embraced it. On August 9, 1906, he choseto present his ideas in the famous Times of London. He selected this pop-
ular venue because radium and everything about it fascinated the public.He wrote that radium instead of being a new element was only a com-pound of lead with ﬁve helium atoms. Of course, if he was correct thenboth Marie Curie’s work and Rutherford and Soddy’s theory of radioactivedisintegration would be in tatters. Kelvin, at 82, just could not conceiveof the possibility of a new element. And of course Marie was equally cer-tain that she was correct. Kelvin had called her basic assumption that ra-dioactivity was an atomic property into question. Even though she, andmost of the scientiﬁc community, accepted radium as an element, she feltchallenged to produce a purer form than the radium chloride which shehad puriﬁed earlier. Thus, she began the puriﬁcation process again in hernew laboratory. By 1907, she had produced a perfectly pure radium chlo-ride allowing her to determine an even more precise atomic weight for theelement radium.1By the time she had completed this work, there could be
little doubt that radium was a new element.
Nevertheless, Lord Kelvin still clung to his ideas tenaciously. The idea
of one element being transformed into another was unacceptable toKelvin and others who believed that it smacked of alchemy. At least threeother distinguished scientists had conducted experiments that indicatedthat transformation occurred in other elements: William Ramsay(1852–1916), Ernest Rutherford, and Frederick Soddy (1877–1956). Forher part, Curie was hesitant to give her opinion of Sir William Ramsay’sreported transmutation of copper into helium. However, she ﬁnally re-lented and on August 18, 1906, the Sunday New York Times quoted Curie
as saying that she shared the opinions of Ramsay, Rutherford, and Soddyand would place radium in a group of unstable elements. Radium, she hy-pothesized, is composed of atoms that undergo spontaneous transforma-tion resulting in helium as one of its products. But she still was notabsolutely convinced that this transformation was the source of the he-lium. She also considered the possibility that it was in the gases surround-ing the radium, which were never completely removed even in a vacuum.In either case, there was no doubt in her mind that an atomic transforma-tion had occurred. Marie did not resent Lord Kelvin’s ideas or those of anyscientist whose views differed from hers. Only from a free and open dis-cussion of ideas, she reported, can additions to knowledge be made.Kelvin was an old man and set in his ways by this time, and Marie mayhave tried to avoid offending him. She wrote that she did not considercombating Lord Kelvin’s opinion useful. She did reiterate that radium wasa distinct chemical element. Lord Kelvin died in December 1907 and theopposition to the new element evaporated. Marie, with the assistance ofAndré Debierne, also conﬁrmed that polonium was a new element.
In 1908, the New York Times proclaimed that there was practically no
commercial use for radium, but that its value for laboratory experimentscreated a demand that could not be satisﬁed because of the great cost. Afactory in France supplied radium bromide, not pure metallic radium, at acost of $40 million a pound. The reporter admitted that he was still con-fused as to the nature of radium—whether it was a substance or a quality.“To speak of a pound of it is like speaking of a pound of sunlight.”
2After
reporting that fresh radium experiments were being performed daily inMarie Curie’s laboratory at the Sorbonne, the reporter concluded that thesecret of radium was still unsolved. Of course, articles such as this one andthose scientists who doubted that radium was an element inspired Marieto double her efforts to obtain pure metallic radium.86 MARIE CURIEA short note on the front page of the Tuesday, September 6, 1910, edi-
tion of the New York Times proclaimed that Curie “had announced to-
day to the Academy of Sciences that she had succeeded in obtainingpure radium.” The article continued by adding that previously it had ex-isted only in the form of salts. In order to obtain the pure radium, Curietreated a decigram of bromide of radium by an electrolytic process, “ob-taining an amalgam which was extracted from the metallic radium bydistillation.” According to the report the radium “has the appearance ofa white metal, and is capable of adhering strongly to iron.” The whitemetal changes to black when exposed to the air, “burns paper, and oxi-dizes in water.”
3
The next major project that Marie and her institute became involved
in was the development of an international standard for radium. It was es-sential for a researcher who was working with radium to know its purity.Since hospitals were using radium in the treatment of cancer, they tooneeded to know its purity so that they could determine an optimum doseto treat the tumors. Although national rivalries came into play in deter-mining the international radium standard, all agreed that Madame Curie’seminence gave her the right to prepare the standard. In 1911 she estab-lished the standard and deposited a thin glass tube a few centimeters longwith the pure salt inside at the International Bureau of Weights and Mea-sures near Paris.
Marie Curie had managed to make a number of enemies along the way.
At international conferences she appeared to be uncompromising, deter-mined, and demanding. Although the young people in her laboratoryadored her, those who did not know her well felt rebuffed. They did notrealize that her apparent coldness and refusal to engage in light conversa-tion was due in large part to her shyness and sensitivity.
Some of the enemies that she made returned to haunt her later. One of
the most vicious was an American, Bertram Borden Boltwood, who oftensuffered from bouts of depression. Rutherford admired his skill as a radio-chemist and enjoyed his company when he was feeling cheerful and full offun, and they became fast friends. Unlike when Pierre was alive, Mariewas more proprietary with the discoveries from her laboratory. WhenBoltwood asked Marie Curie to allow him to compare one of his radiumsolutions with her own radium standard she refused to do so. In a letter toRutherford he wrote, “The Madame was not at all desirous of having sucha comparison carried out, the reason, I suspect, being her constitutionalunwillingness to do anything that might directly or indirectly assist anyworker in radioactivity outside her own laboratory.”
4The diplomaticSCANDAL! 87Rutherford was able to get Marie to lend him the standard when he
needed it several months later.
Although Rutherford liked Curie as a person, he began to have less re-
spect for her originality. Both he and Boltwood attributed her successmore to hard work and tenacity than to any innate creativeness. After shepublished her comprehensive summary of advances in radiation, Treatise
on Radioactivity (1910) Rutherford, although publicly supportive (he had
reviewed the book for the journal Nature ), privately was condescending.
Her health was clearly declining, and she often missed conferences andmeetings because of illness. Some of her more unsympathetic colleaguesthought that she was malingering when a topic to be discussed was not toher liking. One example had to do with naming the unit of measurementfor the Radium Standard the “curie.” There was disagreement over whatthis unit should be. When the decision did not go her way, she left themeeting claiming illness. She wrote a note on the hotel notepaper that ifthe name of Curie was to be adopted then it was she who would deﬁne it.She won the battle but also made more enemies. Pleading a bad cold, shedid not attend the Congress’s festive banquet.
In spite of his general support for Curie, Rutherford found Marie a dif-
ﬁcult person with whom to work. In the spring of 1910, he approached herwith a problem of different radium standards—he had his own, Marie hadher own, there was one from Vienna, and, no doubt, there were others indifferent parts of the world. They saw the need to appoint a committee todevelop an international standard. Without such a standard there wouldbe no way to check the agreement between results obtained in differentlaboratories. Since medical applications of radium were increasing, thecreation of a universal standard was vital. Marie agreed to prepare thestandard, but she informed Rutherford at the ﬁrst Solvay Conference thatshe wanted to keep it in her own laboratory partly because of sentimentalreasons and partly because she wanted to make additional observations onit. This attitude was different from her early perspective, when she andPierre agreed that radium belonged to the world—not to one country orto any individual. When Rutherford explained that the InternationalCommittee could not allow the standard to be in the hands of a single per-son, Marie was distressed. By being diplomatic he ﬁnally was able to ne-gotiate a solution, but there were many other questions where he felt thatshe was being unnecessarily difﬁcult. The solution involved comparingthe Viennese standard of Stefan Meyer with Marie’s standard. AlthoughRutherford assumed that the two standards would closely agree, he knewthat if they did not, Marie would be more than agitated.88 MARIE CURIEThe two standards were compared in March 1912. The accommoda-
tion may have been made easier because of Marie’s illness, for she was notwell enough to accompany the others to her laboratory. To everybody’s re-lief they found that the two samples agreed.
PAUL LANGEVIN
One day, ﬁve years after Pierre’s death, Marguerite Borel reported that
Marie appeared in the Perrins’ dining room in a white dress with a rose ather waist. Marguerite, much younger than her husband, Émile, was thetype of person who invited conﬁdences and was not immune to gossipingabout what she heard. She claimed that when Marie replaced her somberdark clothes with the sparkling white dress, she knew that Marie was no longer mourning Pierre. Who had caused this abrupt change of heart? One of Marguerite’s conﬁdantes was Pierre’s former student, PaulLangevin. He had previously poured out the details of his unhappy mar-riage to her receptive ears. Marie had also conﬁded in her, excoriatingLangevin’s wife for being unsupportive of the brilliant scientist that Paulwas. Marguerite suspected that a romance was blossoming between thetwo.
Several events and inventions made it difﬁcult to keep the romance
hidden. Three inventions, the linotype, the electric telegraph, and thetelephone made possible a larger newspaper with headlines and pictures.The improved newspapers carried news stories designed to appeal to thelower socioeconomic classes as well as the elite. Several of these newspa-pers had various axes to grind. For example L’Action Francaise ﬁrst ap-
peared in March 1908, and was basically an anti-Jewish scandal sheet.Another new development was the beginning of science journalism—writing about science for a popular audience. An example of this newform was the periodical Figaro.
Not only a press hungry for scandal, but an event that occurred publi-
cized by that same press, brought Marie Curie to the attention of thenewspaper reading public. Marie made a decision to become a candidatefor the Academy of Sciences (Académie des Sciences). Her determina-tion to stand for election seemed strange in light of Pierre’s bad experi-ence with this very traditional organization. But, if she were elected, shecould expect more money to come to her laboratory as well as enjoyingenhanced prestige both to herself and to her laboratory. Unlike Pierre,these things were important to her. A woman had never been elected tothe Academy and it seemed that Marie could not resist the opportunity toSCANDAL! 89be the ﬁrst. Thus, she swallowed her pride and made the required visits to
the Academy members.
Her decision to become a candidate immediately became front-page
news. At ﬁrst the articles were full of praise. Figaro published a long arti-
cle extolling her virtues as the grieving widow who managed to hide herpersonal sorrow and continue to work as one of France’s most respectedscientists. But Marie had also managed to collect a group of inﬂuential en-emies. Her outwardly cold, superior attitude annoyed those very scientistswhom she needed for support. Thus, while they might have accepted thevirtues of a modest, feminine woman, her opinionated stance fosteredjealousy in these colleagues. Others such as Rutherford and Boltwoodmaintained their doubts about her scientiﬁc creativity.
The entire idea of women being admitted into the traditional male bas-
tion of the Academy became a media circus. One respectable newspaper,Le Temps , was sympathetic but not completely supportive of Curie. How-
ever, in the France of this time, there existed a strident, radical right-wingpress. One of the most shrill of these voices came from L’Intransigeant.
There was none of the reasoned opposition that characterized the moremoderate press. They accused Marie of being little more than a hack. Theyclaimed that all of the important discoveries were made during Pierre’s life-time. The attacks became personal. What did this woman think she wasdoing putting herself forward for membership in this male institution? Inthe United States, the New York Times reported on the controversy. The
article described a lively two-hour long discussion in the Academy aboutthe admission of women. The committee was divided into two camps, onefavorable to Curie and the second opposed. The opposition consideredthat the admission of women would be an “audacious precedent.”
5
There was only one thing missing in the scenario—a credible opposi-
tion candidate. One appeared in the form of 66-year-old Edouard Branley(1844–1940). Branley, like Curie, was retiring and undemonstrative. T wotimes previously he had been a candidate for the Academy and two timesbefore he had been defeated. Many French people felt that his contribu-tion to modern technology (he made what he called radio conductorsfrom tubes of iron ﬁlings that could receive electromagnetic signals)should have earned him a Nobel Prize in physics along with GuglielmoMarconi (1874–1937). The right-wing press, especially L’Intransigeant
andL’Action Française , was delighted to ﬁnd a suitable male candidate. Fi-
garocheerfully leapt into the fray, proclaiming that the upcoming election
would represent the “battle of the sexes.” The conﬂict got especially nastywith the liberals, feminists, and anti-clerics on the side supporting Curie90 MARIE CURIEand the nationalist, pro-Catholic, anti-Semitic right wing supporting
Branley. The right wing press sneeringly brought up Curie’s Polish originsand this anti-Semitic press even implied that in spite of her Catholic par-ents she had Jewish origins.
The actual election came on January 23, 1911, and there were accusa-
tions of cheating on both sides. When the vote was ﬁnally announcedCurie had 28 votes, Branley 29, and a third candidate had 1. To get a clearmajority a second vote was necessary. The result was that Curie remainedat 28 and Branley got 30. Marie’s disappointment was intense. She neveragain stood for membership in the Academy.
The controversy had an amusing byproduct. An inventor who falsely
portrayed himself as the Comte de Chambert was charged with swindlinga wealthy old woman by convincing her to invest in a system for restoringancient paintings by the application of electricity. The inventor wasvague about the nature of his product and he was able to garner some sup-port among some important men. The defense stated that it would call M.Branley, Marie’s successful opponent in the Academy election, and theprosecution responded by threatening to call upon Marie Curie as an ex-pert witness.
6
By 1911 the name Marie Curie was a household word. She had been
the subject of both positive and negative publicity through her search formembership in the Academy. Her work with radium was exciting and ro-mantic, and the fact that it was a woman working in this ﬁeld made iteven more so. But Marie attempted to remain a private person. As far asanyone knew, she stayed a grieving widow without a romantic interest.This seemed to be the case until one day in the spring of 1911 when JeanPerrin and André Debierne explained to Marguerite Borel that a group ofletters from Marie Curie to Paul Langevin had been stolen. The thief hadbroken into Paul Langevin’s study. The letters implied a close relationshipbetween the two scientists and if the newspapers got hold of them itwould mean a disaster for Marie’s reputation.
In late nineteenth- and early twentieth-century France many men kept
mistresses. It was acceptable practice as long as a man appeared with hiswife at social functions and observed the prescribed niceties. If they wereboth discreet, he was free to support a mistress. But if the affairs becamepublic, they were universally censured. This view would have importantrepercussions on Marie Curie as a famous woman. A mistress of humbleorigins would not have raised the public’s ire, but Marie Curie was a careerwoman who supported herself and who was known by most French peo-ple. Newspaper reports on her unsuccessful candidacy for the FrenchSCANDAL! 91Academy suggested that the public was ready to denounce her. L’Intran-
sigeant stated that she should have withdrawn from the race as homage to
Branley, an older man, by a woman. This newspaper complained that thegesture was not made.
Madame Langevin and the newspapers were quiet for eight months
after the letters were stolen. Perhaps she was still hoping that the marriagecould be repaired. However, the relationship between Langevin and hiswife, Jeanne, deteriorated to such a degree that after an argument hesnatched their two boys and left the house. Jeanne claimed that Paul hadstruck her in the face for cooking badly. He claimed that she had hurledinsults at him in front of the boys. At any rate, the fact that he had takenthe children without his wife knowing where they were made him a can-didate for a lawsuit. There is a possibility that Paul was paying blackmailto keep the letters under wrap. During this time, Marie loaned him a con-siderable amount of money.
Marie was not oblivious to the damage to her reputation and the effect
on her daughters if the letters were made public. In a letter to Langevinquoted by biographer Susan Quinn she speculated on what would happenif Jeanne were to have another child. She concluded that they would be“judged very severely.” She also told him that “I can risk my life and myposition for you, but I couldn’t accept this dishonor in the face of myself,of you and of people I esteem.”
7
While Marie was in Brussels attending a radiation congress, the Solvay
Conference, the vague rumors burst into a full-blown scandal. One ofParis’s most famous newspapers Le Journal, launched a front-page story
under the headline A STORY OF LOVE: MADAME CURIE ANDPROFESSOR LANGEVIN .Perhaps Jeanne Langevin was especially
jealous because both Paul and Marie attended this conference. At anyrate she went to the paper with the letters. Jeanne’s mother also suppliedmaterial for the article, all of which was damning to both Marie and Paul.In the article, Jeanne came across as a mistreated wife who had only goneto the newspapers for the sake of her children. Marie was portrayed as awoman who was engaged in the masculine pursuit of science—a harridanwho specialized in taking another woman’s husband and spoiling the livesof their children. However, there were doubts about the truth of the story.Supporters claimed that the many of the implications drawn from the let-ters were merely the rantings of a jealous wife. And when Marie returnedfrom Paris, she wrote a scathing denial. She sent a letter to Le Temps, ex-
coriating the press for its intrusion into her private life. She averred thatthere was nothing in her actions of which she was ashamed. She also92 MARIE CURIEthreatened to demand monetary damages to be used in the interest of sci-
ence. The Journal reporter retracted the story. In fact he was abjectly
apologetic. Both Marie’s letter and the reporter’s denial were widely pub-licized, and it seemed as if the accusations would die away.
Perhaps the charges would have evaporated if the public and the news-
papers had not been reminded of it when Curie was nominated in 1911for her second Nobel Prize, this time in chemistry. The Nobel committeestressed the importance of Curie’s work in obtaining radium in its puremetallic state. They also stressed the medical use of radium in treatingcancer. The importance of radium led the committee to urge the SwedishAcademy to award a second Nobel Prize to the same person. However, thevery staid Academy was quite concerned after the newspaper broke thestory of the scandal. It was molliﬁed after the denials by Marie and by the man who had written the article. On November 7, 1911, the Acad-emy voted to award her the prize. The newspaper publicity was much dif-ferent from that which occurred when she was selected for the ﬁrst prizewith Pierre and Becquerel. The newspapers basically ignored her. Al-though Le Temps produced a front-page article on the Nobel Prize, it was
totally devoted to the prizewinner in literature, Maurice Maeterlinck.The recipient in chemistry was not even mentioned. Her scientiﬁcfriends, including Albert Einstein, were very supportive. Jacques Curieimplied in a letter to Marie that he would support her even if letters cameout indicating that she and Langevin had had an affair.
Jeanne Langevin planned a gigantic blackmail scheme. If Langevin did
not give up custody of the children and pay her 1,000 francs a month shethreatened to give the letters to the newspapers. When Langevin did notaccept the terms, Jeanne charged her husband with “consorting with aconcubine,” an accusation that would be heard in a criminal court.Marie’s lawyer insisted that the results of a trial would be favorable to her,and that she could go to Sweden to accept the Nobel Prize. Friends ofboth Curie and Paul Langevin attempted to cover up the evidence. Thenewspaper L’Action Française was not discouraged by the impressive array
of people supporting Marie. Instead they used the occasion to not onlyblast her as a home wrecker, but also to insert racist remarks about her asa foreigner. Another newspaper, L’Intransigeant, jumped into the fray and
castigated Marie and Paul while insisting that Jeanne should deﬁnitelyhave custody of the children. Neither of these two papers actually pub-lished the letters.
On November 23, 1911, a vitriolic weekly, L’Oeuvre, published ex-
cerpts from the letters Marie Curie and Paul Langevin had written to eachSCANDAL! 93other. Although nothing explicit was included, it seemed obvious to the
readers that there was truth to the accusations that they were having anaffair. One letter from Marie was especially incriminating. In this lettershe outlined the steps by which Langevin could remove himself from hismarriage. The French public was incensed by these letters. The magazinepitted the foreign woman, Curie, against a respectable French woman,Jeanne Langevin. The right wing press became even more raucous.
The result of the hate campaign was frightening. Hostile crowds gath-
ered around the Curie house shouting imprecations. She and the childrenwere rescued by Marguerite Borel and André Debierne who spirited Marieand Eve off to the Borel apartment. Little Eve had no idea of what was oc-curring as she clutched her mother’s hand. Fourteen-year old Irène, on theother hand, was very aware of what was happening. When Debierne col-lected her from her school (gymnasium), she had already read thescathing article in L’Oeuvre. When she saw her mother, Irène clung to her
and both mother and daughter seemed completely numb. Finally, Henri-ette Perrin was able to take her to their home. Eve was looked after by amaid, and Marie was able to lie down quietly.
Peace eluded Marie for a long time. The public gleefully took sides in
the conﬂict. Marie’s supporters took the view that she was innocent of thecharges and was being persecuted by her enemies. Her detractors insistedthat she had deﬁled French motherhood.
Although Marie was unaware of it, a duel was being fought by her sup-
porter Henri Chervet of Gil Blas and her detractor, Léon Daudet of L’Ac-
tion Francaise. Although Daudet was the more experienced dueler, he
suffered a deep wound in his elbow. Newspapers in the United Statespicked up on this event. The New York Times described the duel as a dis-
pute over the merits of the charges, which Mme. Langevin institutedagainst her husband. The duel was fought with swords. The tone of the ar-ticle was sympathetic to Marie, explaining that the allegations were basedon the fact that Langevin and Curie worked together. This proximitycaused “a jealous feeling on the part of Mme. Langevin, who thereuponbrought suit against her husband, coupling with his name that of Mme.Curie.”
8
This duel was just the ﬁrst of ﬁve to be fought provoked by the
Langevin/Curie affair. A second duel between Pierre Mortier, a writer forGil Blas and a supporter of Curie and Gustave Téry of L’Oeuvre extended
the farce, according to a New York Times article of November 25, 1911.
Although Téry had apologized for writing an article that Curie andLangevin had eloped, he had obtained an illegal copy of the complaint94 MARIE CURIEthat Mme. Langevin had ﬁled against Curie and Langevin. The duel re-
sulted in Mortier being wounded in the arm.
The most famous of the duels was that between Langevin and Téry.
Since Téry had described Langevin as a “cad and a scoundrel,” Langevinfelt that his honor would be impugned if he did not challenge Téry to aduel. Langevin had a difﬁcult time in ﬁnding seconds, because his aca-demic friends, although sympathetic, were not interested in becoming involved in the conﬂict. Langevin ﬁnally located two friends who reluc-tantly agreed to be his seconds. They met on the morning of November 26and chose pistols as their preferred weapons. The tall, thin Langevin ar-rived ﬁrst. Gustave Téry then appeared with his entourage.  The morningwas gray and foggy. Each second gave a pistol to his person. The second,who was chosen by lot to direct the proceedings, asked the combatants ifthey were ready. After an afﬁrmative answer he counted “one, two, three,ﬁre!” Langevin raised his pistol arm up as if to ﬁre. Téry, however, kept hispistol barrel pointed toward the ground. When Langevin saw that Térydid not intend to ﬁre, he lowered his gun. Téry had felt that he could sup-port Jeanne Langevin by killing Paul. However, he had a change of heartwhen he realized that by killing Langevin he would be depriving Franceof one of its most famous scientiﬁc minds. The newspapers reported theduel in great detail.
It is unclear as to when Marie Curie was informed of Paul Langevin and
Téry’s duel. Since it was the talk of Paris and even the Nobel Committeein Sweden knew about the duel, it is improbable that she was shieldedfrom it. Marie had asked the scientist Svante Arrhenius (1859–1927), herenthusiastic supporter for the Nobel Prize and an important member onthe Nobel Committee, if she should go to Sweden to accept the prize be-cause it was likely that the press was going to stir up ugly rumors. He ﬁrstassured her that she should go to Sweden where she would be consideredan honored guest of the nation; however, after the Langevin duel and thepublication of the letters, he reneged. He said that the duel gave the per-haps false impression that the published correspondence was true. He andhis colleagues agreed that Marie should stay in France. If the Academyhad believed that the charges were authentic, continued Arrhenius, itprobably would not have given her the prize in the ﬁrst place. Disap-pointed by Arrhenius’s response, she wrote him rather truculently thatshe saw no connection between her scientiﬁc work and her private life.She stated that she could not accept the idea that the appreciation of herscientiﬁc work was inﬂuenced by libel and slander concerning her privatelife.SCANDAL! 95Marie was somewhat naive in thinking that as the most important
woman scientist in the world, people would be uninterested in her privatelife! Both she and her lawyer wanted the case to go to trial, but Langevindecided to admit that he was in the wrong. Loath to take sides against hiswife in public, he feared that their four children would suffer. There was acash settlement and Jeanne Langevin got custody of the children. Paulwas allowed some visitation rights and was able to direct their intellectualdevelopment. When they were in their mid-teens, the boys would cometo live with their father. Many years later, Marie Curie’s granddaughterand Paul Langevin’s grandson married without having any clue about thescandal.
The controversy was not limited to France, for in addition to report-
ing on the duels, the New York Times presented editorials, letters to the
editor, and numerous additional articles. In order to see how the presen-tation of the subject was different in the United States and France, it isinteresting to look at some of the articles. An editorial on November 24,1911, the day after L’Oeuvre published excerpts of the letters, the New
York Times presented a different interpretation of the subject. The edito-
rial stated that the honor of science and that of the Sorbonne couldnever be tarnished because an extraordinary Frenchwoman “has beenmade, rather late in life, the heroine of a somewhat scandalous ro-mance.” Clearly this newspaper blamed Jeanne Langevin, writing thatMarie had been “assailed by a jealous woman who accuses her of estrang-ing a husband from wife and children.” Without judging whether or notthe charges were justiﬁed, the editorial concluded that people of extraor-dinary abilities sometimes deﬁed social conventions. The article con-cluded that “there are hints of deliberate mischief-making in the case.The letters quoted by Mme. Langevin’s complaint may not be genuine.In any case neither science nor the Sorbonne can suffer at all from socialscandals affecting the lives of scientists.”
9In response, a letter to the ed-
itor agreed that gifted people may legitimately have different standardsthan ordinary people. The writer also quotes a statement “Don’t believeanything you hear and only half of what you see.”
10Another article sug-
gested that even if the accusations proved true, “Mme. Curie will have topay the cruel penalty of her sex and be known hereafter much less as theco-discoverer of radium and one of the most eminent laboratory workersthat has ever existed than as the woman who stole another woman’s hus-band.”
11By December 4, 1911, the New York Times printed a number of
rumors that had been spread about the affair. One sensational one statedthat Mme. Langevin “proposed to allow her husband six months’ ab-96 MARIE CURIEsolute liberty, so that he may experiment with Mme. Curie’s companion-
ship as much as possible before coming to a decision.” Jeanne Langevin’ssympathizers hinted that this was a maneuver by Marie’s supporters totest public opinion. An even more unsubstantiated tidbit of gossip in sci-entiﬁc circles suggested that Professor Langevin had helped to assureCurie’s scientiﬁc reputation. Although the rumors were reported in theUnited States, the general tone was that they were ridiculous.
12On De-
cember 14, the New York Times reported that Mme. Langevin had ﬁled
for divorce. She “asks in her petition for separation from her husband andthat the children of the marriage shall be left in her custody. She alsoclaims separate maintenance.”
13
On December 23, 1911, the New York Times reported that the Lan-
gevin case had been dismissed. The criminal charge against Langevin waswithdrawn and his wife reported that she was “completely satisﬁed withthe decision of the Divorce Court granting her a separation from her hus-band and the custody of her four children.”
14Mme. Curie’s name was not
brought up in the proceedings. On December 17, 1911, the Sunday New
York Times summarized the events surrounding the scandal.
Marie endured the scandal stoically at ﬁrst, holding her head high and
pretending to be unphased by the accusations. However, it became appar-ent as the scandal crossed the ocean and entranced the American publicnearly as much as the French and appeared in other publications through-out the world, that Marie’s apparent assurance began to fade. She beganto dread her encounters with people. The fact that she was the most out-standing woman scientist in the world, one who at this very time was togo to Sweden to present a lecture for a second Nobel Prize, made her in-discretion all the more interesting to the public. What might have beenone of the most satisfying times in her life had turned to a nightmare re-sulting in ostracism and illness.
NOTES
1. Marie Curie, “Sur le poids atomique du radium,” Compte rendus 145
(1907): 422.
2. “Practically No Commercial Use,” New York Times, 3 May 1908, pt. 5, 10.
3. “Pure Radium Obtained,” New York Times , 6 September 1910, 1.
4. Bertram Boltwood to Ernest Rutherford, 11 October 1908, Cambridge Uni-
versity Library, quoted in Robert Reid, Marie Curie (London: Collins, 1974), 167.
5. “Dispute over Mme. Curie,” New York Times, 4 December 1910, 4, col. 3.
6. “Mme. Curie May Testify,” New York Times, 5 February 1910, pt. 3, 4, col. 2.SCANDAL! 977. Marie Curie to Paul Langevin, summer of 1910, reproduced in L’Oeuvre,
in Susan Quinn, Marie Curie: A Life (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1995), 296.
8. “Editors in Duel Over Mme. Curie,” New York Times, 24 November 1911,
3, col. 4.
9. “Madame Curie,” New York Times, 24 November 1911, 12, col. 2.
10. “To the Editor,” New York Times, 26 November 1911, 14, col. 5.
11. “A Scandal and Its Consequences,” New York Times, 29 November 1911,
10, col. 5.
12. “Curie Case Rumors Are Not Veriﬁed,” New York Times, 4 December
1911, 4, col. 3.
13. “Langevin Divorce Suit,” New York Times, 14 December 1911, 9, col. 2.
14. “Langevin Case Withdrawn,” New York Times, 23 December 1911, 3, col. 5.98 MARIE CURIE