Chapter 3
PARIS AND THE SORBONNE
It was not just her responsibilities toward her father that kept Maria in
Warsaw. She seems to have attempted to reconcile with Kazimierz one lasttime. Although information is not available about what happened whenthey met that summer, the relationship was over. Maria wrote another let-ter to Bronia asking if she could still come to Paris. Bronia wrote back andextended the invitation. This time Maria did not hesitate. She boarded theParis train and sat on a folding chair surrounded by her luggage in thefourth-class carriage. After three miserable days, her train chugged into the Gare du Nord (one of the Paris train stations) where she was met byher brother-in-law Kazimierz Dluski (Bronia was visiting in Poland), whotook her to their apartment. Kazimierz wrote to her father saying, “Every-thing is going very well with us. Mademoiselle Marie is working seriously;she passes nearly all her time at the Sorbonne and we meet only at theevening meal.”
1He showed some displeasure with Maria’s self-reliance.
“She is a very independent young person, and in spite of the formal powerof attorney by which you placed her under my protection, she not onlyshows me no respect or obedience, but does not care about my authorityand my seriousness at all ....”
2Apparently, Marie (as she was now called
taking the French form of her name) felt smothered by her overly intrusivebrother-in-law. Kazimierz wanted to have people around him at all times.Whereas Bronia was an able and willing hostess, Marie was unwilling totake over these duties while Bronia was in Poland or participate in themafter she returned. She also was expected to go out in the evenings to thetheater and to concerts. The Dluski house was often ﬁlled with interestingpeople such as musicians, scientists, and Polish political activists. Al-though Marie enjoyed going to concerts and meeting the Dluski guests, she
disliked the time they took from her studies.
Kazimierz began to get on Marie’s nerves. Although he wrote to her fa-
ther that he and Marie understood each other well and “lived in the mostperfect agreement,” Marie complained to her brother Józef that her “littlebrother-in-law” disturbed her constantly and that he insisted that she donothing but “engage in agreeable chatter with him.”
3To one for whom
studying was her very reason for living—she had dreamed her whole of life
of learning in Paris—it was intolerable that she would be kept from con-centrating by Kazimierz’s incessant conversation. The Dluskis’ residencewas even more chaotic because Kazimierz, now a practicing physician, sawhis patients in the house. Using the excuse that she needed to be closer tothe university, Marie found herself an attic room and moved away fromher family.
Far from being lonely, Marie relished living by herself. She could have
the freedom to do exactly what she wanted to do when she wanted to doit. Money, however, was a constant problem. She had given up free roomand board and now had to support herself on her meager savings and thesmall sums her father sent her. Living close to the University in the LatinQuarter she lived in poverty, as did other students. Marie’s status wasequally wretched. Her attic room (she was at the top of six ﬂights of stairs)was without heat, lighting, and water. She had to fetch water from thelanding in her pitcher even to make a cup of tea. Her furniture consistedof a mattress she had brought from Poland, an iron folding bed, a whitewooden table, and a kitchen chair. She had a stove for heating and a pe-troleum oil lamp for reading at night. Marie, who had never learned tocook, was ignorant of how to prepare even the simplest meals. She was toopoor to eat in the Parisian restaurants. She nearly starved during the ﬁrstmonths by herself. She boiled an occasional egg on an alcohol burner andsometimes had a piece of chocolate or fruit. Her standard diet was but-tered bread and tea. Not surprisingly, she became ill and often fainted.After Kazimierz discovered her situation, Bronia and he brought her backto their apartment, gave her medicine, healthy food, and she soon becamestrong again. She did not keep her promise to treat herself better, for assoon as she returned to her attic, she went back to her former ways. Pan-icked about the impending examinations, she, as her daughter Eve laterwrote, “began again to live on air.”
4
It was not surprising that Marie was so concerned about her examina-
tions. When she entered the university she soon realized that she was notsufﬁciently prepared to follow the physical science course. French stu-22 MARIE CURIEdents spent at least seven years preparing to enter the university. Al-
though Marie had equipped herself as well as possible, she soon under-stood that she had to work doubly hard to eliminate her deﬁciencies,particularly in mathematics. In her autobiographical notes she wrote
I divided my time between courses, experimental work, and
study in the library. In the evening I worked in my room, some-times very late into the night. All that I saw and learned thatwas new delighted me. It was like a new world opened to me,the world of science, which I was at last permitted to know inall liberty.
5
As Marie knew, the Sorbonne was one of the oldest universities in the
world. By 1253 it had a recognized Theology Faculty and in 1271 it alsobecame a Faculty of Philosophy and Arts. Following the Franco PrussianWar in 1870 and the events of the Paris Commune, French universitiesno longer provided the best education in the sciences. The Ministry ofEducation had invested little money in laboratories, so that research wasno longer on the cutting edge. The French saw the need to reform theiruniversities after France’s catastrophic defeat by Prussia. Blaming the lossin large part on their inferior educational system, they began to reexam-ine their educational institutions. Even as they scorned their own univer-sities, they heaped praise on those German universities that ﬁnancedresearch laboratories and instituted seminars oriented toward researchtopics and methods. The French system was based on eloquent lecturesand carefully argued theses, whereas the German professors discussed cur-rent research and trained students in practical laboratory work.
By the time that Marie Curie attended the university, improvements
had been made in the science curriculum, although the German universi-ties continued to outperform the French. Still, much of the reform of theSorbonne had already occurred. Although the Sorbonne had once been abulwark of church doctrine, the reformed institution preached republicananticlerical teachings. This emphasis appealed to Marie, who champi-oned the superiority of the rational over the irrational. Theology was ban-ished and the humanities de-emphasized with the sciences gaining theupper hand. The Sorbonne also was undergoing a massive building proj-ect at this time with science classrooms and laboratories being con-structed.
More important to Marie’s education than the general reform philoso-
phy and the quality of the buildings, were the teachers. She found thePARIS AND THE SORBONNE 23French science courses challenging and many of her teachers inspiring.
These teachers included the Nobel Prize winner in physics Gabriel Lipp-mann (1845–1921), who brought the German laboratory perspective toParis. Talented in designing instruments, he emphasized the practical ap-plications of physics. His sensitive devices were used in seismology and as-tronomy, and he received the Nobel Prize in 1908 for devising a method ofphotographic color reproduction. She also received training from JosephBoussinesq (1842–1929), a physicist of the old school, who remained op-posed to relativity theory and its consequences, but taught her the detailsof classical physics (the physics of Sir Isaac Newton [1642–1727]). In con-trast to Boussinesq’s practical and experimental emphasis, she was alsotaught by one of the most brilliant theoretical physicist/mathematicians ofthe time, Henri Poincaré (1854–1912), who made many novel contribu-tions to mathematical theory and to celestial mechanics. Philosophically,he came close to developing a relativity theory himself. Thus, Marie wasexposed to a variety of ideas in physics from these professors as well as oth-ers among the 16 who taught her during her career at the Sorbonne.
Nearly all of the students in her classes were men, and the few women
who were there were foreigners like herself. Constraints resulting fromFrench ideas that boys and girls should have different types of secondaryschool education meant that Frenchwomen were less likely to enter theirown universities than foreign women. In all ﬁelds of study, foreign womenoutnumbered French women at the Sorbonne until 1912 when the num-bers of Frenchwomen ﬁnally exceeded those of foreign women. If nine-teenth-century French women were educated at all, their education wasmediocre. The daughters of the rich could attend private schools, some ofwhich had been established at the end of the seventeenth century byMadame de Maintenon (1636–1719) and Bishop François Fénélon(1651–1715) to encourage the education of girls. However, education forthe majority of French children, both boys and girls, only became possiblewhen the government provided free schools. The education of girls con-tinued to lag behind that of boys, because it was assumed that the girlswould be taught at home by their mothers. The ﬁrst government-fundedschool for young girls was created in 1807, with the purpose of educatingthe close relatives of members of the Legion of Honor. Although the edu-cation that these rich young women received included religion, reading,spelling, botany, some history and geography, and the art of being agree-able, it seldom was of a very high quality.
French secondary-school education was ﬁrst established in 1867, al-
though the promising beginning did not last. However, the situation did24 MARIE CURIEimprove after the Camille Sée law—which required establishing second-
ary schools for girls—was passed on December 21, 1880. Seventy-two Ly-cées and colleges were authorized with a more rigorous course contentthan the earlier schools. These schools were still inferior to those avail-able to young men and did not prepare women for the baccalauréate ex-amination required for entrance to the university.
With these strictures, it is not surprising that the number of foreign
women students surpassed French students at the University of Paris. For-eign students were treated differently than French students and had agood deal more freedom in their conduct. The French theorist JulesMichelet (1789–1874) reported that the worst fate for a woman was tolive alone. If a French woman (presumably including university students)would go out in the evening she would be taken for a prostitute. “If shewere late, far from home, and became hungry, she would not dare enter arestaurant ....  She would make a spectacle of herself.”
6As a foreign stu-
dent, Marie had much more freedom. Nevertheless, according to anAmerican woman who went to France in 1900, a single woman could nowdiscretely attend the theaters if “she is quiet in her dress, and is careful notto loiter in the foyers. People in Paris have begun to discriminate betweentwo kinds of lone ladies.”
7It was unlikely that studious Marie would be at-
tending the theater. However, as a foreign student at the Sorbonne, shewas expected to have different rules of conduct. She also came from a fam-ily where women led independent lives. Even though Poland’s womenwere denied access to higher education, they were often outspoken. Still,French people often made fun of the foreign students. One chronicler,Henri d’Almeras, ridiculed the foreign female students as working “withgreat patience, as though they were doing embroidery,”
8He continued by
saying that study made them ugly and that they usually wear glasses andlook like school teachers.
Marie gradually came out of her shell and found that some of her fellow
students wanted to be friendly. However, most of their interactions wereconcerned with studies. She also made friends with Polish students, noneof whom were in the physical sciences. T wo of the students were mathe-maticians and one was a biologist (he later married Marie’s sister Helena),and a future president of the Polish Republic. She joined them in walks,political talks in bare rooms, and general reminiscences about home.They prepared Polish food for Christmas and organized theatrical per-formances. Although Marie did not have the leisure to learn parts for theplays, she did participate in the performances in other ways, much to thechagrin of her father when he found out. In a letter to Marie he wrote thatPARIS AND THE SORBONNE 25he deplored her taking part in the theater. “Even though it be a thing
done in all innocence, it attracts attention to its organizers, and you knowthat there are persons in Paris who inspect your behavior with the great-est care.” He warned her that when she returned to Poland she might bein trouble if her name was mentioned in reference to events such as con-certs, balls, and the theater. Such publicity might keep her from obtaininga job in certain professions. He concluded by remarking that “it would bea great grief to me if your name were mentioned one day.”
9
It is unclear how much her father’s disapproval affected Marie’s behav-
ior. However she reported that after her ﬁrst year she had to give up theserelationships in order to devote all of her energy to her studies. “I waseven obliged to devote most of my vacation time to mathematics.”
10As
the time for her to take her ﬁrst exam in physics drew frighteningly near,she became more and more withdrawn. She threw her entire being intoher studies and resented any intrusion that would take her away fromthem. Not only did Marie have to master physics for her exams, she alsohad to take them in a language with which she was not completely athome. Her self-conﬁdence would plummet if she did not do well, and shefretted about how she would perform on the examinations. However,looking back on those years of intense study she later characterized themas the best times of her life. The concentrated study paid off, and in 1893she not only passed the licence exam in physics (a step beyond a bachelor
of science degree), but also was ﬁrst in her class. When her father heardthat she was taking her examinations, he was overjoyed because he wascertain that Marie would come home to him. In a letter to Bronia, hewrote that he intended to keep the lodging that he now occupied for him-self and Maria when she returned. For her part, Marie realized how indis-pensable a mathematics background was to physics and chemistry anddecided to return the next year and work on an additional degree in math-ematics. Because she had been so successful as a student she received a six-hundred-ruble Alexandrovitch scholarship for her studies in Paris. On herreturn to Paris, she wrote to her brother Józef on September 15, 1893, ex-plaining that she was
studying mathematics unceasingly, so as to be up to date when
the courses begin. I have three mornings a week taken by les-sons with one of my French comrades who is preparing for theexamination I have just passed. Tell Father that I am gettingused to this work, that it does not tire me as much as before,and that I do not intend to abandon it.
1126 MARIE CURIEAt the end of the next year she emerged with a licence in mathematics.
She ranked second in her examinations.
Writing of these years, Marie noted that although they were sometimes
painful, they also “had a real charm for me.”12Being unknown in Paris was
neither frightening nor particularly lonely to her. The feeling of indepen-dence made up for any anxiety she may have felt from being in a strangecountry, speaking a foreign language, and largely without friends.
NOTES
1. Eve Curie, Madame Curie: A Biography (Garden City, NY: Doubleday,
Doran, & Co., 1938), 98.
2. Eve Curie, Madame Curie , 98.
3. Susan Quinn, Marie Curie: A Life (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1995),
45, 88.
4. Eve Curie, Madame Curie, 110.
5. Marie Curie, “Autobiographical Notes ,” in Pierre Curie, trans. Charlotte
and Vernon Kellogg (New York: Macmillan, 1923), 171.
6. Claire Goldberg Moses, French Feminism in the Nineteenth Century (Al-
bany, NY: State University of New York Press, 1984), 35.
7. Mary Abbot, A Woman ’s Paris: A Handbook of Every-day Living in the
French Capital (Boston: Small, Maynard & Co., 1900).
8. Quoted in Quinn, Marie Curie: A Life , 95.
9. Eve Curie, Madame Curie, 103.
10. Eve Curie, Madame Curie , 172.
11. Eve Curie, Madame Curie, 115.
12. Marie Curie, “Autobiographical Notes,” 171.PARIS AND THE SORBONNE 27