Chapter 2
PREPARING FOR THE FUTURE
Eventually Maria had to return to reality. The year of rejuvenation had
been exactly what she needed. But after her glorious vacation year, shehad to return to dirty, dingy, depressing Warsaw and confront her future.Her choices seemed singularly unappetizing. Still, the time arrived whenshe had to decide what she was going to do with her life. A Polish girl atthat time had only limited possibilities for higher education. The gymna-sia for boys and girls differed in the subjects taught. The boys’ gymnasiataught Russian, Latin, and Greek; the girls’ gymnasia, on the other hand,did not teach classical languages. This difference might have been in-signiﬁcant if it had not been for the entrance requirements for admissionto the universities in the Russian empire, which at that time includedPoland. These universities required classical languages, so that womenwere effectively blocked from admission. There was a solution for Maria,albeit an expensive one. She could leave her beloved Poland to study in aforeign country. The ﬁnancial barrier seemed insurmountable. The familysimply did not have enough money to educate the girls outside of Poland.Józef was attending medical school at Warsaw University and was in noposition to help his sisters with their education. The alternative thatMaria reluctantly decided upon was a teaching career in a girls’ school.Thus, during her year back in Warsaw she tutored younger students whileattempting to educate herself.
Their father challenged the Sklodowski children to learn. He was a
very proper Polish gentleman who wore carefully brushed dark clothingand whose gestures and speech were always precise. He was a man whoplanned every aspect of life. If the family went on a holiday the childrencould be certain that their father had organized every aspect of their tripin advance—what sights they were going to see, where they would stay,
and how much they would spend. Where Wladyslaw Sklodowski was con-cerned, there was no spontaneity—nothing was left to chance. As a sci-ence teacher, he kept up with the progress in chemistry and physics. Buthe also knew Greek and Latin and was able to speak English, French, Ger-man, Russian, and (of course) Polish. He composed poetry and loved lit-erature. On Saturday evenings the family would gather around Wladyslawwith a teapot steaming in the background and discuss literature. Living inthis intellectual atmosphere gave Maria and her sisters an advantage un-known to most Polish girls. Forbidden ofﬁcial higher education, Mariavowed to educate herself.
Through her self-education program, Maria became involved in the Pol-
ish “Positivist” movement. Positivism was a philosophy that stressed the im-portance of scientiﬁc knowledge. It was begun by the nineteenth-centuryFrench thinker Auguste Comte (1798–1857). Positivists claimed that sen-sory experience was the most perfect form of knowledge. Maria and herfriends, many of whom were students at Warsaw University, accepted thispart of Positivism but modiﬁed it to suit their needs. They expanded its orig-inal intent to include ways of solving Poland’s political and socioeconomicproblems. The Positivist reform program was not revolutionary but gradual.It stressed the importance of trade, science, and industrial advances toPoland, areas which were considered to be beneath the Polish upper class.
There were two main reasons why Polish Positivism was so appealing to
Maria and her sister Bronia. First was its stress on the importance ofwomen. Although Comte himself was convinced of women’s inferiority,in Poland the Positivists taught that women, if properly educated, couldcontribute to the reform movement. Therefore, in Warsaw many youngPolish intellectual girls ﬂocked around Positivist teachers in an informalsetting. Maria admired the ideas of a Polish Positivist novelist, ElizaOrzeszkowa (1841–1910). Not only did Orzeszkowa write novels, she wasalso a part of the Polish literary scene espousing the notions of contempo-rary Positivist thinking. In her novels, she sought to educate her readersin order to change their attitudes and values. She hoped to eliminateclass, race, and gender prejudices. Of course, she did not accept the part ofComte’s Positivism that considered women naturally inferior. In her writ-ings, Orzeszkowa discussed the education of the masses, the developmentof science, and class discrimination. They also reﬂected her strong beliefin evolution and her agnosticism. All of these ideas became a part ofMaria’s intellectual persona for the rest of her life.
Positivism offered a second beneﬁt to the patriotic Sklodowska girls
who looked for ways to improve Poland’s situation. The idea of industrial12 MARIE CURIEadvances to replace the old romantic ideal of Poland appealed to them.
Inﬂuenced by the evolutionary ideas of the English scientist Charles Dar-win (1809–1882) as interpreted by her teachers and associates, Maria sawthe salvation of Poland occurring through science and logic. Positivismwas not just a passing interest for Maria. During her entire life she ab-horred ideas that were unsupported by empirical evidence and insistedthat education was necessary if social progress was to occur.
All of these ideas ﬂourished underground, for Poland was still under the
thumb of Russia. Maria and Bronia became a part of an institution knownas the ﬂoating university where revolutionary ideas ﬂowered. Universitywas a far too pretentious name for this loosely constituted group of people.One writer described this as a “parochial little institution” consistingmostly of teenage girls as well as young married women with little else todo.
1Another is more positive about this “little university,” since it had a
regular curriculum, with courses meeting for two hours a week.2In either
case, this gathering kept young Polish women’s interest in intellectual ac-tivities alive. It provided them with a forum where they could discuss newideas such as Positivism and Marxism. The Marxist movement in Polandoriginated among the factory workers. Marxism and Positivism clashed onseveral issues. Whereas Positivists suggested gradual change and scientiﬁcsolutions to Poland’s problems, to Marxists the solution was more radical;they rejected collaboration with occupying powers and supported revolu-tionary change. Although she was interested in Marxist ideology, Mariaremained a Positivist.
These ad hoc attempts to better themselves were not sufﬁcient for Maria
and Bronia. They both wanted desperately to obtain university degrees andplotted to ﬁnd a way to get the money to study abroad. Bronia’s dream wasto go to the Paris Faculty of Medicine, which at the time was acceptingmany Polish women students, and get her M.D. degree. She then plannedto return and open a medical practice in Poland. Her younger sister Mariawas uncertain about what she wanted to study in Paris because she was in-terested in subject ﬁelds ranging from literature to physics. Maria’s tutoringdid not enable her to save enough money for her education. Since Warsawwas an expensive place to live, she realized that she would be an old ladybefore she saved enough money to go to a university.
EDUCATION OF WOMEN
Polish women were not the only European women who found it difﬁ-
cult to get a university education. Unlike in the United States where thewomen’s colleges in the northeast—Vassar (1865), Smith (1875), Welles-PREPARING FOR THE FUTURE 13ley (1875), Radcliffe (1879), Bryn Mawr (1885), Barnard (1889), and
Mount Holyoke (1893)—gave women the opportunity to obtain a uni-versity education, European women had no similar institutional support.England was also in the forefront of women’s university education where,under the leadership of Emily Davies and Anne Clough, residential col-leges for women were established. Girton (1869) and Newnham (1875) atCambridge University, followed by the founding of Somerville (1879),Lady Margaret Hall (1879), St. Hugh’s (1889), and St. Hilda’s (1893) atOxford were among the early women’s colleges. Although neither Oxfordnor Cambridge granted degrees to women during the nineteenth century,the examinations at these universities were gradually opened to them.The provincial universities—Leeds, Manchester, Bristol, Durham, andBirmingham—were more hospitable to women students than Oxford andCambridge. They followed the lead of the University of London (foundedin 1836), whose charter stipulated the admission of women to the degreeprogram without reservation. The situation was quite different at Germanuniversities. Throughout the nineteenth century, women were unable tomatriculate at German universities, although they had some access tothese institutions by the end of the century. In 1891, the University ofHeidelberg allowed women to attend as auditors; the University of Göt-tingen granted a Ph.D. to the American physicist Margaret Maltby(1860–1944) in 1895; the following year another American, the physiol-ogist Ida Hyde (1857–1945), received a Ph.D. from Heidelberg, and in1899, the German physicist Elsa Neumann (1872–1902) earned a Ph.D.degree from the University of Berlin. During the early twentieth century,the legal barriers to women’s admission had for the most part crumbled,but because few German women had sufﬁcient training to pass an en-trance examination, most of the women who entered German universitieswere foreigners.
Although the situation varied from country to country, in the late nine-
teenth century the education of women in Europe advanced more than ithad previously. In France 109 academic degrees were conferred uponwomen between 1866 and 1882. Switzerland, Sweden, and Denmark allopened their universities to women in the third quarter of the century. Al-though many Italian universities had accepted women students and facultymembers during the Middle Ages and the Renaissance, they had closedtheir doors to women during the late eighteenth and early nineteenth cen-turies. However, they began to readmit women in the 1870s.
Maria Sklodowska’s situation was very similar to that in Russia because,
of course, the Russians were in charge of her part of Poland. In Russia, the14 MARIE CURIEgovernment rejected the petition of women to be admitted to the univer-
sities in 1867. These women participated in an informal system of edu-cation whereby cooperating professors, by a combination of public lecturesand discussion meetings in private homes, were able to present a completecourse. The Russian mathematician Soﬁa Kovalevskaia (1850–1891) wasa product of this system of underground education. Maria’s ﬂoating uni-versity followed this pattern. Unlike Kovalevskaia, she did not choose acommon path to the university favored by Russian women. Since womenwho wanted to leave Russia to attend a foreign university could not do sounless they were married, a woman often found a young man who wouldagree to a “sham” marriage. Maria’s approach was much more conven-tional. There were no laws in Poland to prevent her from leaving thecountry, so when she earned the required sum she would be able to leavelegally. However, she could not accumulate the necessary money by tu-toring.
Maria’s father was unable to educate his daughters because he had en-
gaged in a speculative ﬁnancial venture in which he lost the nest egg thathe had accumulated. He lamented that he was unable to send the girlsabroad and give them the brilliant educations that they deserved. Hefeared that not only was he unable to help them he might become depen-dent on them for his own survival. Describing the difﬁculties of herpredicament Maria wrote, “I resolved to accept a position as governess.”Her ﬁrst job was a disaster. She took a position as governess for the familyof a lawyer. Vehemently expressing her anger in a letter to her cousin, shecomplained that the family members spent money foolishly on luxuries,and were then too cheap to buy oil for the lamps. “They pose as liberals,”she ranted, while “in reality, they are sunk in the darkest stupidity.”
3She
described them all as terrible gossips. Maria had no desire to stay in sucha household, particularly since she and the lady of the house were mutu-ally hostile.
With both Bronia’s and her own goals in mind, Maria developed a plan
whereby each sister would get the education that she so wanted. Mariawould ﬁnd another position as a governess, this time outside of Warsaw,live on a pittance, and save the majority of her salary. Bronia, as the old-est, would be the ﬁrst to beneﬁt from this plan. When Bronia ﬁnishedmedical school, she could, in turn, help Maria. Bronia had saved enoughmoney to pay for the trip to Paris and to support herself for a year. She de-cided to begin her medical training in Paris right away. Maria as a gov-erness “with board, lodging and laundry all free,” would have “fourhundred rubles a year in wages, perhaps more,” to contribute to Bronia’sPREPARING FOR THE FUTURE 15subsequent years of schooling.4In spite of regrets for Maria’s sacriﬁce,
Bronia agreed that the plan might work. While it was easy to be altruisticin the abstract, Maria found the reality of keeping her promise to Broniavery difﬁcult. The ﬁve years that it would take for Bronia to ﬁnish medi-cal school seemed interminably long.
Maria’s second try as a governess was much more successful, although
taking the well-paid position meant that she would be away from her fam-ily and her beloved Warsaw. With her face pressed against the train win-dow, she watched familiar landmarks recede into the distance. Aftertraveling for several hours by train she still had to drive ﬁve hours more byhorse and sleigh before she reached her destination. She initially wroteglowing reports about her new employers, the Zorawskis. In a letter to hercousin Henrika Michalowska on February 3, 1886, she described them as“excellent people.” Besides the parents, the Zorawski family consisted ofan older daughter “about my age” and “two younger children a boy and agirl.”
5They also had three sons who were being educated in Warsaw. She
worked with Bronka, the older daughter, for three hours each day andwith Andzia, the 10-year-old, for four. She wrote Henrika complainingthat “Andzia, who will soon be ten ,...i s  a n  obedient child, but very dis-
orderly and spoiled.”
6As time went on, Maria demonstrated that she
found coping with this child grated on her nerves. She no longer spoke ofAndzia as obedient and described to Henrika how angry she became whenAndzia did not obey her.
Today we had another scene because she did not want to get up
at the usual hour. In the end I was obliged to take her calmly bythe hand and pull her out of bed. I was boiling inside. You can’timagine what such little things do to me: such a piece of non-sense can make me ill for several hours. But I had to get thebetter of her ....
7
Although she spent over seven hours a day tutoring the Zorawski chil-
dren and another hour with the son of one of the Zorawski’s servantswhom she was preparing for school, she did have some free time. With theblessings of the Zorawskis, she used this time to teach young peasant chil-dren how to read and write. Her pupils were peasants from the Zorawski’sbeet farms and the workers’ children from the sugar beet factories. Thisactivity took not only commitment but courage on Marie’s part. The Rus-sian government would not approve of such an activity and it was evenmore dangerous because she circulated Polish books to the children’s par-16 MARIE CURIEents. If she had been caught the possible punishment was imprisonment
or deportation to Siberia. Her ﬁrst class consisted of ten children and thenumber soon grew to eighteen. She taught them in her own room.
In spite of her seven ofﬁcial hours of work a day and many hours tutor-
ing the peasant children, Maria was often bored. She found most of thepeople her age that she met to be shallow. They seldom thought about thesocial, philosophical, and economic problems that so obsessed her andstimulated her to teach the peasant children. The exception was 18-year-old Bronka. Due to Maria’s superior knowledge, she was Bronka’s teacher.The two became good friends even though Maria as a governess was con-sidered by the family to be inferior to Bronka in social class. Social classfor a governess presented a contradiction. In order to be a governess, aperson had to be “well-born,” well educated, and have impeccable man-ners. However, the position was not considered one of high social class.
The question of class muddied the waters both in her relationship with
Bronka and later with the older Zorawski son, Kazimierz, who wasstudying mathematics at the University of Warsaw. On one of his holidaysat home he met Maria. The two promptly fell in love. Kazimierz’s parentsimmediately attempted to break up the romance, for they consideredMaria merely an employee—a lowly governess without money or status. Itdid not matter to the Zorawskis that Maria was intelligent, came from agood family, and was obviously a reﬁned person. His parents’ views cameas a shock to Kazimierz, who had expected that they would approve oftheir engagement. The very opposite occurred. His father fell into a rage.His mother almost fainted. They could not imagine that their golden boy,who could have married any girl that he wanted, had chosen one of theiremployees. Although Kazimierz resisted his family for a while, he ﬁnallywent along with his parents’ wishes. Broken-hearted Maria swore that shewould never marry nor fall in love again. Although she was angry with theZorawskis, she continued as governess for 15 more months. During thistime she wrote vitriolic and desperately miserable letters to her friendsand family at home. Other people’s good fortune was especially hard forher to take when she herself was so unhappy. After receiving a cheerfulletter from her friend Kazia, Maria replied stating that she had been dis-consolate and did not want to hear about Kazia’s happiness.
The years at the Zorawskis had beneﬁts as well. Maria embarked upon
a program of self-education, starting her studies at nine o’clock in theevening and getting up at six in the morning. At one point she was read-ing books in physics, sociology, and anatomy and physiology. She ex-plained that she preferred to read several books at a time rather than justPREPARING FOR THE FUTURE 17concentrating on a single subject. When reading became too tedious, she
worked on problems in algebra and trigonometry. Even though she foundliterature and sociology as interesting as science, she eventually decidedthat her future lay in mathematics and physics.
In 1889 it looked as if she could leave her job with the Zorawskis once
and for all. Perhaps she would ﬁnally have a chance to go to Paris. Her sis-ter Bronia had become engaged to a fellow medical student, another Kaz-imierz—Kazimierz Dluski. After they married, Maria might be able to goto Paris to attend the University. Until then, she was content to stay inWarsaw with her father. She soon took another position as a governesswith the Fuchs family. Although it was less humiliating than her previousexperience, it was still very depressing. When the letter from Bronia ﬁ-nally came to invite Maria to come to Paris, she replied with a litany ofreasons why she could not go—her father was too old and would be dis-appointed, she must help her sister Hela ﬁnd a position in Warsaw, andmany other excuses. At the end of the letter she did not mention Parisfurther, but clearly was ambivalent about her sister’s marriage when shewrote, “My heart is so black, so sad, that I feel how wrong I am to speak ofall this to you and to poison your happiness, for you are the only one of usall who has had what they call luck. Forgive me, but, you see, so manythings hurt me that it is hard for me to ﬁnish this letter gaily.”
8Marie
stayed with her father for the year. For the previous two years, Wladyslawhad directed a correctional agricultural colony outside of Warsaw, a posi-tion that he despised. But when Maria returned he had retired, and fatherand daughter were able to live comfortably in his apartment. During thisyear, she had access through her cousin Józef Boguski to a laboratory forthe ﬁrst time in her life. She described it in her autobiography as a small,municipal physical laboratory. Although her time was usually conﬁned toevenings and Sundays, she was left alone to try out the experiments thatshe had previously only read about in textbooks. When her laboratory ex-perience was not successful, she was plunged into despair. When the ex-periments succeeded, she was elated. This experience, she explained,conﬁrmed her interest in the ﬁelds of experimental physics and chemistry.
NOTES
1. Robert Reid, Marie Curie (London: Collins, 1974), 24–25.
2. Susan Quinn, Marie Curie: A Life (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1995),
65–66.
3. Reid, Marie Curie , 29.18 MARIE CURIE4. Eve Curie, Madame Curie: A Biography (Garden City, NY: Doubleday,
Doran, & Co., 1938), 58.
5. Marie Curie, “Autobiographical Notes ,” in Pierre Curie, trans. Charlotte
and Vernon Kellogg (New York: Macmillan, 1923), 164.
6. Reid, Marie Curie , 30.
7. Reid, Marie Curie , 31–32.
8. Eve Curie, Madame Curie, 84–85.PREPARING FOR THE FUTURE 19